The Life of Mohammad, from Original Sources (William Muir, 1923)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan (lifeofmohammadfr00muir) (https://archive.org/details/lifeofmohammadfr00muir).
Muir’s Life of Mahomet from original sources (1861; revised by T. H. Weir, 1923) — the great Victorian critical biography built on Ibn Ishaq, Ibn Hisham, Waqidi and Tabari: the PD stand-in for the Sira in English.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================
THE



LIFE OF MOHAMMAD


a


First  Edition

pv

blished  18G1

Second  Edition

1876

Third  Edition

1894

New  and  Revised  Edition  .

,

1012

li£fimi.ted

19-23

[Frontisjiiece.


THE

LIFE  OF  MOHAMMAD

FROM ORIGINAL SOURCES


BY

SIR  WILLIAM  MUIR, K.C.SJ.

LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Ph.D.  (Bologna)


A  NEW  AND  REVrSED  EDITION  BY

T.  H.  WEIR,  B.D.,  M.R.A.S.

Lecturer  in Arabic  in the Uni-versity  of Glasgoiv


EDINBURGH: JOHN GRANT

31 GEORGE IV- BRIDGE
1923


6P


[All  rights  reserved]


PRINTED IN OREAT BIIITAIN BY
OLIVER AND BOYD, EDINBURGH


PREFACE


The  Life  of  MaJwmct,  by  Sir  William  Muir,  was  first  pub-
lished in  four  volumes  in  the  year  1861,  with  profuse  notes
and  references,  as  well  as  introductory  chapters  on  the  Early
History  of  Arabia,  and  an  Essay  on  the  '  Sources  for  the
Biography  of  Mahomet — the  Coran  and  Tradition.'  In  the
second  (1876)  and  third  (1894)  editions  these  introductory
chapters,  although  of  the  highest  interest  in  themselves,  were
omitted,  as  not  being  immediately  relevant  to  the  biography
of  the  Arabian  Prophet.  Moreover,  most  of  the  notes  and
all  the  references  to  original  authorities  were  left  out,  the
curious  readers  being  referred  for  the  latter  to  the  first  and
larger  form  of  the  work.  The  text  itself  remained  practically
unaltered  in  all  three  editions.

The  present  text  is  a  revision  in  some  matters  of  detail
of  that  of  the  third  edition.  All  the  learned  author's
expressions  of  opinion  and  the  view  he  took  of  particular
events  have,  of  course,  been  left  unaltered.  The  changes
which  have  been  made  have  been  in  respect  of  the  form
rather  than  of  the  substance.

In  the  first  place,  the  orthography  of  the  Arabic  proper
names  has  been  brought  into  line  with  modern  usage.  The
name  Mahomet  was  adopted  by  Principal  Muir  to  designate
the  Prophet,  '  following  the  established  usage  of  Christendom,
and  had  the  further  advantage  of  always  distinguishing  him
from  other  persons  of  the  same  name,  in  whose  case  he  wrote
it Mohammad or Muhammad (first edition,  p. 16). The


ii  PREFACE

objection  to  this  is  that  we  now  place  the  accent  on  the  first
syllable  of  the  name  Mahomet  instead  of  the  second,  thus
giving  it  an  entirely  wrong  sound.  Mohammad  has,  there-
fore, been  used  for  all  persons  of  that  name  in  this  edition.
Other  names  which  have  become  naturalised  in  English  have
been  retained  as  in  Muir,  e.g.  Mecca  not  Makka  ;  Caliph,  not
Khalifa;  Medina,  not  Al-Madlna  {pp.  cit.  p.  vi.).  On  the
other  hand,  I  have  put  At-Taif  instead  of  Muir's  Tayif;
'A'isha  for  Ayesha ;  Az-Zubeir  for  Zobeir ;  and  so  on.
Absolute  consistency  in  these  matters  is  not  attainable.

In  the  matter  of  the  transliteration  from  Arabic  into
Roman  letters,  the  system  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  has
been  generally  followed.  Thus  dh  is  put  for  Muir's  dz,  (/for
dh,  z  for  tz,  k  for  c  or  ck.  The  heavier  sound  of  t  is  repre-
sented by  t,  and  of  j  by  i- ;  and  the  guttural  //  by  h.  The  (to
a  European)  unpronounceable  letter  'ain  is  denoted  by
the  '  rough  breathing '  :  the  lighter  hamza  being  generally
omitted,  unless  when  it  falls  between  two  vowels.  The  long
vowels  are  denoted  by  the  long  mark.  The  final  h  of  the
feminine  is  left  out,  although  thus  a  final  a  may  either
correspond  to  a  final  //  or  final  y,  as  in  Selama,  Musa.  No
system  of  transliteration  is  perfect,  and  the  present  one  aims
only  at  enabling  the  reader  correctly  to  pronounce  the  proper
names,  and,  if  he  wishes,  to  turn  them  back  into  their  Arabic
original.

In  the  first  edition  of  the  Life  the  references  were  made
to  manuscript  copies  of  the  histories  of  Ibn  Hisham,  At-
Tabari,  and  Ibn  Sa'd,  which  are  quite  inaccessible  to  the
ordinary  reader.  Since  that  date  excellent  editions  of  all
these  have  been  published,  and  to  these  the  references  are
made  in  the  present  revision.  In  the  case  of  the  MagJidzi  of
Al-Wakidi  the  condensed  translation  by  the  famous  Professor
Wellhausen  is  referred  to  as  being  more  convenient  and  easy
of  reference  than  the  Arabic  text  of  Von  Kremer,  as  well  as
because  the  latter  is  not  available  after  the  beginning  of  the
fourth  year  of  the  Hijra. On  some  points  the  edition  of  Ibn


PREFACE  Hi

Koteiba's  Kitab  al-  MaWrif  by  the  late  Dr  Ferdinand
Wiistenfeld  has  also  been  referred  to,  as  it  groups  together
facts  which  occur  separately  in  the  histories  which  follow  the
order  of  time.  References  have  not  been  given  to  the  Diwdn,
or  Poems  of  Hassan  ibn  Thabit,  recently  published  in  the
Gibb  Memorial  Series,  as  it  is  easily  obtainable,  and  much  of
the  material  will  be  found  in  the  Biographies  cited  above.

The  text  of  the  work  has  been  left  practically  as  it  stood
in  the  third  edition.  In  a  few  cases  a  phrase  has  been
changed  so  as  to  bring  it  nearer  the  original,  and  a  variant
account  occurring  in  one  of  the  old  sources  has  been  added.
All  such  additions  are  enclosed  within  square  brackets.

I  have  to  thank  Professor  Margoliouth,  D.Litt.,  of  Oxford,
for  his  kindness  in  giving  me  the  advantage  of  his  advice  in
regard  to  the  system  of  transliteration  to  be  followed  and  the
authorities  to  which  reference  should  be  made.  For  the
arduous  task  of  the  compilation  of  the  Index,  I  owe  thanks
to  M.  G.  W.

T.  H.  W.


The  University,  Glasgow


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER  PAQE

I.  Sources for  the  biography  of Mohammad — The Kor'an,

Tradition  and  early  Biographies ....  xiii

II.  Arabia  before  the  time  of  Mohammad  .  .  . Ixxxviii

III.  Pre-historical  notices  of  Mecca — The  Ka'ba — Abrahamic

legends  ....... xcix

IV,  Forefathers  of  Mohammad — Abraha's  attack  on  Mecca —

The  Homs — Hashimites  and  Omeiyads .  .  . cviii


PART  FIRST

MOHAMMAD TILL THE HIJRA

CHAPTER I

AL/af.  I-I2. — Birth  of  Mohammad — Nursed  among  BedawTn  —
Death  of  his  mother — 'Abd  al-Muttalib  and  Abu  Talib —
First  journey  to  Syria  .....  I

CHAPTER II

/£tai.  12-40. — Youth  of  Mohammad — Sacrilegious  war — Second
journey  to  Syria — Khadija — Children  by  her — Mohammad
described  —  Rebuilding  of  Ka'ba  ^ 'All  and  Zeid — The
Four  Inquirers — Mohammad  gropes  after  light .  .  13

CHAPTER III

^tat.  40-43. — Mohammad's  belief  in  his  own  inspiration — Early
poetical  fragments — Commission  to  preach — Traditional
account  .......  39


CONTENTS


CHAPTER IV


^tat.  44-45. — Early  converts  —  Abu  Bekr  ;  'Othman  —  Persecu-
tion—  First  emigration  to  Abyssinia — Kor'an  as  revealed
during  this  period — Precepts — Paradise — Hell  .  '55


CHAPTER V

^tat.  45-50.  —  The  lapse  —  Second  emigration  to  Abyssinia  —
Hamza;  'Omar  —  The  Ban — Appeal  in  Kor'an  to  Jewish
Scriptures — Scriptural  and  Rabbinical  stories  .  . 80


CHAPTER VI

^tat.  51-52. — Ban  removed— Death  of  Khadija  and  Abu  Talib —
Mohammad  marries  Sauda  and  is  betrothed  to  'A'isha —
Medina — First  pledge  of  the  'Akaba .  .  .  .104


CHAPTER VII

yEtat.  52-53. — Midnight  journey  to  Jerusalem— Second  pledge  of
the  'Akaba — Emigration  to  Medina — Council  of  Koreish —
Mohammad  escapes  to  the  cave — Flight  from  Mecca — Rela-
tion of  Islam  to  Christianity— Knowledge  of  Christianity,
whence  derived — Effect  of  Mohammad's  teaching  at  Mecca  .


PART  SECOND

MOHAMMAD AT MEDINA

CHAPTER VIII

/EiuL  53. — Mohammad's  arrival  at  Medina — Building  of  Mosque —

Marriage  with  'A'isha ...... 165

CHAPTER IX
State  of  parties  at  Medina — Refugees  ;  Citizens  ;  Disaffected;  Jews 179


CONTENTS  vii


CHAPTER X

PACK

A.H.  I.  and  II. — Religious  institutions — Miscellaneous  events . 187


CHAPTER XI
First  hostilities  with  Koteish — Divine  command  to  fight .  . 203

CHAPTER XII
A.H.  II. — yEtaf.  ^^. — Battle  of  Bedr — Consternation  at  Mecca . 214

CHAPTER XIII

A.H.  II.  and III.  —  ALtat. 56.  —  Assassinations  —  Beni Kainuka'

exiled — Hafsa — Fatima  married  to  'All  .  .  . 238

CHAPTER XIV

A.H.  III. — ^tat.  56.— Battle of  Ohod— Mohammad wounded—

Hamza  slain — Law  of  inheritance .... 252

CHAPTER XV

A.H.  W.—.'Etat.  57.  —  Expeditions— Ar-Raji'  and  Bi'r  Ma'una—

Exile  of  Beni  an- Nadir  .  .  .  .  .  -275

CHAPTER XVI

A.H.  IV.  and  V. — ^tat.  57-58. — Bedr  the  second — Expeditions —
Mohammad  marries  Zeinab  (daughter  of  Khozeima),  Um
Selama,  and  Zeinab  (divorced  wife  of  Zeid) — Veil  for  Muslim
women — Juweiriya — 'A'isha's  misadventure .  .  . 286

CHAPTER XVII

A.H.  V.—yEtat.  58.— Siege  of  Medina— Battle  of  the  Ditch— Mas-
sacre of  Beni  Koreiza — Reihana — Death  of  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh
— Suras  revealed  at  Medina — Jews  discarded — Mohammad's
power  and  dignity — Marriage,  divorce,  and  female  slavery —
Style  of  Kor'an ....... 306


CONTENTS


CHAPTER XVIII

PAGE

A.H.  VI. — ACtat.  59. — Expeditions — Abu'I-'As  and  Zeinab — Expe-
dition to  Duma — Assassination  of  Abu'r-Rafi',  and  attempt
to  assassinate  Abu  Sufyan  ..... 341

CHAPTER XIX

Pilgrimage to Al-Hodeibiya — Pledge of the Tree — Treaty  with

Koreish — Abu  BasTr ...... 353

CHAPTER XX

A.H.  VII. — ^tat  60. — Despatches  to  the Kaiser,  the Chosroes,

and  other  Princes  ...... 368

CHAPTER XXI

Conquest  of  Kheibar  —  Saflya — Mohammad  poisoned — Return  of
Abyssinian  exiles — Um  Habiba— Mohammad  bewitched  by
Jews .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .374

CHAPTER XXII

Pilgrimage to Mecca  —  Meimiina  —  Conversion of Khalid and

'Amr 386

CHAPTER XXIII
A.H.  WW.—yEtat.  61.— Battle  of  Muta— Generalship  of  Khalid . 392

CHAPTER XXIV
Conquest  of  Mecca ....... 400

CHAPTER XXV

Battle  of  Honein — Siege  of  At-Ta'if — Mohammad  mobbed — Lesser

pilgrimage  .  .  .  .  .  .  -414

CHAPTER XXVI

A.H.  VIII.-X. — ALtat.  61-62. — Mary  the  Coptic  maid,  and  her  son

Ibrahim  ........ 425


CONTENTS


CHAPTER XXVII

PAGE

Deputations  from  Arabian  tribes  .  .  ,  .  •43^


CHAPTER XXVIII

Campaign  of  Tebuk — Conquest  of  Duma — Death  of  'Abdallah  ibn

Obei ........ 439

CHAPTER XXIX
Submission  of  At-Ta'if— Pilgrimage  of  Abu  Bekr — The  'Release'  . 449

CHAPTER XXX
A.H.  IX.  and  X. — jEtat.  62-63. — Embassies  of  submission  .  . 454

CHAPTER XXXI
A.H.  X. — ^tat.  63. — Mohammad's  Farewell  pilgrimage .  . 468

CHAPTER XXXII
The  three  Pretenders ....... 476

CHAPTER XXXIII
A.H.  XI. — ALtat.  63.— Sickness  and  death  of  Mohammad .  . 480

CHAPTER XXXIV
Abu  Bekr  elected  Caliph  .  a  »  . 497

CHAPTER XXXV
Burial  of  Mohammad ....... 504

CHAPTER XXXVI
Osama's  campaign  •....,. 507

CHAPTER XXXVII

Person  and character  of Mohammad — Traditions  on  the  person

and  habits  of  Mohammad  .  .  .  .  .510


INDEX


537


CONTENTS


ARABIAN CALENDAR


Arabian
Months

Corresponding
Months

The  Arabian  month  is  lunar,  and  the
year  was  originally  corrected  by  the  inter-
calation of  a  month  every  third  year.  The
reckoning  was  thus  luni-solar  until,  at  the
Farewell  pilgrimage,  Mohammad,  by  abolish-
ing intercalation,  made  the  Muslim  or  Hijra
year  a  purely  lunar  one.

This  table  gives  the  months  as  they  stood
at  the  time  of  Mohammad's  flight  to  Medina,
and  they  were  so  maintained,  by  intercala-
tion, with  little  variation  till  the  Farewell
pilgrimage.  After  that  the  year  is  of  couise
shorter  by  about  eleven  days  than  the  solar
year.

The  calculation  is  according  to  M.  C.  de
Perceval.^

Moharram
Safar
Rabi'  I.
Rabr  II.
Jumada  I.
Jumada  II.
Rajab
Sha'ban
Ramadan
Shauwal
Dhu'l-Ka'da
Dhu'l-Hijja

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

January

February

March

1 For  the  results  of  more  recent  invesiigations,  cf.  S. D.  Margoliouth  Mohammed  and  the
Rise  of  Islam,  pp.  xix.,  x.x.


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


MAPS AND PLANS
The  Ka'ba,  as  it  now  stands,  at  the  time  of  Pil-


grimage ....

Map  of  Arabia ....
Plan  of  Mecca ....
Mount  Hira  (the  Mountain  of  Light|^
Plan  of  Modern  Medina  .
Medina  as  it  now  is  .  .  .

View  of  Modern  Mecca .
Mount  'Arafat  at  the  time  of  Pilgrimage
Devil's  Corner  (Place  of  Throwing  Siones)


. Frontispiece
fo  face  page  Ixxxviii
„  cxx

)»  3S

164
178

„  4CO

468

,.  470


IN TEXT


The  Black  Stone,  front  and  side  views


PAOH
29


The  Ka'ba,  as  at  present,  showing  the  curtain  cut  and

adjusted  .  .  .  .  .  .  .30

The  Ka'ba,  as  it  now  stands, showing  the  curtain  fes-
tooned AT  pilgrimage  ,  ,  .  .  . 3I


ERRATA.

p.  113  and  elsewhere  (see  Index), /^;-  "  Sauda  "  read  "Sauda.'
p.  48i«„yor  "1704"  read  "1794."


INTRODUCTION


CHAPTER  I

SOURCES FOR THE BIOGRAPHY OF MOHAMMAD.
THE KOR'AN and TRADITION


Confidence  in  a  narrative  must  vary  with  the  medium
through  which  it  has  been  transmitted.  The  exploits  of
Hercules  carry  less  conviction  than  the  feats  of  the  heroes
of  Troy  ;  while,  again,  the  wanderings  of  Ulysses  and  the
adventures  of  the  early  founders  of  Rome  are  regarded  with
incomparably  less  trust  than  the  history  of  the  Peloponnesian
war  or  the  fortunes  of  Julius  Caesar.  Thus  there  are  three
great  divisions  of  ancient  narrative.  Legendary  tales  are
based  upon  visionary  materials,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether
they  shadow  forth  facts  or  only  myths  and  fancies.  Tradition
and  the  rhapsodies  of  bards  have  for  their  object  actual  or
supposed  events  ;  but  the  impression  of  these  events  is  liable
to  become  distorted  from  the  imperfection  of  the  vehicle
which  conveys  them.  It  is  to  contemporary  history  alone,  or
to  history  deriving  its  facts  from  contemporary  records,  that
we  accord  a  reliance  which,  proportioned  to  the  means  and
the  fidelity  of  the  observer,  may  rise  to  absolute  certainty.

The  narrative  which  we  now  possess  of  the  origin  of  Islam
does  not  belong  exclusively  to  any  one  of  these  classes.  It
is  legendary,  for  it  contains  multitudes  of  pure  myths,  such  as
the  '  Light  of  Mohammad  and  the  '  Cleansing  of  his  Heart'
It  is  traditional,  since  the  main  material  of  the  story  was
handed  down  by  oral  recitation  not  generally  recorded  until
Islam  had  attained  to  a  full  growth.  But  it  possesses  also
some  of  the  elements  of  History,  because  there  are  certain
contemporary  records  of  undoubted  authenticity,  to  which  we
can  refer. Moreover,  Muslim  tradition  is  of  a  peculiar  and


Ancient
story,
legendary,
traditional,
or  contem-
porary


Rise  of
Islam  be-
longs to
all  three
classes


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


Sources
specified


Value,
absolute
and  com-
parative


How

preserved
during
Mohamm
lifetime


systematic  character,  bearing  in  some  respects  an  authority
superior  to  that  of  common  tradition.

From  such  imperfect  and  incoherent  materials  it  might
be  supposed  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  frame  a  uniform
and  consistent  biography  of  the  Arabian  Prophet,  the  various
points  of  which  shall  be  supported  by  sufficient  evidence  or
probability.  It  will  be  my  attempt  to  elucidate  this  topic;
to  inquire  into  the  available  sources  for  such  a  narrative  ;  and
the  degree  of  credit  to  which  they  are  severally  entitled.

We  have  two  main  sources  from  which  to  draw  materials
for  the  life  of  Mohammad  and  rise  of  Islam — the  Kor'an
and  Tradition.  Two  minor  classes  may  be  added,  namely,
contemporary  documents  and  Arab  poetry ;  but  these  have
been,  for  the  most  part,  transmitted  also  by  tradition,  and
may  with  propriety  be  treated  as  coming  under  the  same
head.  What  dependence,  then,  can  be  placed  on  these
sources?  What  is  their  individual  merit  as  furnishing
historical  evidence,  and  what  their  comparative  value  in  rela-
tion to  each  other?  The  solution  of  these  questions  will
form  the  subject  of  this  Essay.

The  Kor'an  consists  exclusively  of  the  revelations  or  com-
mands which  Mohammad  professed,  from  time  to  time,  to
^(j's  receive  through  Gabriel,  as  a  message  direct  from  God ;  and
which,  under  alleged  divine  direction,  he  delivered  to  those
about  him.^  At  the  moment  of  inspiration  or  shortly  after,
each  passage  was  recited  by  Mohammad  before  the  friends  or
followers  who  happened  to  be  present,  and  was  generally
committed  to  writing  by  some  one  amongst  them,  at  the  time
or  afterwards,  upon  palm-leaves,  leather,  stones,  or  such  other
rude  material  as  conveniently  came  to  hand.^ These  divine


^  According  to  the  orthodox  doctrine,  every  syllable  of  the  Kor'an  is  of
divine  origin,  eternal  and  'uncreate'  as  the  Deity  itself.  Some  of  the
earliest  rhapsodies,  indeed  (as  the  91st,  looth,  102nd,  and  103rd  Siiras,  or
chapters),  do  not  seem  to  have  been  intended  as  revelations  at  all.  But
when  Mohammad's  die  was  cast  of  assuming  the  Most  High  as  the
immediate  speaker,  then  these  earlier  Suras  also  came  to  be  regarded  as
emanating  directly  from  the  Deity.  Hence  Mohammadans  rigidly
include  every  word  of  the  Kor'an,  at  whatever  stage  delivered,  in  the
category  of  'Thus  saith  the  Lord.'  And  it  is  one  of  their  arguments
against  our  Scriptures,  that  they  are  not  exclusively  oracles  professing  to
proceed  directly  from  the  mouth  of  God.

2  The  Prophet  himself  neither  read  nor  wrote. His  being  an Uvitnl


CH.  I.]  THE  KOR'AN  XV

messages  continued  throughout  the  three-and-twenty  years
of  his  prophetical  life,  so  that  the  last  portion  did  not  appear
till  near  the  time  of  his  death.  The  canon  was  then  closed  ;
but  the  contents  during  the  Prophet's  lifetime  were  never  as
a  whole  systematically  arranged  or  even  collected  together.
We  have  no  certain  knowledge  how  the  originals  were  pre-
served. That  there  did  not  exist  any  special  depository  for
them,  is  evident  from  the  mode  in  which,  after  Mohammad's
death,  the  various  fragments  had  to  be  sought  for.  Much  of
the  Kor'an  possessed  only  a  temporary  interest,  arising  out
of  circumstances  which  soon  ceased  to  be  important;  and  it
is  doubtful  whether  the  Prophet  intended  such  passages  to  be
used  for  public  or  private  worship,  or  even  maintained  in
currency  at  all.  Such  portions  it  is  little  likely  he  would  take
any  pains  to  preserve.  Whether  he  retained  under  his  own
eye  and  custody  the  more  important  parts,  we  have  no
indication  ;  perhaps  he  regarded  them  as  sufficiently  safe  in
the  current  copies,  guarded  by  the  miraculous  tenacity  of  the
Arab  memory.  The  later,  and  the  more  important,  revela-
tions were  probably  left  with  the  scribes  who  recorded  them,
or  laid  up  in  the  habitation  of  some  one  of  the  Prophet's
wives.^ However  this  may  have  been,  it  is  very  certain  that,

(unlearned)  is  held  to  enhance  the  marvel  of  his  revelation.  At  Medina,
he  had  many  Arabic  amanuenses  ;  some  of  them  occasional  as  'All  and
'Othman,  others  official  as  Zeid  ibn  Thabit,  who  also  learned  Hebrew  for
the  purpose.  In  Al-Wakidi's  collection  of  despatches,  the  writers  are
named,  and  they  amount  to  fourteen.  Some  say  there  were  four-and-
twenty  followers  whom  Mohammad  used  as  scribes  ;  others  as  many  as
forty-two.  In  his  early  Meccan  life,  he  could  not  have  had  these  facilities;
but  even  then  Khadija,  Waraka,  'All,  or  Abu  Bekr,  who  could  all  read,
might  have  recorded  his  revelations.  At  Medina,  Obei  ibn  Ka'b  is
mentioned  as  one  who  used  to  do  so.  Another,  'Abdallah  ibn  abi  Sarh,
was  excepted  from  the  Meccan  amnesty,  because  he  had  falsified  revela-
tions dictated  by  the  Prophet  before  the  Flight.

It  is  also  evident  that  the  revelations  were  recorded,  because  they  are
called  in  the  Kor'an  itself  Kiidb^i.e.^  'what  is  written'  or  'Scriptures.'
The  name  Kor'an  signifies  simply  'recitation,'  and  does  not  necessarily
imply  a  written  original.

'  If  the  originals  were  retained  by  Mohammad  himself,  they  must
needs  have  been  in  the  custody  of  one  of  his  wives  ;  since  at  Medina  the
Prophet  had  no  special  house  of  his  own,  but  dwelt  by  turns  in  the  abode
of  each  of  his  wives.  'Omar  committed  his  exemplar  (as  we  shall  see)  to
the  keeping  of  his  daughter  Hafsa,  one  of  the  vvidows  of  Mohammad,  and
this  may  have  been  done  in  imitation  of  the  Prophet's  own  practice. The


xvi  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd.

when  Mohammad  died,  there  was  nowhere  any  deposit  of  the

complete  series,  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  original

transcripts  themselves  were  anywhere  preserved.

Committed  But  the  preservation  of  the  various  Suras,  during  the  life-

to  memory w^^  of  Mohammad,  was  not  altogether  dependent  on  any

Muslims ; such  archives. The  divine  revelation  was  the  corner-stone  of

Islam. The  recital  of  a  passage  from  it  formed  an  essential

part  of  daily  prayer  public  and  private ;  and  its  perusal  and

repetition  were  enforced  as  a  duty  and  privilege  fraught  with

religious  merit. Such  is  the  universal  voice  of  early  tradition,

and  may  be  gathered  also  from  the  revelation  itself The

Kor'an  was  accordingly  committed  to  memory  more  or  less

by  every  adherent  of  Islam,  and  the  extent  to  which  it  could

be  recited  was  one  of  the  chief  distinctions in the early

Muslim  empire.^ The  custom  of  Arabia  favoured  the  task.

Passionately  fond  of  poetry,  but  without  the  ready  means  for

committing  to  writing  the  effusions  of  their  bards,  the  Arabs

had  long  been  used  to  imprint  these,  as  well  as  the  tradition

of  genealogical  and  tribal  events,  on  the  living  tablets  of  the

heart. The recollective  faculty  was  thus  cultivated  to  the

highest  pitch;  and  it  was  applied,  with  all  the  ardour  of  an

awakened  spirit,  to  the  Kor'an. Such  was  the  tenacity  of

their  memory,  and  so  great  their  power  of  application,  that

several  of  his  followers  could,  during  the  Prophet's  lifetime,

repeat  with  scrupulous  accuracy  the  whole  as  then  in  use.^

but  not  in  We  are  not,  however,  to  assume  that  the  entire  Kor'an

any  fixed vv^as  at  this  period  repeated  in  any  fixed  order. The  present

parts  compilation,  indeed,  is  held  by  the  Muslims  to follow the

arrangement  prescribed  by  Mohammad  ;  and  early  tradition

statement  made  by  Sale,  that  the  fragmentary  revelations  were  cast
promiscuously  into  a  chest,  is  not  borne  out  by  any  good  authority  that  I
have  met  with.

^  Thus,  among  a  heap  of  warrior  martyrs,  he  who  had  been  the  most
versed  in  the  Kor'an  was  honoured  with  the  first  burial.  The  person
who  in  any  company  could  most  faithfully  repeat  the  Kor'an  was  of  right
entitled  to  be  the  Imam,  or  conductor  of  the  public  prayers  (a  post
ordinarily  implying  also  military  command)  and  to  pecuniary  rewards.
Thus  after  the  usual  distribution  of  the  spoils  taken  on  the  field  of
Al-Kadislya,  A.H.  14,  the  residue  was  divided  among  those  who  knew
most  of  the  Kor'an.

^  Four  or  five  such  persons  are  named  ;  and  several  others  also  who
could  very  nearly  repeat  the  whole  before  Mohammad's  death.


CH.  I.]  THE  KOR'AN  xvii

might  appear  to  imply  some  known  sequence.^  But  this
cannot  be  admitted  ;  for  had  any  fixed  order  been  observed
or  sanctioned  by  the  Prophet,  it  would  unquestionably  have
been  preserved  in  the  subsequent  collection.  Now  the
Kor'an,  as  handed  down  to  our  time,  follows  in  the  disposition
of  its  several  parts  no  intelligible  arrangement  whatever,
either  of  subject  or  time ;  and  it  is  inconceivable  that
Mohammad  should  have  enjoined  its  recital  invariably  in
this  order.  We  must  even  doubt  whether  the  number  of  the
Suras  was  determined  by  Mohammad  as  we  now  have  thcm.^
The  internal  sequence  at  any  rate  of  the  contents  of  the
several  Suras  cannot,  in  most  cases,  have  been  that  intended
by  the  Prophet.  The  constant  chaotic  mingling  of  subjects,
disjoined  as  well  by  chronology  as  by  the  sense  ;  a  portion

^  Thus  we  read  of  certain  Companions,  who  could  repeat  the  whole
Kor'an  in  a  given  ihne,  which  might  be  held  to  imply  some  usual
connection  of  the  parts  ;  but  the  original  tradition  may  have  intended
such  portions  only  as  were  commonly  used  in  public  worship,  and  these
may  have  followed,  both  in  copying  and  repetition  from  memory,  some
understood  order  ;  or  the  tradition  may  refer  to  a  later  period  when  the
order  had  been  fixed  by  means  of  'Omar's  compilation.  There  was  no
fixed  order  observed  (as  with  'Lessons'  in  Christian  worship)  in  the
portions  of  the  Kor'an  recited  at  the  public  prayers.  The  selection  of  a
passage  was  dependent  on  the  will  and  choice  of  the  Imam.  Thus  Abu
Hureira  one  day  took  credit  to  himself  for  remembering  which  Sura  the
Prophet  had  read  the  day  before  ;  and  on  urgent  occasions  we  hear
of  a  shori  Sura  being  used.  It  is  only  in  private  recitals  that  the
whole,  or  large  portions,  of  the  Kor'an  are  said  to  have  been  recited
consecutively.

The  common  idea  of  the  Mohammadans,  that  the  Kor'an  was  fixed
by  Mohammad  as  we  have  it  now,  originates  in  the  tradition  that
Gabriel  had  an  annual  recitation  of  the  whole  Kor'an  with  the  Prophet,
as  well  as  in  the  desire  to  augment  the  authority  of  the  book  as  it  now
stands.

2  But  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  chief  Suras,  including  all
passages  in  most  common  use,  were  fixed  and  known  by  name  or  other
distinctive  mark.  Some  are  spoken  of,  in  early  and  well-authenticated
traditions,  as  having  been  so  referred  to  by  Mohammad  himself.  Thus
he  recalled  his  fugitive  followers  at  the  discomfiture  of  Honein,  by  shout-
ing to  them  as  'the  men  of  the  Surat  al-Bakara'  [Ibn  Ishfik  has  not  this
expression]  {i.e.  Sura  ii.).

Several  persons  are  stated  by  tradition  to  have  learnt  by  heart  a
certain  nic7nber  oi  Suras  in  Mohammad's  lifetime.  Thus  'Abdallah  ibn
Mas'ud  learned  seventy  Suras  from  the  Prophet's  own  mouth,  and
Mohammad  on  his  death-bed  repeated seventy  Suras, 'among which

b


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


Fragments

from  which

Kor'an

compiled,

faithfully

preserved


produced  at  Medina  sometimes  immediately  preceding  a
passage  revealed  long  before  at  Mecca  ;  a  command  put  in
some  places  directly  after  a  later  one  which  cancels  or  modifies
it ;  or  an  argument  suddenly  disturbed  by  the  interjection  of
a  sentence  foreign  to  its  purport ;  all  this  forbids  us  to  believe
that  the  present,  or  indeed  any  complete,  arrangement  was  in
use  during  Mohammad's  lifetime.

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that
several  at  least  of  the  Suras  are  precisely  the  same,  both  in
matter  and  order,  as  Mohammad  left  them;^  and  that  the
remainder,  though  often  resembling  a  mosaic  of  various
material  rudely  dovetailed  together,  are  yet  composed  of
genuine  fragments,  generally  of  considerable  length,  each  for
the  most  part  following  the  connection  in  which  it  was  recited
in  public,  and  committed  to  memory  or  to  paper  from  the
mouth  of  the  Prophet  by  his  followers.^  The  irregular  inter-
were  the  Seven  long  ones.'  These  traditions  signify  a  recognised
division  of  at  least  some  part  of  the  revelation  into  Suras,  if  not  a  usual
order  in  repeating  the  Suras  themselves.

The  liturgical  use  of  the  Suras  by  Mohammad  must,  no  doubt,  have
in  some  measure  fixed  their  form,  and  probably  also  their  sequence.
But  I  fail  to  follow  Sprenger  in  his  conclusions  as  to  'double'  Suras,  and
Suras  '  in  groups '  {inathdni  and  nazdir).

^  Where  whole  Suras  were  revealed  at  once,  this  would  naturally  be
the  case ;  but  short  passages  were  often  given  out  in  driblets,  and  even
single  verses,  as  occasion  required.  With  regard  to  these,  it  is  asserted
in  some  traditions  that  Mohammad  used  to  direct  his  amanuensis  to
enter  them  'in  the  Sura  which  treated  of  such  and  such  a  subject.'  This,
if  authentic  (and  it  is  probably  founded  on  fact),  would  indicate  that
Mohammad  intended  the  Kor'an  to  be  arranged  according  to  its  matter,
and  not  chronologically.  There  are  also  several  Suras  which,  from  the
unity  of  subject,  or  from  the  form  of  composition,  are  evidently  complete
and  integral.  Such  are  the  history  of  Joseph,  Sura  xii.  ;  and  the  psalm
descriptive  of  Paradise,  Sura  Iv.,  quoted  in  ch.  iv.

The  traditions  just  cited  as  to  the  number  of  Suras  which  some  of  the
Companions  could  repeat,  and  which  Mohammad  himself  repeated  on
his  death-bed,  also  imply  the  existence  of  such  Suras  in  a  complete  and
finished  form.

2  Anecdotes  are  told  of  persons  who,  in  reciting  the  Kor'an,  from  an
imperfect  memory,  or  when  tired,  omitted  passages — passing  from  one  to
another,  because  of  the  similar  termination,  and  of  others  who,  having
been  guilty  of  such  omission,  could  spontaneously  correct  themselves.
{Homoio/eletila  are  of  very  frequent  recurrence  in  the  Kor'an  from  the
rhythm  of  the  verses  being  often  formed  by  the  repetition  of  set  phrases
at  their  close,  such  as  the  attributes  of  God,  &c.) These anecdotes


CH.  I.]  THE  KOR'AN  xix

position  and  ordcrless  disposal  of  the  smaller  fracrments  have
indeed  frequently  destro)'ed  the  sequence,  and  produced  a
perplexing  confusion.  Still,  the  fact  remains,  that  the  frag-
ments themselves  were  strictly  and  exclusively  Mohammad's
own  composition,  and  were  learned  or  recorded  under  his
instructions  ;  and  this  fact  stamps  the  Kor'an,  not  merely  as
formed  out  of  the  Prophet's  own  words  and  scntaices,  but  to  a
large  extent  as  his  in  relation  to  the  context  also.

However  retentive  the  Arab  memory,  we  should  still  have Ability  to
regarded  with  distrust  a  transcript  made  entirely  from  that ^'"'^  <^°f"-

fc>  ^  ^  ^  •'  mon  both

source.  But  there  is  good  reason  for  believing  that  many  at  Mecca
fragmentary  copies,  embracing  amongst  them  the  whole  Medina
Kor'an,  or  nearly  the  whole,  were  during  his  lifetime  made  by
the  Prophet's  followers.  Writing  was  without  doubt  gener-
ally known  at  Mecca  long  before  Mohammad  assumed  the
prophetical  ofifice.  And  at  Medina  many  of  his  followers
were  employed  by  the  Prophet  in  writing  his  letters  or
despatches.^  Though  himself  delighting  in  the  title  of  the
'  illiterate  Prophet,'  and  abstaining,  whether  from  inability  or
design,  from  the  use  of  penmanship,  he  by  no  means  looked
with  a  jealous  eye  upon  the  art.  The  poorer  captives  taken
at  Bedr  were  offered  their  release  on  condition  that  they
taught  a  certain  number  of  Medina  citizens  to  write.  And
although  the  people  of  Medina  were  not  so  generally  educated
as  those  of  Mecca,  yet  many  are  noticed  as  having  been  able
to  write  before  Islam.^  The  ability  thus  existing,  it  may  be
safely  inferred  that  the  verses  so  indefatigably  committed  to
memory  would  be  likewise  committed  carefully  to  writing.

We also know that when a tribe first joined Islam, Transcripts
Mohammad  was  in  the  habit  of  deputing  one  or  more  of  his °f  Kor'^n^
followers  to  teach  them  the  Kor'an  and  the  requirements  of  common
the faith. We are  frequently  informed that  they  carried ^^^^^fms^
written  instructions  with  them  on  the  latter  point,  and  they
would  naturally  provide  themselves  also  with  transcripts  of  the

certainly  suppose  a  settled  order  of  the  parts  repeated  ;  and  though  the
period  referred  to  is  subsequent  to  Mohammad's  death,  yet  the  habit  ot
such  connected  repetition  was  most  probably  formed  during  his  lifetime,
and  before  the  collection  into  one  volume.

1  At-Tabari  I.,  1782.

2  Thus,  to  cite  one  out  of  a  score  of  instances,  Al-Wakidi  says  that
'Abu'l-'Abbas  used  to  write  Arabx  before  the  rise  of  Islam,  while  as  yet
writing  was  rare  among  the  Arabs.'


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


But  incom-
plete and
fragmentary


State  of
Kor'an  up
to  the  year
after

Mohammad's
death.


Kor'an  col-
lected A.H.
XI. -XIV.  by
Zeid;  his
text  authori-
tative
during  the
Caliphate
of  'Omar


more  important  parts  of  the  Revelation,  especially  those  upon
which  the  ceremonies  of  Islam  were  founded,  and  such  as
were  usually  recited  in  the  public  service.  Besides  the
reference  in  the  Kor'an  to  its  own  existence  in  a  written  form,
express  mention  is  made,  in  the  account  of  'Omar's  conver-
sion, of  a  copy  of  the  20th  Sura,  as  used  in  his  sister's  family.^
This  refers  to  a  period  preceding,  by  three  or  four  years,  the
emigration  to  Medina.  If  transcripts  of  the  revelations  were
made,  and  in  common  use,  at  that  early  time  when  the
followers  of  Islam  were  few  and  oppressed,  it  is  certain  that
they  must  have  multiplied  exceedingly  when  the  Prophet
came  to  power,  and  his  Book  formed  the  law  of  Arabia.

But  such  transcripts  were  (like  the  portions  committed  to
memory)  mere  fragments  compiled  and  put  together  with
little  or  no  connection  of  subject  and  date.  The  Suras  used
in  public  worship,  or  for  private  perusal  and  recitation,  would
be  those  of  which  the  greatest  number  of  copies  existed.
Transcripts  of  the  earliest  Suras,  and  of  those  of  evanescent
interest,  if  extant  at  all,  would  be  few  in  number.

Such  was  the  condition  of  the  text  during  Mohammad's
lifetime,  and  such  it  remained  for  about  a  year  after  his  death,
imprinted  upon  the  hearts  of  his  people,  and  fragmentary
transcripts  increasing  daily.  The  two  sources  would  corre-
spond closely  with  each  other ;  for  the  Kor'an,  even  during
the  Prophet's  lifetime,  was  regarded  with  a  superstitious  awe
as  containing  the  very  words  of  God ;  so  that  any  variations
would  be  reconciled  by  a  direct  reference  to  Mohammad
himself,^  and  after  his  death  to  the  originals,  or  to  copies,  or
to  the  memory  of  the  Prophet's  confidential  friends  and
amanuenses.

It  was  not  till  the  overthrow  of  Museilima,  when  great
carnage  took  place  amongst  the  Muslims  at  Al-Yemama,  and
large  numbers  of  the  best  reciters  of  the  Kor'an  were  slain,
that  a  misgiving  arose  in  'Omar's  mind  as  to  the  uncertainty
which  would be experienced regarding  the text,  when  all

'  'The  Kor'an  .  .  .  none  shall  touch  the  same,  excepting  such  as  are
clean,'  Ivi.,  80.  This  passage  was  referred  to  by  the  sister  of  'Omar  when
at  his  conversion  she  refused  to  let  him  take  her  copy  of  Sura  xx.  into
his  hands.

^  We  meet  with  instances  of  such  references  made  in  case  of  doubt  to
Mohammad  by  'Omar,  Ibn.Mas'ud,  and  Obei  ibn  Ka'b.


CH.  I.]  THE  KOR'AN  xxi

those  who  had  stored  it  in  their  memories  should  have  passed
avva\'.  '  I  fear,'  said  he,  addressing  the  CaHph  Abu  Bekr,
that  slaughter  may  again  wax  hot  amongst  the  reciters  of
the  Kor'an,  in  other  fields  of  battle  ;  and  that  much  may  be
lost  therefrom.  Now,  therefore,  my  advice  is,  that  thou
shouldest  give  speedy  orders  for  the  collection  of  the  Kor'an.
Abu  Bekr  agreed,  and  thus  made  known  his  wishes  to  Zeid
ibn  Thabit,  the  Prophet's  chief  amanuensis :  *  Thou  art  a
young  man  and  wise;  against  whom  no  one  amongst  us  can
cast  an  imputation  ;  and  thou  wast  wont  to  write  down  the
inspired  revelations  of  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord.  Wherefore
now  search  out  the  Kor'an,  and  bring  it  together.'  So  new
and  unexpected  was  the  enterprise  that  Zeid  at  first  shrank
from  it,  and  doubted  the  propriety,  or  even  lawfulness,
of  attempting  that  which  Mohammad  had  neither  himself
done  nor  commanded  to  be  done.  At  last,  yielding  to  the  joint
entreaties  of  Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar,  he  sought  out  the  Suras
and  fragments  from  every  quarter,  and  '  gathered  them  to-
gether, from  date-leaves,  and  tablets  of  white  stone,  and  from
the  breasts  of  men.'  ^  By  the  labours  of  Zeid,  these  scattered
and  confused  materials  were  within  two  or  three  years
reduced  to  the  order  and  sequence  in  which  we  now  find
them,  and  in  which  it  is  said  that  Zeid  used  to  repeat  the
Kor'an  in  the  presence  of  Mohammad.  The  original  copy
thus  prepared  was  committed  by  'Omar  to  the  custody  of  his
daughter  Hafsa,  the  Prophet's  widow.  The  compilation  of
Zeid,  as  embodied  in  this  exemplar,  continued  during  'Omar's
Caliphate  to  be  the  standard  and  authoritative  text.

But  variety  of  expression  either  prevailed  in  the  previous Recension
transcripts  and modes  of  recitation,  or  soon  crept  into  the J^^n'sCali-
copies  which  were  made  from  Zeid's  edition. The  Muslim phate
world  was  scandalised. The  Revelation  as  sent  down-  from
heaven  was  ONE,  but  where  was  now  its  unity? Hodheifa,
who had warred in Armenia and Adherbaijan and had
observed  the  different  readings  of  the  Syrians  and  of  the  men

^  Other  traditions  add,  fragments  of  parchment  or  paper,  pieces  of
leather,  and  the  shoulder  and  rib  bones  of  camels  and  goats.  Leather
was  frequently  used  for  writing,  and  many  of  Mohammad's  treaties  and
letters  were  recorded  on  it.  There  is  a  curious  tradition  regarding  a
man  who  used  a  leather  letter,  received  from  Mohammad,  for  the  purpose
of  mending  his  bucket,  and  whose  family  were  thence  called  the
'children  of  the  cobbler.^


xxii  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd

of  Al-'Irak,  was  alarmed  at  the  number  and  extent  of  the
variations,  and  warned  'Othman  to  interpose,  and  '  stop  the
people,  before  they  should  differ  regarding  their  Scripture,  as
did  the  Jews  and  Christians.'  The  Caliph  was  convinced,  and
to  remedy  the  evil  had  recourse  again  to  Zeid,  with  whom
he  associated  a  syndicate  of  three  of  Koreish.  The
original  copy  of  the  first  edition  was  obtained  from  Hafsa's
depository,  the  various  readings  were  sought  for  throughout
the  empire,  and  a  careful  recension  of  the  whole  set  on  foot.
In  case  of  difference  between  Zeid  and  his  coadjutors,  the  voice
of  the  latter,  as  conclusive  of  the  Koreishite  idiom  was  to  be
followed,  and  the  collation  thus  assimilated  exclusively  to  the
Meccan  dialect.^  Transcripts  were  multiplied  and  forwarded
to  the  chief  cities  in  the  empire,  and  previously  existing
copies  were  all,  by  the  Caliph's  command,  committed  to  the
flames.  The  original  was  returned  again  to  Hafsa's  custody.
Which  The  recension  of  'Othman  has  been  handed  down  to  us

remains  unaltered.  So  carefully,  indeed,  has  it  been  preserved,  that
to  the  pre-  there  are  no  variations  of  importance — we  might  almost  say
sent  day  ^^  variations  at  all — to  be  found  in  the  innumerable  copies
scattered  throughout  the  vast  bounds  of  the  empire  of  Islam.
Contending  and  embittered  factions,  taking  their  rise  in  the
murder  of  'Othman  himself  within  a  quarter  of  a  century  from
the  death  of  Mohammad  have  ever  since  rent  the  Moham-
madan  world.  Yet  but  ONE  Kor'an  has  been  current  amongst
them ;  and  the  consentaneous  use  by  all  of  the  same
Scripture  in  every  age  to  the  present  day  is  an  irrefragable
proof  that  we  have  now  before  us  the  very  text  prepared  by
command of  the unfortunate Caliph,^ There is  probably

^  It  is  one  of  the  maxims  of  the  Muslim  world  (supported  perhaps  by
Sura  xi.  2)  that  the  Kor'an  is  incorruptible,  and  that  it  is  preserved  from
error  and  variety  of  reading  by  the  miraculous  interposition  of  God  him-
self. In  order,  therefore,  to  escape  the  inconsistency  of  a  revision,  it  is
held  that  the  Kor'an,  as  to  external  form,  was  revealed  in  seven  dialects
of  the  Arabic  tongue,  so  that  no  change  was  made  in  the  integrity  of  the
text.  [The  expression,  however,  means  no  more  than  this — that  the
words  of  the  Suras  were  not  fixed,  but  might  be  recited  in  an  indefinite
number  of  ways.  Cf.  Noldeke's  GescJiichte  des  Qordns,  ed.  by  F.
Schwally,  p.  47  ff]

2  The  Muslims  would  have  us  believe  that  some  of  the  self-same
copies,  penned  by  'Othman  or  by  his  order,  are  still  in  existence.  The
copy  which  the  Caliph  held  in  his  hand  when  he  was  murdered  is  said  to
have  been  preserved  in  the  village  of  Antartus  on  the  Coast  of  Syria.


Othman's
text  a


CH.  I.]  ■  THE  KOR'AN  xxiii

in  the  world  no  other  work  which  has  remained  twelve
centuries  with  so  pure  a  text.  The  various  readings  are
wonderfully  few  in  number,  chiefly  confined  indeed  to
differences  in  the  vowel  points  and  diacritical  signs.  But
these,  invented  at  a  later  date,  can  hardly  be  said  to  affect
the  text  of 'Othman.^

Assuming,  then,  that  we  possess  unchanged  the  text  of  I.  Was
'Othman's  recension,  it  remains  to  inquire  whether  that  text
was  an  honest  reproduction  of  Zeid's,  with  the  simple  recon- faithful
cilement of unimportant variations. There is the fullest [fon°of"'^
ground  for  believing  that  it  was  so. No  early  or  trustworthy Zeid's?
tradition  throws  suspicion  upon  'Othman  of  tampering  with
the  Kor'an  in  order  to  support  his  own  claims. The  Shl'a,
indeed,  of  later  times  pretend  that  'Othman  left  out  certain
Suras  or  passages  which  favoured  'All. But  this  is  incredible.

Others  hold  that  leaves  of  it  were  treasured  up  in  the  Mosque  of
Cordova,  and  Edrisi  describes  the  ceremonies  with  which  they  were
treated  ;  they  were  finally  transferred  to  Fez  or  Telemsan.  Ibn  Batuta,
when  in  the  fourteenth  century  he  visited  Al-Basra,  declares  that  this
MS.  was  then  in  its  Mosque,  and  that  the  marks  of  the  Caliph's  blood
were  still  visible  (according  to  tradition)  at  the  words  '  God  shall  avenge
thee  against  them'  (Sura  ii.  138).  Other  of 'Othman's  originals  are  said
to  be  preserved  in  Egypt,  Morocco,  and  Damascus,  as  well  as  at  Mecca
and  Medina.  The  Medina  copy  has  a  note  at  the  end,  relating  that  it
was  compiled  by  the  injunctions  of  'Othman  ;  and  the  compilers'  names
are  also  given.  But  it  appears  very  unlikely  that  any  of  'Othman's
copies  can  have  escaped  the  innumerable  changes  of  dynasty  and  party
to  which  every  part  of  the  MusHm  world  has  been  subjected.  Any  very
ancient  copy  might  come  to  be  called  that  of  'Othman.  [The  oldest
copies  of  the  Kor'an  belong  probably  to  the  third  century  of  the  Hijra  ;
a  few  may  belong  to  the  second.  Cf.  Noldeke's  GescJiicJite  des  Qordfis^
i860,  p.  325.]

*  There  are,  however,  instances  of  variation  in  the  letters  themselves,
not  confined  always  to  difference  in  the  dots,  but  extending  sometimes  to
iheform  of  the  letters  also;  these  too,  however,  are  immaterial.  This
almost  incredible  purity  of  text,  in  a  book  so  widely  scattered  over  the
world,  and  continually  copied  by  people  of  different  tongues  and  lands,
is  without  doubt  owing  mainly  to  'Othman's  recension  and  to  the  official
promulgation  and  maintenance  of  his  edition.  To  countenance  a  various
reading  was  an  offence  against  the  State,  and  as  such  would  still  to  this
day  be  punished.  We  need  not  wonder  then  that,  with  such  means
resorted  to,  perfect  uniformity  of  text  has  been  maintained.  To  compare
(as  the  Muslims  are  fond  of  doing)  their  pure  text  with  the  various
readings  of  our  Scriptures,  is  to  compare  things  between  which  there  is
no  analogy.


xxiv  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd.

Reasons  for  When  'Othman's  edition  was  prepared,  no  open  breach  had
thaTit^was  taken  place  between  the  Omeiyads  and  the  'Alids.  The
so  unity  of  Islam  was  still  unthreatened. 'All's  pretensions  were

as  yet  undeveloped.  No  sufficient  object  can,  therefore,  be
assigned  for  the  perpetration  by  'Othman  of  an  offence  which
Muslims  would  have  regarded  as  one  of  the  blackest  dye.
Again,  at  the  time  of  the  recension,  there  were  still  multitudes
alive  who  had  the  Kor'an  by  heart  as  they  had  heard  it
originally  delivered  ;  and  copies  of  any  passages  favouring
'All — had  any  ever  existed — must  have  been  in  the  hands  of
his  numerous  adherents,  both  of  which  sources  would  have
proved  an  effectual  check  upon  any  attempt  at  suppression.
Further,  the  party  of  'All,  immediately  on  'Othman's  death,
assumed  an  independent  attitude,  and  raised  him  to  the
Caliphate.  Is  it  conceivable  that,  when  thus  arrived  at
power,  they  would  have  tolerated  a  mutilated  Kor'an — muti-
lated expressly  to  destroy  their  leader's  claim  ?  Yet  we  find
that  they  continued  to  use  the  same  Kor'an  as  their
opponents,  and  raised  no  shadow  of  an  objection  against  it.^
The  insurgents,  indeed,  made  it  one  of  their  complaints
against  'Othman  that  he  had  caused  the  revision,  and  ordered
all  previous  copies  of  the  sacred  volume  to  be  burned ;  but
these  proceedings  were  objected  to  simply  as  in  themselves
unauthorised  and  sacrilegious.  No  hint  was  dropped  of
ulterior  object,  or  of  any  alteration  and  omission.  Such
supposition,  palpably  absurd  at  the  time,  is  altogether  an
afterthought  of  the  Shl'a  sect.

1  So  far  from  objecting  to  'Othman's  revision,  'All  multiplied  copies
of  it.  Among  other  MSS.  supposed  to  have  been  written  by  'All  himself,
one  is  said  to  have  been  preserved  at  Meshhed  'All  as  late  as  the
fourteenth  century,  which  bore  his  signature.  Some  leaves  of  the  Kor'an,
said  to  have  been  copied  by  him,  are  now  in  the  Lahore  Tosha-Kha7ia;
others  in  the  same  repository  are  ascribed  to  the  pen  of  his  son,  Al-
Hosein.  Without  leaning  on  such  uncertain  evidence,  it  is  sufficient  for
our  argument  that  copies  of  'Othman's  Kor'an  were  notoriously  used  and
multiplied  by  ''AIT  s  partisans^  7nx6.hdLV&  been  so  used  and  multiplied  to
the  present  day.  'All  was,  moreover,  deeply  versed  in  the  Kor'an,
and  his  memory  (if  tradition  be  true)  would  amply  have  sufficed  of  itself
to  detect,  if  not  to  restore,  any  passage  that  had  been  tampered  with.
*Ali  said  of  himself;  '  There  is  not  a  verse  in  the  Kor'an  of  which  I  do  not
know  the  matter,  the  parties  to  whom  it  refers,  and  the  place  and  time
of  its  revelation,  whether  by  night  or  by  day,  whether  in  the  plains  or
upon  the  mountains.'


en.  I.]


THE  KOR'AN


We  may  then  safely  conclude  that  '0th man's  recension
was,  what  it  professed  to  be,  namely,  the  reproduction  of  the
text  of  Zeid,  with  a  more  perfect  conformity,  it  is  true,  to  the
dialect  of  Mecca,  and  the  elimination  of  the  various  readings
prevalent  throughout  the  realm,  but  still  a  faithful  repro-
duction. The  most  important  question  yet  remains,  viz.
Whether  Zeid's  collection  was  itself  an  authentic  and  exhaustive
collection  of  Mohammad's  Revelations.  The  following  con-
siderations warrant  the  belief  that  it  was  authentic  and  in  the
main  as  complete  as  at  the  time  was  possible.

Fii'st. — Abu  Bekr,  under  whose  direction  it  was  under-
taken, was  a  sincere  follower  of  Mohammad,  and  an  earnest
believer  in  the  divine  origin  of  the  Kor'an.  His  faithful
attachment  to  the  Prophet's  person,  conspicuous  for  the  last
twenty  years  of  his  life,  and  his  simple,  consistent,  and
unambitious  deportment  as  Caliph,  admit  no  other  supposi-
tion. Believing  the  revelations  of  his  friend  to  be  the  revela-
tions of  God  himself,  his  first  object  would  be  to  secure  a  pure
and  complete  transcript  of  them.  A  similar  argument  applies
with  equal  force  to  'Omar,  under  whose  Caliphate  the  revision
was  completed.  From  the  scribes  employed  in  the  compila-
tion, to  the  humblest  Believer  who  brought  to  Zeid  his  little
more  of  writing  on  stones  or  palm-leaves,  all  would  be  influ-
enced by  the  same  earnest  desire  to  reproduce  the  very  words
their  Prophet  had  declared  to  be  his  message  from  the  Lord.
A  similar  guarantee  existed  in  the  feelings  of  the  people  at
large,  in  whose  soul  no  principle  was  more  deeply  rooted  than
an  awful  reverence  for  the  supposed  word  of  God.  The
Kor'an  itself  contains  frequent  denunciations  against  those
who  should  presume  to  '  fabricate  anything  in  the  name  of  the
Lord,'  or  conceal  any  part  of  that  which  He  had  revealed.
Such  an  action,  declared  to  be  the  height  of  impiety,  we
cannot  believe  that  the  first  Muslims,  in  the  early  ardour  of
their  faith  and  love,  would  have  dared  to  contemplate.

Second. — The  compilation  was  made  within  two  or  three
years  of  Mohammad's  death.  We  have  seen  that  some  of  his
followers  had  the  entire  revelation  (excepting  perhaps  some
obsolete  fragments)  by  heart;  that  every  Muslim  treasured
up  portions  in  his  memory ;  and  that  there  were  official
Reciters  of  it,  for  public  worship  and  tuition,  in  all  countries
to which Islam extended. These formed a living- link


IF.  Was
Zeid's
edition  a
faithful
copy  of
Mohammad's
revela-
tions ?


Reasons  for
believing
it  was  so  :
First. —
Sincerity
and  faith  of
Abu  Bekr
and  early
Muslims


Second. —
Kor'an  as
delivered
by  Moham-
mad, yet
fresh  in
memory  of
his  followers


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[iNTROD,


Third. —
It  must
have  corre-
sponded
with  nu-
merous
transcripts
in  daily  use


Fourth. —
Internal
evidence  of
simplicity
and  faith-
fulness of
compilers


between  the  Revelation  fresh  from  Mohammad's  lips,  and
Zeid's  collection.  Thus  the  people  were  not  only  sincere  in
wishing  for  a  faithful  copy  of  the  Kor'an ;  they  were  also  in
possession  of  ample  means  for  realising  their  desire,  and  for
testing  the  accuracy  and  completeness  of  the  book  now  placed
in  their  hands.

TJiird. — A  still  greater  security  would  be  obtained  from
the  copies  of  separate  portions  made  in  Mohammad's  lifetime,
and  which  must  have  greatly  multiplied  before  the  Kor'an
was  compiled.  These  were  in  the  possession,  probably,  of  all
who  could  read.  And  as  we  know  that  the  compilation  of
Zeid  came  into  immediate  and  unquestioned  use,  it  is  reason-
able to  conclude  that  it  embraced  and  corresponded  with
every  extant  fragment ;  and  therefore,  by  common  consent,
superseded  them.  We  hear  of  no  fragments,  sentences,  or
words  omitted  by  the  compilers,  nor  of  any  that  differed  from
the  received  edition.  Any  such  would  undoubtedly  have
been  preserved  and  noticed  in  those  traditional  repositories
which  treasured  up  the  minutest  and  most  trivial  acts  and
sayings  of  the  Prophet.

Fourtli. — The  contents  and  arrangement  of  the  Kor'an
speak  forcibly  for  its  authenticity.  All  the  fragments  have,
with  artless  simplicity,  been  joined  together.  The  patchwoi^
bears  no  marks  of  a  designing  genius  or  moulding  hand.  It
testifies  to  the  faith  and  reverence  of  the  compiler,  and  proves
that  he  dared  no  more  than  simply  collect  the  sacred  remains
and  place  them  in  juxtaposition.  Hence  the  interminable
repetitions ;  the  wearisome  reiteration  of  the  same  ideas,
truths,  and  doctrines ;  scriptural  stories  and  Arab  legends,
told  over  and  over  again,  with  little  or  no  verbal  variation ;
hence  also  the  pervading  want  of  connection,  and  the  startling
chasms  between  adjacent  passages.  Even  the  frailties  of  the
Prophet,  as  noticed  by  the  Deity,  have  with  evident  faithful-
ness been  entered  in  the  Kor'an.  Not  less  undisguised  are
the  many  passages  contradicted  or  abrogated  by  later  revela-
tions.'^  Thus  the  editor  plainly  contented  himself  with  com-
piling and  copying  in  a  continuous  form,  but  with  scrupulous

^  Though  the  convenient  doctrine  of  abrogation  is  acknowledged  in
the  Kor'an,  yet  the  Muslim  doctors  endeavour  as  far  as  possible  to
explain  it  away.  Still  they  are  obliged  to  allow  that  the  Kor'an  contains
no  fewer  than  225  verses  cancelled  by  later  ones.


CH I.]


THE  KOR'AN


accuracy,  the  fragmentary  materials  within  his  reach.  He
neither  ventured  to  select  from  repeated  versions  of  the
same  incident,  or  to  reconcile  differences,  or  by  the  altera-
tion of  a  letter  to  connect  abrupt  transitions  of  context,
or  by  tampering  with  the  text  to  soften  discreditable
appearances.  In  fine,  we  possess  every  internal  guarantee
of  confidence.

But  it  may  be  objected, — If  the  text  of  Zeid  was  pure  and
universally  received,  how  came  it  to  be  so  soon  deteriorated
as  to  require,  in  consequence  of  its  variations,  an  extensive
recension  ?  Tradition  does  not  afford  sufficient  light  to
determine  the  cause  of  these  discrepancies.  They  may  have
been  due  to  various  readings  in  transcripts  that  remained  in
the  possession  of  the  people,  or  have  originated  in  the  diverse
dialects  of  Arabia,  and  different  modes  of  pronunciation  and
orthography  ;  or  have  sprung  up  naturally  in  the  already  vast
domains  of  Islam,  before  strict  uniformity  was  officially
enforced.  It  is  sufficient  for  us  to  know  that  in  'Othman's
revision  recourse  was  had  to  the  original  exemplar  of  the
first  compilation,  and  that  there  is  otherwise  every  security,
internal and external, that we possess the text which

^Mohammad  himself  gave  forth  and  used.

^Hl  While,  however,  it  is  maintained  that  we  now  have  the
'  Kor'an  as  it  zvas  left  by  Mohammad,  there  is  no  ground  for
asserting  that  passages,  once  put  forth  as  inspired,  may  not
at  some  subsequent  period  have  been  changed  or  withdrawn
by  the  Prophet  himself.  On  the  contrary,  repeated  examples
of  withdrawal  are  noticed  in  tradition ;  and  alterations
(although  no  express  instances  are  given)  seem  to  be  clearly
implied.  The  Kor'an  itself  recognises  the  withdrawal  of
certain  passages,  after  they  had  been  promulgated  as  a  part
of  the  Revelation  :  '  Whatever  verses  We  cancel,  or  cause  thee
to  forget,  We  give  thee  better  in  their  stead,  or  the  like
thereof  (Sura  ii.  loo).

Any  passages  which  Mohammad,  finding  to  be  incon-
venient, or  otherwise  inexpedient  for  publication,  withdrew
before  coming  into  circulation,  will,  of  course,  not  be  found  in
our  present  Kor'an  ;  nor  would  an  altered  passage  remain
but  in  its  altered  form.  But  this  does  not  in  any  measure
affect  the  value  of  the  Kor'an  as  an  exponent  of  Mohammad's
opinions,  or  at  least  of  the  opinions  he  finally  professed  to


Recension
of  Abu
Bekr's  edi-
tion, why
required  ?


Kor'an  may
not  contain
some  pas-
sages once
revealed
but  subse-
quently
cancelled,


xxviii  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd.

hold ; since  what  we now  have, though possibly  corrected

and  modified  by  himself,  is  still  Jiis  o-ivn.

Nor  some  It  is,  moreover,  not  impossible  that  verses  which  had  been

su res^s'ed allowed  to  fall  into  abeyance  and  become obsolete,  or  the

or  epheme- suppression  of  which  Mohammad  himself  desired,  may  have

ra  passages |-jggj-j  sought  out  by  the  blind  zeal  of  his  followers,  and,  with

pious  veneration  for  everything  believed  to  be  the  word  of

God,  entered  in  Zeid's  collection. On  the  other  hand,  many

early  passages  of  ephemeral  interest  may,  without  design  on

the  part  of  Mohammad,  have  disappeared  in the lapse  of

time  ;  and,  no  trace  being  left,  must  necessarily  have  been

omitted  from  the  compilation.

CoNCLU-  The  conclusion,  which  we  may  now  with  confidence  draw,

SIGN.— jg  thdl  the  editions  of  Zeid  and  'Othman  were  not  only  faith-

Kor  an  _  ■'

authentic ful,  but  both  of  them,  so  far  as  the  materials  went,  complete  ;

Mohimmad's  ^""^  ^^^^  whatever  omissions  there  may  have  been,  were  not

revelations on  the  part  of  the  compilers  intentional. The  real  drawback

to  the  inestimable  value  of  the  Kor'an  as  a  contemporary  and

authentic  record  of  Mohammad's  character  and  actions,  is  the

want  of  arrangement  and  connection  which  pervades  it ;  so

that,  in  inquiring  into  the  meaning  and  force  of  a  passage,  no

certain  dependence  can  be  placed  upon  adjacent  sentences  a^^

the  true  context. But,  bating this  serious  defect,  we  maJ^B

upon  the  strongest  presumption affirm  that  every  verse  m

the Kor'an is the genuine and unaltered composition of

Mohammad himself, and conclude with at least a close

approximation  to  the  verdict  of  Von  Hammer  : That  we  hold

the  Koj'dn  to  be  as  surely  Mohaniniad's  word,  as  the  Mohani-

Diadans  hold  it  to  be  the  word  of  God.

Importance  The importance of  this  deduction can hardly  be  over-

ofl^oranas  estimated. The Kor'an becomes  the  groundwork  and the

contempo-  , •  ,  . .  °

lary  evi- test  of  all  inquiries  into  the  origin  of  Islam  and  the  character
dence  of ^  j^ Founder. Here  we  have  a  storehouse  of  MoJianimad's

Mohammad  s

words  and  owu  words  recorded  during  his  life,  extending  over  the  whole
c  aracter  course  of  his  public  career,  and  illustrating  his  religious  views,
his  public  acts,  and  his  domestic  character.  By  this  standard
of  his  own  making,  we  may  safely  judge  his  life  and  actions,
for  it  must  represent  either  what  he  actually  thought,  or  what
he  affected  to  think.  And  so  true  a  mirror  is  the  Kor'an  of
Mohammad's  character,  that  the  saying  became  proverbial
among  the  early  Muslims,  His  character  is  the  Kor'an. 'Tell


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


me,'  was  the  curious  inquiry  often  put  to  'A'isha,  as  well  as  to
Mohammad's  other  widows,  'tell  me  something  about  the
Prophet's  disposition.'  'Thou  hast  the  Kor'an,'  replied
'A'isha ;  '  art  thou  not  an  Arab,  and  readest  the  Arabic
tongue?'  'Yea,  verily.'  'Then  why  take  the  trouble  to
inquire  of  me?  For  the  prophet's  disposition  is  no  other
than  the  Kor'an  itself  Of  Mohammad's  biography  the
Kor'an  is  the  keystone.

[A  source  second  only  to  the  Kor'an  would  be  the  Dlv\an
or  Poems  of  Hassan  ibn  Thabit,  if  we  could  be  certain  that  in
any  given  instance  these  were  genuine.  These  poems  have
been  edited  recently  (1910)  in  the  Gibb  Memorial  Series.
The  verses  of  other  contemporary  poets,  such  as  Al-Ash'a
{cf.  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  255  f.),  would  be  of  first-rate  value,  if  their
authenticity  were  established.]


Having  gained  this  firm  position,  we  proceed  to  inquire
into  the  credibility  and  authority  of  the  other  source  of  early
Mohammadan  history,  viz.  TRADITION.  This  must  neces-
sarily form  the  chief  material  for  the  biography  of  the
Prophet.  It  may  be  possible  to  establish  from  the  Kor'an
the  outlines  and  some  of  the  details  of  his  life,  but  tradition

tone  enables  us  to  determine  their  relative  position,  and  to
lave  them  into  the  tissue  of  intermediate  affairs.
Mohammadan  tradition  consists  of  the  sayings  of  the
friends  and  followers  of  the  Prophet,  handed  down  by  an
alleged  chain  of  narrators  to  the  period  when  they  were
collected,  recorded,  and  classified.  The  process  of  transmis-
sion was  for  the  most  part  oral.  It  may  be  sketched  as
follows.

After  the  death  of  Mohammad,  the  main  employment  of
his  followers  was  arms.  The  pursuit  of  pleasure,  and  the
formal  round  of  religious  observances,  filled  up  the  intervals
of  active  life,  but  afforded  scanty  exercise  for  the  higher
faculties  of  the  mind.  The  tedium  of  long  and  irksome
marches,  and  the  lazy  period  from  one  campaign  to  another,
fell  listlessly  upon  a  simple  and  semi-barbarous  race.  These
intervals  were  occupied,  and  that  tedium  beguiled,  chiefly  by
calling  up  the  past  in  familiar  conversation  or  more  formal
discourse.  On  what  topic,  then,  would  the  early  Muslims
more  enthusiastically  descant  than  on  the  acts  and  sayings  of


Tradi-
tion, the
chief  ma-
terial of
early  Mus-
lim history


Described


Habits  ot
the  early
Muslims
favoured
growth  of
tradition


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[iNTROD.


Lapse  of

time  in-
vested Mo-
hammad with
superna-
tural attri-
butes


Supersti-
tious rev-
erence with
which  tra-
ditions of
Companions
were  re-
garded by
succeeding
ffeneration


that  wonderful  man  who  had  called  them  into  existence  as  a
conquering  nation,  and  had  placed  in  their  hands  'the  keys
both  of  this  World  and  of  Paradise  '  ?

Thus  the  converse  of  Mohammad's  followers  would  be
much  about  him.  The  majesty  of  his  character  gained  great-
ness by  contemplation  ;  and  as  time  gradually  removed  him
farther  from  them,  the  lineaments  of  the  mysterious  mortal
who  was  wont  to  hold  familiar  intercourse  with  the
messengers  of  heaven  rose  into  dimmer  but  more  gigantic
proportions.  The  mind  was  unconsciously  led  on  to  think  of
him  as  endowed  with  supernatural  power  and  surrounded  by
supernatural  agency.  Here  was  the  material  out  of  which
Tradition  grew  luxuriantly.  When  there  was  at  hand  no
standard  of  fact  whereby  these  recitals  might  be  tested,  the
Memory  was  aided  by  the  unchecked  efforts  of  the  Imagina-
tion ;  and  as  days  rolled  on  imagination  gained  the
ascendancy.

Such  is  the  influence  which  the  lapse  of  time  would
naturally  have  upon  the  minds  and  the  narratives  of  the
'Companions'  of  Mohammad — more  especially  of  those
who,  being  young  when  he  died,  lived  long  into  the  next
generation.  And  then  another  race  sprang  up  who  had  never
seen  the  Prophet,  who  looked  up  to  his  contemporaries  witjj^
a  superstitious  reverence,  and  listened  to  their  stories  of  hflP
as  to  the  tidings  of  a  messenger  from  the  other  world.  *  Is  it
possible,  father  of  'Abdallah !  that  thou  hast  been  with
Mohammad?'  was  the  question  addressed  by  a  pious  Muslim
to  Hodheifa,  in  the  Mosque  of  AI-Kufa ;  'didst  thou  really
see  the  Prophet,  and  wert  thou  on  terms  of  familiar  inter-
course with  him  ?  '  'Son  of  my  uncle!  it  is  indeed  as  thou
sayest'  '  And  how  wert  thou  wont  to  behave  towards  the
Prophet  ? '  '  Verily,  we  used  to  labour  hard  to  please  him.'
*  Well,  by  the  Lord  ! '  exclaimed  the  ardent  listener,  '  if  I  had
been  but  alive  in  his  time,  I  would  not  have  allowed  him  to
put  his  blessed  foot  upon  the  earth,  but  would  have  borne
him  on  my  shoulders  wheresoever  he  listed.'  On  another
occasion,  the  youthful  'Obeida  listened  to  a  Companion  who
was  reciting  before  an  assembly  how  the  Prophet's  head  was
shaved  at  the  Pilgrimage,  and  the  hair  distributed  amongst
his  followers  ;  the  young  man's  eyes  glistened  as  the  speaker
proceeded, and he interrupted him with the impatient


CH.  I.]  TRADITION  ^  xxxi

exclamation  :  '  Would  that  I  had  even  a  single  one  of  those
blessed  hairs  !  I  would  cherish  it  for  ever,  and  prize  it  beyond
all  the  gold  and  silver  in  the  world.'  Such  were  the  natural
feelings  of  fond  devotion  with  which  the  Prophet  came  to  be
regarded  by  the  generation  which  followed  the  '  Companions.'

As  the  tale  of  the  Companions  was  thus  taken  up  by  their Successon
followers, distance began to invest it with an increasing jatterhaif
charm,  while  a  living  faith  and  warm  imagination  were  fast of  first
degenerating  into  superstitious  credulity. This  new  genera- ^^^  "'^
tion  is  termed  in  the  language  of  the  patristic  lore  of  Arabia,
Successors. Here  and  there  a  Companion  survived  till  near
the  end  of  the  first  century  ;  but,  for  all  practical  purposes,
they  had  passed  from  the  stage  long  before  its  close. Their
first  Successors,  who  were  in  some  measure also  their  con-
temporaries, flourished  in  the  latter  half  of  the  same  century,
and  some  of  the  older  may  have  survived  for  a  time  even  in
the  second.^  *

Meanwhile  a  new  cause  was  at  work,  which  gave  to  the Wants  o(
tales  of  Mohammad's  Companions  a  fresh  and  an  adven- ^■'^P^.^'^'^g

^  _  ^  empire  re-

titious  importance. The  Arabs,  a  simple  and  unsophisticated quired  en-
race,  found  in  the  Kor'an  ample  provisions  for  the  regulation o/fo^^o[
of  their  affairs,  religious,  social,  and  political. But  the  aspect Kor'an
of  Islam  soon  underwent  a  mighty  change. Scarcely  was  the
PTophet  buried  when  his  followers  issued  forth  from  their
barren  Peninsula  resolved  to  impose  the  faith  of  Islam  upon
all  the  nations  of  the  earth. Within  a  century  they  had,  as  a
first  step,  conquered  every  land that intervenes from the
banks  of  the  Oxus  to  the  farthest  shores  of  Northern  Africa,
and  enrolled  the  great  majority  of  their  peoples  under  the
standard  of  the  Kor'an. This  vast  empire  differed  widely
from the Arabia of Mohammad's time ; and that which
sufficed  for  the  patriarchal  simplicity  of  the  early  Arabs  was
found  altogether  inadequate  for  the multiplying  wants of

^  Companions,  termed  As/ulb  c__;lokV%5^  ;  their  followers,  or  Successors,
Tdbi^iin  j^,^lj.  For  practical  purposes,  the  age  of  Companions  may
be  limited  to  the  first  half  or  three-quarters  of  the  7th  century  a.d.
Thus,  supposing  a  Companion  to  have  reached  his  sixty-third  year
in  A.D.  674,  he  would  have  been  only  twenty  years  of  age  at  the  Prophet's
death,  and  but  ten  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  the  Flight.  A  margin  of
ten  or  twelve  additional  years  may  be  left  for  cases  of  greater  age  and
unusual  memory.


xxxii  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd.

their  descendants.  Crowded  cities,  like  Al-Kufa,  Cairo,  and
Damascus,  required  elaborate  laws  for  the  guidance  of  their
courts  of  justice :  widening  political  relations  demanded  a
system  of  international  equity :  the  speculations  of  a  people
before  whom  Literature  was  throwing  open  her  arena,  and
the  controversies  of  eager  factions  on  nice  points  of  doctrine,
were  impatient  of  the  narrow  limits  which  confined  them  : —
all  called  loudly  for  the  enlargement  of  the  scanty  and  naked
dogmas  of  the  Revelation,  and  for  the  development  of  its
rudimental  code  of  ethics.
Kor'an  at  And  yet,  by  the  first  principles  of  Islam,  the  standard  of

authoriui- Theology,  Politics,  and  Law  was  the  Kor'an  alone. By  the
tive  rule  of divine  Revelation,  Mohammad  himself  ruled. To  it  in  his
con  ucc teaching  he  always  referred. From  the  same  infallible  source
he  professed  to  derive  his  opinions,  and  upon  it  to  ground  his
decisions. If  he,  the  Messenger  of  the  Lord,  and  the  Founder
of  the  faith,  was  thus  bound  by  the  heavenly  Revelation,  how
much  more  the  Caliphs,  his  uninspired  successors  ! But  new
and unforeseen  circumstances  were continually  arising,  for
which the Kor'an had made no provision. It  no  longer
sufficed for the needs of society. How, then, was the
deficiency  to  be  supplied  ?
Deficiency  The difficulty was resolved by  adopting the Custom

SeSuNNi,  ('SUNNA')  of  Mohammad;  that  is,  his  sayings  and  Wfs
or  sayings  practice,  as  supplementary  of  the  Kor'an.  The  recitals  re-
^ce  "ot^'  garding  the  life  of  the  Prophet  now  acquired  an  unlooked-for
Mohammad  value.  He  had  never  held  himself  infallible,  except  when
directly  inspired  of  God  ;  but  this  new  doctrine  assumed  that
a  heavenly  and  unerring  guidance  pervaded  every  word  and
action  of  his  prophetic  life.  Tradition  was  thus  invested  with
the  force  of  law,  and  with  something  of  the  authority  of
inspiration.  It  was  in  great  measure  owing  to  the  rise  of
this  theory,  that,  during  the  first  century  the  cumbrous
recitals  of  tradition  so  far  outstripped  the  dimensions  of
reality.  The  prerogative  now  claimed  for  Tradition  stimu-
lated the  growth  of  evidence,  and  led  to  the  preservation  of
every  kind  of  story,  spurious  or  real,  touching  the  Prophet.
Before  the  close  of  the  century  it  had  imparted  an  incredible
impulse  to  the  search  for  traditions,  and  had  in  fact  given
birth  to  the  new  profession  of  Co/lectors.  Men  devoted  their
lives  to  the  business. They  travelled  from  city  to  city,  and


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


from  tribe  to  tribe,  over  the  whole  Mohammadan  world ;
sought  out  by  personal  inquiry  every  vestige  of  Mohammad's
biography  yet  lingering  among  the  Companions,  the  Successors,
or  their  descendants ;  and  committed  to  writing  the  tales  and
reminiscences  with  which  these  were  wont  to  edify  their
wondering  and  admiring  auditors.  They  also  established  in
every  leading  city  schools  of  tradition,  in  which  they  held
lectures,  and  recited  their  Collections  with  the  string  of
authorities  on  which  they  rested.  Each  circle  of  pupils  took
notes  from  their  master's  oral  delivery ;  and  thus  the  compila-
tions of  the  most  popular  Collectors  were  preserved  and
spread  abroad.

I  need  here  only  allude  to  another  body  of  so-called
tradition,  namely,  the  legendary  tales  of  the  strolling  minstrel
or  story-teller.  This  personage  has  always  been  popular  in
the  East,  and  in  the  early  days  of  Islam  had  special  oppor-
tunities for  the  exercise  of  his  vocation.  As  he  travelled
from  city  to  city  and  village  to  village,  crowds  gathered
around,  and  hung  upon  his  lips  while  he  recited  in  glowing
terms  some  episode  of  the  Prophet's  life,  his  birth  and  child-
hood, the  heavenly  journey,  or  the  Battle  of  Bedr.  Great
latitude  both  in  detail  and  colouring  was  allowed  to  these
story-tellers,  whose  object  was  at  once  to  entertain  and  edify.
Such  tales,  no  doubt,  formed  the  groundwork  of  the  biographical
legends  so  popular  all  over  the  Mohammadan  world.  They
are  still  recited  on  special  occasions  (as  the  birth  and  child-
hood of  Mohammad  in  the  first  ten  days  of  Rabl'  i.) ;
and  they  form  the  staple  of  the  modern  biographies  of  the  Pro-
phet It  is  needless  to  add  that,  being  utterly  uncritical,  they
are  possessed  as  historical  sources  of  no  authority  whatever,^

It  was  soon  found  that  the  work  of  collecting  and  circulat-
ing authoritative  traditions  too  closely  affected  the  public
interests  and  the  political  aspect  of  the  empire  to  be  left
entirely  to  private  responsibility  and  individual  zeal.  About
a  hundred  )ears  after  Mohammad,  the  Caliph  'Omar  II.
issued  circular  orders  for  the  formal  collection  of  all  extant
tradition.  The  task,  thus  begun,  continued  to  be  vigorously
prosecuted  ; but we possess no authentic remains of  any

'  See  Sprenger,  i.  341  ;  and  for  samples  of  these  legends  as  current
at  the  present  time,  an  article  by  myself  in  the  Calcutta  Revie%v  on
Biographies  of  Mohammad  for  India,  No.  xxxiv.,  Art.  6.


Legendary
tales  of
strolling
story-tellers


General
collections
of  biogra-
phical tra-
dition


XXXIV


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


Tradition
not  recorded
as  a  rule
till  latter
part  of  1st
century


compilation  of  an  earlier  date  than  the  middle  or  end  of  the
second  century  of  the  Hijra.  Then,  indeed,  ample  materials
had  been  amassed,  and  they  have  been  handed  down  to  us  both
in  the  shape  of  Biographies  and  of  General  collections  which
bear  upon  every  imaginable  point  of  Mohammad's  character,
and  record  the  minutest  incidents  of  his  life.

It  thus  appears  that  the  traditions  we  now  possess
remained  generally  unrecorded  for  at  least  the  greater  part
of  a  century.  It  is  not,  indeed,  asserted  that  some  of
Mohammad's  sayings  may  not  have  been  noted  down  in
writing  during  his  lifetime,  and  from  that  source  copied  and
propagated  afterwards.  But  the  evidence  in  favour  of  any
such  record  is  meagre,  suspicious,  and  contradictory.  And
few  and  uncertain  as  are  the  statements  of  the  practice,  there
was  a  motive  to  invent  them  in  the  additional  credit  with
which  the  traditions  of  a  Companion  supposed  to  have  com-
mitted them  to  writing  would  be  invested.  It  is  indeed
hardly  possible  that,  if  the  writing  dov/n  of  Mohammad's
sayings  had  prevailed  as  a  custom  during  his  life,  we  should
not  have  had  frequent  intimation  of  the  fact,  with  notices  of
the  writers,  and  special  references  to  the  nature,  contents,  and
peculiar  authority  of  their  records.  But  no  such  references  or
quotations  are  anywhere  to  be  found.  It  cannot  be  asserted
that  the  Arabs  trusted  so  implicitly  to  their  memory  that  they
regarded  oral  to  be  as  authoritative  as  recorded  narratives,
and  therefore  had  these  existed  would  not  have  cared  to
notice  them  ;  for  we  see  that  'Omar  was  afraid  lest  even  the
Kor'an,  believed  by  him  to  be  divine  and  itself  the  subject  of
heavenly  care,  should  become  defective  if  left  to  the  memory
of  man.  Just  as  little  weight,  on  the  other  hand,  should  be
allowed  to  the  tradition  that  Mohammad  prohibited  his
followers  from  the  practice  of  noting  down  his  words.  The
truth  appears  to  be  that  there  was  at  the  first  no  such
practice ;  and  that  the  story  of  the  prohibition,  though
spurious,  embodies  the  afterthought  of  serious  Mohammadans
as  to  what  Mohammad  would  have  said  had  he  foreseen  the
loose  and  fabricated  stories  that  sprang  up,  and  the  danger
his  people  would  fall  into  of  allowing  Tradition  to  supersede
the  Kor'an.  The  risks  of  Tradition,  in  truth,  were  as  little
thought  of  as  its  value  was  perceived,  till  many  years  after
Mohammad's  death.


CH.  I.]  TRADITION  XXXV

But  even  admitting  all  that  has  been  advanced,  it  would Even  if
prove  no  more  than  that  sovie  of  the  Couipatiions  used  to  keep "!e^°e^."  ^
memoranda  of  the  Prophet's  sayings. Now,  unless  it  were corded  in
possible  to  connect  any  given  traditions  with  such  memoranda,  iifeti^"Jione
the  concession  would  be  useless. But  it  is  not,  so  far  as  I connected
know, demonstrable of any single tradition or class of  tradition
traditions  now  in  existence,  that  they  were  copied  from  such
memoranda,  or  have  been  derived  in  any  way  from  them.
To  prove,  therefore,  that  some  traditions  were  at  first  recorded,
would  not  help  us  to  a  knowledge  of  whether  any  of  these
still  exist,  or  to  discriminate  between  them  and  such  as  rest
on  a  purely  oral  basis. The  very  most  that  could  be  urged
from  the  premises  is,  that  our  present  collections  may  contain
some  traditions  founded  upon  a  recorded  original,  and  handed
down  in  writing. The  entire  mass  of  extant  tradition  rests
in  this  respect  on  the  same  uncertain  ground,  and  the  un-
certainty of  any  one  portion  (apart  from  internal  evidence  of
probability)  attaches  equally  to  the  whole. In  fine,  it  cannot,
with  the  least  show  of  likelihood,  be  confidently  affirmed  of
any  tradition  that  it  was  recorded  till  nearly  the  end  of  the
first  century  of  the  Hijra.

We  see,  then,  how  entirely  Tradition,  as  now  possessed, Moham-
rests  its  authority  on  the  memory  of  those  who  handed  it madan  tradi-

■'  . -^  tion  affected

down ; and  how  dependent  it  must  have been  upon  their by  bias  and
convictions and their prejudices. For, in addition to P''^j"<i'<^e
the frailty of the faculty itself rendering such evidence
notoriously  infirm,  and  to  the  errors  and  exaggerations  which
must  distort a narrative transmitted orally  through  many
witnesses,  there  exist  in Mohammadan  tradition abundant
indications  of  actual  fabrication ;  and  there  may  everywhere
be  traced  the  indirect  but  not  less  powerful  and  dangerous
influence  of  a  latent  bias,  which  insensibly  gave  colour  and
shape  to  the  stories  of  their  Prophet  treasured up in  the
memories  of  Believers. To  form  an  adequate  conception  of  Historical
the  value  and defects  of  Tradition,  the  nature  and extent  '■^vew

necessary

of  these  influences  must  be  thoroughly  understood  ;  and  for
this  purpose  the  reader  should  possess  an  outline  of  the
political  aspect  of  the  empire  of  Islam  from  the  death  of
Mohammad  to  the  period  at  which  our  written  authorities
comm.ence.  Such  an  outline  I  will  now  endeavour  to
supply.


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


During  first
two  Cali-
phates,
faction
unknown


A.H.  23-35.
First  effect
on  tradi-
tion of
'Othman's
murder  not
unfavourable


A.H.  35-60.

Omeiyad

Caliphate

favourable

to  truthful

tradition


Mohammad  survived  for  ten  years  the  era  of  his  Hijra  or
flight  to  Medina.  The  Caliphates  of  Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar
occupied  the  thirteen  succeeding  years,  during  which  the  nevv^-
born  empire,  animated  by  the  ruling  passion  of  universal
dominion,  was  unbroken  by  schism.  The  distorting  niedium
of  Faction  had  not  yet  interposed  betwixt  us  and  Mohammad.
The  chief  tendency  to  be  dreaded  in  tradition  as  transmitted
through  this  period,  or  originating  in  it,  is  one  which  was
then  perhaps  even  stronger  and  more  busy  than  in  the
approaching  days  of  civil  broil,  namely,  the  disposition  to
exalt  the  character  of  Mohammad,  and  endow  it  with  super-
human attributes.

The  weak  and  vacillating  policy  of 'Othman  gave  birth  to
the  attack  of  the  conspirators  on  Medina,  which,  ending  in
the  murder  of  the  aged  Prince,  caused  a  fatal  rent  in  the  unity
of  the  empire,  and  left  it  a  prey  to  contending  factions  of  new
competitors  for  the  Caliphate.  The  immediate  effect  of  this
disunion  was  not  unfavourable  to  the  historical  value  of
Tradition.  For  although  each  party  would  be  tempted  to
colour  its  recollections  by  their  own  factious  bias,  they  must
still  do  so  in  the  face  of  a  hostile  criticism.  And,  while  as
yet  there  were  alive  on  either  side  eye-witnesses  of  the
Prophet's  actions,  both  parties  would  be  cautious  in  advancing
what  might  be  liable  to  dispute,  and  eager  to  denounce  and
expose  any  false  statement  of  their  opponents.^

The  Caliphate  of  'All,  after  a  troubled  and  doubtful
existence  of  four  and  a  half  years,  was  terminated  by
assassination,  and  the  opposing  faction  of  the  Omeiyads  then
gained  undisputed  supremacy.  During  the  long  reign  of
Mu'awiya,  i.e.  to  60  A.H.,  and  indeed,  more  or  less  through-


'  'Othman  (when  Caliph)  commanded,  saying  :  '  It  is  not  permitted  to
any  one  to  relate  a  tradition  as  from  the  Prophet,  which  he  hath  not
already  heard  in  the  time  of  Abu  Bekr  or  'Omar.  And  verily  nothing
hinders  me  from  repeating  traditions  of  the  Prophet's  sayings  (although
I  be  one  of  those  endowed  with  the  most  retentive  memory  amongst  all
his  Companions)  but  that  I  have  heard  him  say,  Whoever  shall  repeat  of
me  that  which  I  have  not  said,  his  resting-place  shall  be  in  Hell.^  This
tradition,  if  well  founded,  gives  pretty  clear  intimation  that,  even  before
'Othman's  murder,  fabricated  traditions  were  propagated  by  opponents
to  shake  his  authority,  and  that  the  unfortunate  Caliph  endeavoured  to
check  the  practice  by  forbidding  the  currency  of  traditions  not  already
known  in  the  reign  of  his  two  predecessors.


CH.  I.]  TRADITION  xxxvii

out  the  Omeiyad  rule,  the  influence  of  the  reigning  power
directly  opposed  the  interested  dogmas  of  the  adherents  of
Mohammad's  immediate  family.  The  authority  of  a  line
deriving  its  descent  from  Abu  Sufyan,  so  long  the  grand
opponent  of  the  Prophet,  may  have  softened  the  asperity  of
Tradition  regarding  the  conduct  of  their  progenitor,  while  it
aided  in  the  chorus  of  glory  to  Mohammad.  But  it  would
be  tempted  to  none  of  those  distorting  elements  the  object  of
which  was  to  make  out  a  divine  right  of  succession  in  favour
of  the  descendants  of  the  Founder  of  Islam  ;  and  which,  for
that  end,  invested  their  heroes  with  virtues,  and  attributed  to
them  actions,  which  never  had  existence.  Such  in  the
process  of  time  were  the  motives,  and  such  the  practice,  of
the  partisans  of  the  houses  of  'All  and  of  Al-'Abbas,  the  Son-
in-law  and  Uncle  of  Mohammad.  In  the  early  part,  however,
of  the  Omei}ad  succession,  these  insidious  tendencies  had
but  little  room  for  play.  The  fiction  of  divine  right,  even
had  it  been  thought  of,  contradicted  too  directly  the  know-
ledge and  convictions  of  the  early  Muslims  to  have  met  with
support.  The  unqualified  opposition  of  a  large  section  of
Mohammad's  most  intimate  friends  to  'All  himself,  shows
how  little  ground  there  was  for  regarding  him  as  the  peculiar
favourite  of  Heaven.  The  Khawarij,  or  sectarians  of  the  theo-
cratic principle  and  the  extreme  opponents  of  the  Omeiyads,
went  the  length  of  condemning  and  rejecting  'All  for  the
scandalous  crime  of  parleying  with  the  denounced  Mu'awiya.
It  is  hence  evident  that  the  extravagant  pretensions  of  the
'Alids  and  'Abbasids  were  not  entertained,  or  even  dreamt
of,  in  the  early  days  of  the  Omeiyad  Caliphate.

During  the  first  century  the  main  fabric  of  Tradition  grew Type  cast

up,  and assumed permanent  shape. Towards  its  close,  all '"  J^^
i  '  J^  ^  _  '  century,

surviving  traditions  began  to  be  systematically  sought  out,  never  mate-
and  openly  put  on  record.  The  type  then  moulded  could  [^^^^
not  but  be  maintained,  at  least  in  its  chief  features,  ever
after.  Subsequent  sectaries  might  strive  to  recast  it ;  their
efforts  could  secure  but  partial  success,  because  the  only
standard  they  possessed  had  been  formed  under  Omeiyad
influence.  In  the  traditional  impress  of  this  period,  although
the  features  of  the  Prophet  were  magnified  into  majestic  and
supernatural  dimensions,  yet  the  character  of  his  friends  and
followers,  and  the  general  events  of  early Islam,  were  un-


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[iNTROD.


'Alids  and
'Abbasids
conspire  to
supplant
Omeiyad
line ;


And  for
that  object
fabricate
and  pervert
tradition


doubtedly  preserved  with  very  tolerable  accuracy,  and  thus  a
broad  basis  of  historical  truth  maintained.

But  in  the  latter  part  of  the  first  century  an  under-
current of  great  volume  and  intensity  commenced  to  flow.
The  adherents  of  the  house  of  'All,  beaten  in  the  field  and
in  all  their  attempts  to  dethrone  the  Omeiyads,  were  driven
to  other  expedients  ;  and  the  keystone  of  their  machinations
was  the  divine  right  of  the  family  of  the  Prophet  to  both
temporal  and  spiritual  rule.  They  established  secret  associa-
tions, and  sent  forth  emissaries  in  every  direction,  to  decry
the  Omeiyads  as  godless  usurpers,  and  canvass  for  the  'Alid
pretender  of  the  day.  These  claims  were  ever  and  anon
strengthened  by  the  mysterious  report  that  the  divine  Imam
or  Leader  of  'All's  race  was  about  to  step  forth  from  his  hidden
recess,  and  stand  confessed  the  Conqueror  of  the  world.
Such  attempts,  however,  issued  in  no  more  permanent  results
than  a  succession  of  rebellions,  massacres,  and  fruitless  civil
wars,  until  another  party  leagued  themselves  in  the  struggle.
These  were  the  'Abbasids,  who  desired  to  raise  to  the  throne  a
descendant  of  the  Prophet's  uncle,  A1-' Abbas.  They  com-
bined with  the  'Alids  in  denouncing  as  usurpers  the  reigning
dynasty,  which,  though  sprung  from  Koreish,  was  but
distantly  relating  to  Mohammad.  By  their  united  endeavours
they  at  length  succeeded  in  supplanting  the  Omeiyads,  when
the  'Alids  found  themselves  over-reached,  and  an  'Abbasid
Caliph  was  raised  to  the  throne.

It  is  not  difficult  to  perceive  how  much  Tradition  must
have  been  affected  by  these  unwearied  conspirators.
Perverted  tradition  was,  in  fact,  the  chief  instrument
employed  to  accomplish  their  ends.  By  it  they  blackened
the  memory  of  the  forefathers  of  the  Omeiyads  and  exalted
the  progenitors  of  the  'Abbasids.  By  it  they  were  enabled
almost  to  deify 'All,  and  to  assert  their  principle  that  the  right  of
empire  vested  solely  in  the  near  relatives  of  the  Prophet,  and
in  their  descendants.  For  these  ends  no  device  was  spared.
The  Kor'an  was  glossed  over,  and  tradition  coloured,
distorted,  and  fabricated.  Their  operations  were  concealed.
Studiously  avoiding  the  eye  of  anyone  likely  to  oppose  them,
they  canvassed  in  the  dark.  Thus  they  were  safe  from  criti-
cism ;  and  the  stories  and  glosses  of  their  traditional  schools
gradually  acquired  the  character  of  presumptive  evidence.


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


In  the  132nd  year  of  the  Hijra,  the  'Abbasids  were
installed  in  the  Caliphate  ;  and  the  factious  teaching,  which
had  hitherto  flourished  only  in  the  distant  satrapies  of  Persia
or,  when  it  ventured  near  the  throne,  lurked  in  the  purlieus
of  crowded  cities,  now  stalked  forth  with  the  prestige  of
sovereignty.  The  Omeiyads  were  pursued  even  to  extirpation,
and  their  names  and  descent  overwhelmed  with  obloquy.

It  was  under  the  auspices  of  the  first  two  'Abbasid
Caliphs  that  the  earliest  biography  of  which  we  have  any
remains  was  composed ;  that,  namely,  of  IBN  Ishak.  It  is
cause  for  little  wonder  that  this  author  followed  in  the  steps
of  his  patrons;  and  that,  while  lauding  their  ancestors,  he
sought  to  stigmatise  the  Omeiyads  and  to  denounce  those  of
their  forefathers  who  acted  a  prominent  part  in  the  first
scenes  of  Islam.

The  fifth  Caliph  from  this  period  was  the  famous  Al-Ma'-
mun  who,  during  a  reign  of  twenty  years,  countenanced  with
princely  support  the  pursuits  of  literature.  He  effected  a
combination  with  the  followers  of  'All  who  had  been
bitterly  persecuted  by  his  predecessors ;  ^  and  he  adopted
with  enthusiasm  the  peculiar  teaching  of  the  Mo'tazila — a
sect  whom  the  learned  Weil  applauds  as  the  Rationalists  of
Islam.  But  however  freely  this  Caliph  may  have  derided  the
doctrine  of  the  '  eternity  of  the  Kor'an,'  and  in  opposition  to
orthodox  believers  asserted  the  freedom  of  the  human  will,
he  was  not  a  whit  less  bigoted  or  intolerant  than  his  pre-
decessors. He  not  only  declared  'All  to  be  the  noblest  of
mortals,  and  Mu'awiya  the  basest,  but  he  denounced  and
punished  anyone  who  should  venture  to  speak  evil  of  the  one,
or  attribute  good  to  the  other.  He  made  strenuous  efforts
to  impose  his  theological  views  upon  all.  He  went  so  far  as
to  establish  even  a  species  of  inquisition,  and  visited  with
penalties  those  who  dared  to  differ  from  him.  Unhappily
for  us,  this  very  reign  was  the  busiest  age  of  the  traditional
writers,  and  the  period  at  which  (excepting  only  that  of  Ibn


Accession
of  the  'Ab-
basids, A.H.
132


Under
whom  first
biography
of  Moham-
mad com-
piled


Intolerant
Caliphate  of
Al-Ma'miin.
A.H.  198-218


*  When  the  'Abbasids  reached  the  throne,  they  cast  aside  the  'Alid
platform  from  which  they  had  made  their  fortunate  ascent.  They  were
then  obliged  in  self-defence  to  crush  with  an  iron  hand  every  rising  of
the  'Alids,  who  found  to  their  cost  that  they  had  become  the  unconscious
tools  for  raising  to  power  a  party  which  had  in  reality  as  little  fellow-
feeling  with  them  as  with  the  Omeiyads. They  deserved  their  fate.


xl


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[iNTROD.


Its  baneful
influence
on  tradition


General
collections
of  tradition
rnade  under
similar  in-
fluences


Two

schools  ;
Sunni  and
ShVa


Ishak)  the  earliest  extant  biographies  of  Mohammad  were
composed.  It  was  under  Al-Ma'mun  that  Al-Wakidi,  Ibn
HiSHAM,  and  Al-Mada'ini,  lived  and  vvrote.^  Justly,  indeed,
may  we  grieve  over  this  as  a  coincidence  fraught  with  evil  to
the  interests  of  historical  truth.  '  We  look  upon  it,'  says
Weil,  '  as  a  great  misfortune,  that  the  very  three  oldest
Arabic  histories,  which  are  nearly  the  only  sources  of  authority
for  the  first  period  of  Islam,  were  written  under  the  govern-
ment of  Al-Ma'mun.  At  a  period  when  every  word  in  favour
of  Mu'awiya  rendered  the  speaker  liable  to  death,  and  when
all  were  declared  outlaws  who  would  not  acknowledge  'All  to
be  the  most  distinguished  of  mankind,  it  was  not  possible  to
compose,  with  even  the  smallest  degree  of  impartiality,  a
history  of  the  Companions  of  Mohammad  and  of  his
successors.'

But  besides  the  biographers  of  Mohammad,  the  Collectors
of  general  tradition,  who  likewise  flourished  at  this  period,
came  within  the  circle  of  'Abbasid  influence,  and  some  of
them  under  the  direct  patronage  of  Al-Ma'mun.  This  class,
as  shown  above,  travelled  over  the  whole  empire,  and
searched  after  every  kind  of  tradition  which  bore  the  slightest
relation  to  their  Prophet.  The  mass  of  narrations  gathered
by  this  laborious  process  was  sifted  by  a  pseudo-critical
canon,  founded  on  the  repute  of  the  narrators  forming  the
chain  from  Mohammad  downwards ;  and  the  approved
residuum  was  published  under  the  authority  of  the  Collector's
name.  Such  collections  were  far  more  popular  than  the  bio-
graphical or  historical  treatises.  They  formed,  in  fact,  and
stifl  form,  the  groundwork  of  the  different  theological  schools
of  Islam  ;  and,  having  been  used  universally  and  studied  con-
tinuously from  the  period  of  their  appearance,  exist  to  the
present  day  in  an  authentic  and  genuine  shape.  Copies  of
them  abound  in  all  Muslim  countries  ;  whereas  the  early  bio-
graphies can  only  be  procured  with  difficulty.

The  six  standard  .S//«;// collections  were  compiled  exclu-
sively under  the  'Abbasid  Caliphs,  and  the  earliest  of  them
partly  during  the  reign  of  Al-Ma'mun.  The  four  canonical
collections  of  the  Slil^a  were  prepared  somewhat  later,  and

^  [The  Caliphate  of  Al-Ma'mun  lasted  from  198  to  218  A.H.  (813-833
A.D.).  Al-Wakidi  died  in  207  A.H.,  Ibn  Hisham  in  218,  and  Al-Mada'ini
in  215  or  225  or  231.]


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


xli


are  incomparably  less  trustworthy  than  the  former,  because
their  paramount  object  is  to  build  up  the  divine  Imdma  or
headship  of  'All  and  his  descendants.

[The  oldest  and  one  of  the  best  collections  of  Traditions,
although  it  is  not  reckoned  among  the  six,  is  that  of  the
Imam  Malik  ibn  Anas,  of  Medina,  who  died  in  the  year  179
A.H.  (795  A.D.),  Many  editions  of  it  have  appeared,  including
one  lithographed  at  Fez.]

That  the  Collectors  of  tradition  rendered  an  important
service  to  Islam,  and  even  to  history,  cannot  be  doubted.
The  vast  flood  of  tradition,  poured  forth  from  every  quarter
of  the  Muslim  empire,  and  daily  gathering  volume  from
innumerable  tributaries,  was  composed  of  the  most  hetero-
geneous elements  ;  without  the  labours  of  the  traditionists  it
must  soon  have  formed  a  chaotic  mass  in  which  truth  and
error,  fact  and  fable,  would  have  mingled  together  in  undis-
tinguishable  confusion.  It  is  a  legitimate  inference  from  the
foregoing  sketch,  that  Tradition  in  the  Second  century
embraced  a  large  element  of  truth.  That  even  respectably
derived  traditions  often  contained  much  that  was  exaggerated
and  fabulous,  is  an  equally  sure  conclusion.  It  is  proved
by  the  testimony  of  the  Collectors  themselves,  that  thousands
and  tens  of  thousands  of  traditions  were  current  in  their
times  which  possessed  not  even  the  shadow  of  authority.
The  prodigious  amount  of  base  and  fictitious  material  may
be  gathered  from  the  estimate  even  of  Mohammadan  criti-
cism. To  quote  again  from  Dr  Weil :  '  Reliance  upon  oral
traditions,  at  a  time  when  they  were  transmitted  by  memory
alone,  and  every  day  produced  new  divisions  among  the
professors  of  Islam,  opened  up  a  wide  field  for  fabrication  and
distortion.  There  was  nothing  easier,  when  required  to
defend  any  religious  or  political  system,  than  to  appeal  to  an
oral  tradition  of  the  Prophet.  The  nature  of  these  so-called
traditions,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  name  of  Mohammad
was  abused  to  support  all  possible  lies  and  absurdities,  may
be  gathered  most  clearly  from  the  fact  that  Al-Bukhari,  who
travelled  from  land  to  land  to  gather  from  the  learned  the
traditions  they  had  received,  came  to  the  conclusion,  after
many  years'  sifting,  that  out  of  600,000  traditions,  ascer-
tained by  him  to  be  then  current,  only  4,000  were  authentic !
And  of  this  selected number,  the  European  critic  is  corn-


Service
rendered
by  Collec-
tors


Immense
proportion
of  fictitious
tradition
current  in
second  cen-
tury


Rejected
even  by
Mohamma-
dan Collec-
tors


xlii


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD,


Anecdote
of  Al-Bu-
khari


Collectors,
though  un-
sparing in
rejection  of
untrust-
worthy tra-
ditions, did
not  discri-
minate
by  any
intelligent
canon


pelled,  without  hesitation,  to  reject  at  least  one-half.'^  Similar
appears  to  have  been  the  experience  of  other  intelligent
compilers  of  the  day.  Thus  Abu  Daud,  out  of  500,000
traditions  which  he  is  said  to  have  amassed,  threw  aside
495,200,  and  retained  as  trustworthy  only  4,800.^

The  heavenly  vision  which  induced  Al-Bukhari  to  com-
mence his  pious  and  herculean  task  is  significant  of  the  urgent
necessity  which  then  existed  for  searching  out  and  preserving
the  grains  of  truth  scattered  here  and  there  amid  the  chaff.
*  In  a  dream  I  beheld  the  Messenger  of  the  Lord  (Moham-
mad), from  whom  I  seemed  to  be  driving  off  the  flies.  When
I  awoke  I  inquired  of  an  interpreter  of  dreams  the  meaning
of  my  vision.  //  is,  he  replied,  that  thou  shalt  drive  away  lies
far  from  him.  This  it  was  which  induced  me  to  compile  the
Sahlh'^  And  well,  indeed,  in  the  eyes  of  Mohammadans,  did
he  fulfil  the  heavenly  behest ;  for  to  this  day,  the  Sahih  AL-
BuKHARi  is  regarded  by  them  as  one  of  the  most  authentic
treasuries  of  tradition.

It  is  evident,  then,  that  some  species  of  criticism  was
practised  by  the  Collectors ;  and  that,  too,  so  unsparingly
that  out  of  every  hundred  traditions  on  an  average  ninety-
nine  were  rejected.  But  the  European  reader  will  be
grievously  deceived  if  he  at  all  regards  such  criticism,  rigorous
as  it  was,  in  the  light  of  a  sound  and  discriminating  investiga-
tion into  the  credibility  of  the  traditional  elements.  It  was
not  the  subject-77iatter,  but  simply  the  names  responsible  for  it,
which  decided  the  credit  of  a  tradition.  Its  authority  must
rsst  first  on  some  Companion  of  the  Prophet,  and  then  on  the
character  of  each  individual  in  the  long  chain  of  witnesses
through  whom  it  was  handed  down.^ If  these  were  unim-

^  Gesch.  Chalifen,  ii.  290  ;  /.  Kh.  ii.  595.  [A  French  translation  of
Al-Bukhari  is  in  course  of  publication  under  the  title,  Les  Traditions
islamigues,  by  O.  Houdas  and  W.  Margais,  Paris,  1902  f.]

^  Even  of  this  number  a  portion  is  spoken  of  as  doubtful.  'I  wrote
down,'  says  Abu  Da'ud,  '  500,000  traditions  respecting  the  Prophet,  from
which  I  selected  those,  to  the  number  of  4,800,  contained  in  this  book.
I  have  entered  herein  the  authentic,  those  which  seem  to  be  authentic,  and
those  which  are  nearly  so. Op.  cit.  ii.  291  ;  i.  5S9.

^  Sahlh  means  True.

■*  Out  of  40,000  men,  who  are  said  to  have  been  instrumental  in  hand-
ing down  Tradition,  Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim  acknowledged  the  authority
of  only  2,000  by  receiving  their  traditions.  Later  Collectors  were  less
scrupulous.


CH.  1.]


TRADITION


xliii


peachable,  the  tradition  must  be  received.  No  inherent  im-
probabiHty,  however  glaring,  could  exclude  a  narration  thus
attested  from  its  place  in  the  authentic  collections.  The
compilers  would  not  venture  upon  the  open  sea  of  criticism,
but  steered  slavishly  by  this  single  canon.  They  dared  not
inquire  into  internal  evidence.  To  have  arraigned  the
motives  of  the  first  author  or  subsequent  rehearsers  of  a
story,  discussed  its  probability  and  brought  it  to  the  test  of
historical  evidence,  would  have  been  a  strange  and  uncon-
genial task.  The  spirit  of  Islam  would  not  brook  free  inquiry
and  real  criticism.  Implicit  faith  in  Mohammad  and  in  his
followers  spurned  the  aids  of  investigation  and  of  evidence.
Tlius  saitJi  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord,  and  every  rising  doubt
must  be  smothered,  every  question  vanish.  If  doubts  did
arise,  the  sword  was  unsheathed  to  dispel  and  silence  them.
The  temporal  power  was  so  closely  welded  with  the  dogmas
of  Islam,  that  it  had  no  option  but  to  enforce  with  a  stern
front  and  iron  hand  an  implicit  acquiescence  in  those  dogmas.
Upon  the  apostate  Muslim  the  sentence  of  death — an  award
resting  on  the  Prophet's  authority — was  rigorously  executed
by  the  civil  power ;  and  between  the  heterodoxy  of  the  free-
thinker, and  the  lapse  of  the  renegade,  there  existed  but  a
vague  and  narrow  boundary.  To  the  combination,  or  rather
the  unity,  of  the  spiritual  and  political  elements  in  the
unvarying  type  of  Mohammadan  government,  must  be
attributed  the  absence  of  candid  and  free  investigation  into
the  origin  and  early  incidents  of  Islam,  which  so  painfully
characterises  the  Muslim  mind  even  to  the  present  day.  The
faculty  of  criticism  was  annihilated  by  the  sword.

Upon  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the
Collectors  were  sincere  and  honest  in  doing  that  which  they
professed  to  do.  It  may  well  be  admitted  that  they  sought
out  in  good  faith  all  traditions  actually  current,  inquired  care-
fully into  the  authorities  on  which  they  rested,  and  recorded
them  with  scrupulous  accuracy.  The  sanctions  of  religion
were  at  hand  to  enforce  diligence  and  caution.  Thus  Al-
Bukhari,  who,  as  we  have  just  seen,  commenced  his  work  on
a  supposed  divine  monition,  was  heard  to  say  '  that  he  never
inserted  a  tradition  in  his  Sahih,  until  he  had  made  an
ablution,  and  offered  up  a  prayer  of  two  rak'as!  The  pre-
possessions of  the  several  Collectors  would  undoubtedly  influ-


Political
element  of
Islam  ex-
tinguished
free  inquiry
and  real
criticism


But  Col-
lectors were
honest  in
accomplish-
ing what
they  pro-
fessed


xliv  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd.

ence  them  in  accepting  or  rejecting  the  chain  of  witnesses  to
any  tradition ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  they  at
all  tampered  with  the  traditions  themselves.  Thus  a  Shl'a
collector  would  cast  aside  a  tradition  received  from  'A'isha
through  an  Omeiyad  channel ;  whilst  one  of  Omeiyad  pre-
dilections would  discard  every  traditional  chain  in  the  links
of  which  he  discovered  an  emissary  of  the  house  of  'All.  But
neither  the  one  nor  the  other  would  venture  to  fabricate  a
tradition  ;  or  to  tamper  with  a  narration,  whatever  its  purport
or  bearing  might  be,  if  only  it  were  attested  by  a  chain  of
unexceptionable  names.
Guarantees  The  honesty  of  the  compilers  is  warranted  by  the  style

o"the^r  '^^'^^  ^'^'^  contents  of  their  works.  The  series  of  witnesses,  by
honesty  which  each  tradition  is  traced  up  through  each  stage  of
transmission  to  one  or  other  of  the  Prophet's  Companions,  is
invariably  prefixed  ;  and  we  cannot  but  admit  the  authority
which  even  the  names  of  at  least  the  later  witnesses  in  such  a
chain  would  impart.^  These  could  not  be  feigned  names,  but
were  the  names  of  real  characters,  many  of  them  personages
of  note.  The  traditional  collections  were  openly  published,
and  the  credit  of  the  compilers  would  have  been  endangered
by  the  fabrication  of  such  evidence.  The  Collector  was  like-
wise, in  general,  the  centre  of  a  school  of  traditional  learning
which,  as  it  were,  challenged  the  public  to  test  its  authorities.
So  far,  then,  as  this  kind  of  attestation  can  give  weight  to
hearsay,  that  weight  may  be  readily  conceded.  Again,  the
simple  manner  in  which  the  most  contradictory  traditions  are
accepted,  and  placed  side  by  side,  is  guarantee  of  sincerity.
All  that  could  be  collected  was  thrown  together  with  scrupu-
lous fidelity.  Each  tradition,  though  the  bare  repetition,  or
possibly  the  direct  opposite,  of  a  dozen  preceding  it,  is  noted
down  unquestioned,  with  its  special  chain  of  witnesses  ;  whilst
no  account  whatever  is  made  of  the  most  violent  improba-
bilities, of  incidents  plainly  fabulous,  or  even  of  patent  con-

^  A  tradition  is  always  given  in  the  direct  form  of  speech  in  which  it
is  supposed  to  have  been  originally  uttered.  Thus:  'A  informed  me,
saying  that  B  had  spoken  to  the  effect  that  C  had  told  him,  saying  D
mentioned  that  he  heard _E  relate  that  he  had  listened  to  F,  who  said,
/  heard  G  inquu-ing  of  ''A'hha,  "  What  food  did  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord
like?"  and  she  replied,  "  Verily,  he  loved  stveetmeats  and  honey,  and
greatly  relished  the  pumpkin."'


CH.  I.]  TRADITION  xlv

tradictions.^  Now  this  is  evidence  at  least  of  honest  design.
Pains  would  otherwise  have  been  taken  to  exclude  or  soften
down  opposing  statements ;  and  we  should  not  have  found  so
much  allowed  to  be  credible  tradition,  which  either  on  the
one  hand  or  on  the  other  must  have  crossed  the  views  and
prejudices  of  the  compiler.  If  we  suppose  design,  we  must
suppose  at  the  same  time  a  less  even-handed  admission  of
contrary  traditions.

Conceding,  then,  the  general  honesty  of  the  Collectors  in How  far  do
making  their  selection,  upon  an  untenable  principle  indeed,  ^^^l^^^i'^'
yet  bond  fide  from  existing  materials,  let  us  now  turn  to  their  tradition
selected  compilations,  and  inquire  whether  they  contain  any ments  of
authentic  elements  of  the  life  of  Mohammad;  and  if  so,  how  truth?
and  to  what  extent  these  have become commingled  with
adventitious  or  erroneous  matter.

In  the  first  place,  how  far  does  the  present  text  afford  Fragmen-
ground  for confidence that its  contents  are  identical  with  i^ofated
the supposed  evidence originally given by contemporary  character
witnesses? To  place  the  case  in  the  strongest  point  of  view,  dition  pre-
we shall suppose a class of  traditions  purporting  to  have ^^".'^  ^PP^'"
been ivritten  down  by  the  Companions,  and  to  have  been ordinary
recorded afresh at every  successive  stage  of  transmission. ^^^'^^
There  is  a  peculiarity  in  traditional  composition  which,  even
upon this supposition,  would render  it  always  of  doubtful
authority  ;  namely,  that  each  tradition  is  short  and  abrupt,
and  completely  isolated from  every  other. The isolation
extends not  simply  to  the  traditions  themselves  as  finally
compiled  by  the  Collector,  but  to  their  whole history  and
descent  throughout  the  long  period  preceding  their  collection.
At  every  point  each  tradition  was  completely  detached  and
independent ;  and  this,  coupled  with  th£  generally  brief  and
fragmentary character of the statements made in them,
deprives  us  of  the  checks  and  critical appliances  which  are
brought  to  bear  on  a  continuous  composition. There  is  little
or  no  context  whereby  to  judge  the  soundness  of  a  tradition.
Each  witness  in  the  chain,  though  professing  simply  to  repeat
the  words  of  the  first  narrator,  is  in  effect  an  independent

^  The  biographers  of  Mohammad,  when  they  relate  contradictory  or
varying  narratives,  sometimes  add  an  expression  of  their  own  opinion  as
to  which  is  preferable.  They  also  sometimes  mark  doubtful  stories  by
the  addition  :  'The  Lord  knowelh  whether  this  be  false  or  true.'


xlvi


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


Each  tra-
dition was
regarded  as
a  unit,  to  be
accepted  or
rejected  as
a  whole


Exclusive
oral  charac-
ter deprives
early  tra-
dition of
check

against  error
and  fabri-
cation


authority ;  and  we  cannot  tell  how  far,  and  at  what  stages,
variations  may  or  may  not  have  been  allowed,  or  fresh  matter
interpolated  by  any  of  them.  Even  were  we  satisfied  of  the
integrity  of  all  the  witnesses,  we  are  unacquainted  with  their
views  of  the  liberty  with  which  tradition  might  be  treated.
The  style  of  the  narrations  marks  them  for  the  most  part  as
communicated,  at  the  first,  with  the  freedom  of  social  con-
versation, and  with  much  of  the  looseness  of  hearsay;  and  a
similar  informality  and  looseness  may  have  attached  to  any
of  the  steps  in  their  subsequent  transmission.

Again,  each  tradition  was  not  only  isolated,  but  was  held
by  the  Collectors  to  be  an  indivisible  unit,  and  as  such  received
or  rejected.  If  the  traditional  links  were  unexceptionable,
the  tradition  must  be  accepted  as  it  stood,  whole  and  entire.
There  could  be  no  sifting  of  component  parts.  Whatever  in
each  tradition  might  be  true,  and  whatever  might  be  ficti-
tious,— the  probable  and  the  fabulous, — composed  an  indis-
soluble whole;  so  that  the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  one
portion  involved  the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  every  portion,
as  equally  credible  or  undeserving  of  credit.  The  power  of
eradicating  interpolated  words,  or  of  excluding  such  parts  of
a  tradition  as  were  evidently  unfounded  or  erroneous,  was
thus  renounced.  The  good  seed  and  the  tares  were  reaped
together,  and  the  latter  vastly  predominated.

Such  is  the  uncertainty  that  would  attach  to  tradition,
even  if  we  should  concede  that  it  had  been  recorded  from  the
first.  But  (as  we  have  seen)  there  is  no  ground  for  believing
that  the  practice  of  writing  down  traditions  was  observed  in
the  first  days  of  Islam,  or  became  general  until  many  years,
perhaps  the  greater  part  of  a  century,  had  elapsed.  The
existence  of  an  early  record  would  have  afforded  some  check ;
but  as  the  facts  stand,  there  is  no  check  at  all,  A  record
would  have  at  least  fixed  the  terms  in  which  the  evidence
was  given ;  whereas  tradition  purely  oral  is  affected  by  the
character  and  habits,  the  associations  and  the  prejudices,  of
each  witness  in  the  chain  of  repetition.  No  precaution  could
hinder  the  commingling  in  oral  tradition  of  mistaken  or  fabri-
cated matter  with  what  at  the  first  may  have  been  trust-
worthy evidence.  The  flood-gates  of  error,  exaggeration,
and  fiction  were  thrown  wide  open  ;  and  we  need  only  look
to  the  experience of  every  country  and  every  age,  to  be


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


xlvii


satisfied  that  but  little  dependence  can  be  placed  on  the
recital  of  historical  incident,  and  none  whatever  upon  super-
natural tales,  conveyed  for  any  length  of  time  through  such  a
channel.  That  Islam  forms  no  exception  to  the  general
principle  is  amply  proved  by  the  puerile  extravagances  and
splendid  fabrications  which  adorn  or  disfigure  the  pages  of  its
early  history.  The  critical  test  applied  by  the  Collectors  had
no  reference  whatever  to  these  pregnant  sources  of  error  ;  and,
though  it  may  have  rejected  multitudes  of  the  more  recent
fabrications,  it  failed  to  place  the  earlier  traditions  upon  any
certain  basis,  or  to  supply  the  means  of  discerning  between
the  actual  and  the  fictitious,  the  offspring  of  the  imagination
and  the  sober  evidence  of  fact.

It  remains  to  examine  the  traditional  collections  with
reference  to  their  contents  and  internal  probability.  And
here  we  fortunately  have  in  the  Kor'an  a  standard  of  com-
parison which  has  been  already  proved  a  genuine  and
contemporary  document.

We  find  accordingly  that  in  its  main  historical  outlines  the
Kor'an  is  at  one  with  the  received  traditional  collections.  It
notices,  either  directly  or  incidentally,  those  topics  which,
from  time  to  time,  most  interested  Mohammad ;  and  with
these  salient  points,  tradition  is  found  upon  the  whole  to
tally.  The  statements  and  allusions  of  this  description  in
the  Kor'an,  though  themselves  comparatively  few,  are  linked
more  or  less  with  a  vast  variety  of  important  incidents  which
refer  as  well  to  the  Prophet  individually  and  his  domestic
relations,  as  to  public  events  and  the  progress  of  Islam.  A
just  confidence  is  thus  imparted  that  a  large  amount  of
historical  truth  has  been  conveyed  by  tradition.

Upon  the  other  hand,  there  are  subjects  in  which  the
Kor'an  is  at  variance  with  Tradition.  For  example,  there  is
no  position  more  satisfactorily  established  by  the  Kor'an
than  that  Mohammad  did  not  in  any  part  of  his  career
perform  miracles,  or  lay  claim  to  the  power  of  performing
them.  Yet  tradition  abounds  with  miraculous  acts  belying
the  plain  declaration  of  the  Kor'an.  Moreover,  such
miracles,  if  at  all  based  on  fact,  would  undoubtedly  have
been  mentioned  in  the  Kor'an  itself,  which  omits  nothing,
however  trivial,  calculated  to  strengthen  the  prophetical
claim. Here, therefore, in matters of simple narration


Tradition
as  tested
by  Kor'an


Main
historical
and  bio-
graphical
outlines
agree


Disagree-
ment in
certain  im-
portant
points,  as
power  to
woi  k
miracles


xlviii


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[iNTROD.


Perplexing
alternative


Opinion  of
Sprenger
too  favour-
able to  tra-
dition


Attempt  to
frame  tests
discrimin-
ating what
is  reliable  in
tradition


and  historical  incident,  we  find  tradition  discredited  by  the
Kor'an.

The  result  of  the  comparison,  then,  is  precisely  that
already  arrived  at,  a  priori,  from  the  foregoing  historical
review.  But  though  it  strengthens  our  conclusion,  the  com-
parison does  not  afford  us  much  help  in  the  practical  treat-
ment of  Tradition  itself.  Excepting  in  a  limited  number  of
events,  it  furnishes  us  with  no  rule  for  eliminating  falsehood.
Facts  which  we  know  from  the  Kor'an  to  be  well  founded,
and  tales  which  we  know  to  be  fabricated,  are  indiscriminately
woven  together ;  and  of  both  the  fabric  and  colour  are  so
uniform,  that  we  are  at  a  loss  for  any  means  of  distinguishing
the  one  from  the  other.  The  biographer  of  Mohammad  con-
tinually runs  the  risk  of  substituting  for  the  realities  of
history  some  puerile  fancy  or  extravagant  invention.  In
striving  to  avoid  this  danger  he  is  exposed  to  the  opposite
peril  of  rejecting  as  pious  fabrication  what  may  in  reality  be
important  historical  fact.

It  is,  indeed,  the  opinion  of  Sprenger  that  'although  the
nearest  view  of  the  Prophet  which  we  can  obtain  is  at  a
distance  of  one  hundred  years,'  and  although  this  long  vista
is  formed  of  a  medium  exclusively  Mohammadan,  yet  our
knowledge  of  the  bias  of  the  narrators  'enables  us  to  correct
the  media,  and  to  make  them  almost  achromatic.'^  The
remark  is  true  to  some  extent ;  but  its  full  application  would
carry  us  much  beyond  the  truth.  The  difficulties  of  the  task
cannot  without  danger  be  underrated.  To  bring  to  a  right
focus  the  various  lights  of  Tradition,  to  reject  those  that  are
fictitious,  to  restore  to  a  proper  direction  the  rays  reflected
by  a  false  and  deceptive  surface,  to  calculate  the  extent  of
aberration,  and  make  due  allowance  for  a  thousand  disturbing
influences ; — this  is  indeed  a  work  of  entanglement  and
complication,  which  would  require  for  its  perfect  accomplish-
ment a  finer  discernment,  and  deeper  analytic  power,  than
human  nature  can  boast.  Nevertheless,  it  is  right  that  an
attempt  should  be  made,  and  it  is  possible  that,  by  a
comprehensive  consideration  of  the  subject,  and  careful
discrimination  of  the  several  sources  of  error,  we  may  reach
at  the  least  a  fair  approximation  to  the  truth.  With  this
view  I  will  endeavour  to  lay  down  some  principles  which
^  Spj-enger's  MohamtJiad,  p.  68.


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


xlix


may  prove  useful  to  the  inquirer  in  separating  the  true  from
the  false  in  Mohammadan  tradition.


The  grand  defect  in  the  traditional  evidence  consists  in
its  being  wholly  ex  parte.  It  is  the  statement  of  witnesses,
in  which  the  license  of  partiality  and  self-interest  is
unchecked  by  any  opposing  party,  and  the  sanction  even  of
a  neutral  audience  is  wanting.  But  what  is  thus  defective  in
the  process,  may  in  some  measure  be  corrected  or  repaired
by  close  scrutiny  of  the  record.  By  analysing  the  evidence,
and  considering  the  position  and  qualifications  of  the
witnesses,  we  may  find  internal  grounds  for  credit  or  for
doubt ;  while,  in  reference  to  some  classes  of  statements,  it
may  even  appear  that  a  Muslim  public  would  itself  supply
the  place  of  an  impartial  censor.  In  this  view,  the  points  on
which  the  probability  of  a  tradition  will  mainly  depend
appear  to  be  first,  whether  there  existed  a  bias  in  the  mind
of  the  nation  at  large  on  the  subject  narrated ;  second,
whether  there  are  traces  of  any  special  interest,  prejudice,
or  design,  on  the  part  of  the  narrator  ;  and  third,  whether
the  narrator  had  opportunity  for  personally  knowing  the
facts.  These  topics  will  perhaps  best  be  discussed  by  con-
sidering the  Period  to  which  a  narration  relates,  and  then  the
Subject  of  which  it  treats.

I.  A. — The  PERIOD  to  which  a  tradition  purports  to  refer
is  a  point  of  vital  importance.  The  original  authors  of  all
reliable  tradition  were  the  CompanioJis  of  Mohammad  him-
self. But  Mohammad  was  above  threescore  years  old  when
he  died  ;  and  few  of  his  then  surviving  Companions,  from
whom  tradition  has  come  down,  were  of  equal  age, — hardly
any  of  them  older.  In  proportion  to  their  years,  the  number
of  aged  men  was  small  and  the  period  short  during  which
they  outlived  Mohammad  ;  and  these  are  precisely  the  con-
siderations by  which  their  influence,  in  the  formation  of
tradition,  must  be  limited  also.  The  great  majority  were
young ;  and  in  proportion  to  their  youth  was  the  number
that  survived  longest,  and  gave  the  deepest  impress  to
tradition.^ We may, then, fix the term of Mohammad's

'  Abu  Bekr,  for  instance,  was  within  two  years  of  Mohammad's  age  ;
but  then  he  survived  him  only  two-and-a-half  years.  Most  of  the  elderly
Companions  either  died  a  natural  death,  or  were  killed  in  action  before

d


Traditional
evidence
ex  parte.
Tests  must
depend  on
internal
examina-
tion


Two  divi-
sions ;  pe-
riod and
subject  of
events  nar-
rated


I.  Period.
First. — Be-
fore Moham-
mad's entry
on  public
life. Wit-
nesses
younger,
most  of
them  much
younger,
than  Mo-
hammad


1  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd.

own  life  as  the  extreme  backward  limit  within  which  our
witnesses  range  themselves.  In  other  words,  we  have
virtually  no  original  witnesses  who  lived  at  a  period  anterior
to  Mohammad  ;  few,  if  any,  were  born  before  him  ;  the  great
Personal  majority,  many  years  after  him.  They  are  not,  therefore,
knowledge trustworthy authorities for events preceding Mohammad's

cannot  go  ^  . ,  ■  -

farther  birth,  or  for  details  of  his  childhood  ;  few  of  them,  even,  for

Ws^'^omh ^^^  incidents  of  his  youth. They  could  not  by  any  possibility

at  earliest possess  a  personal  knowledge  of  these  things  ;  and  to  admit

that they gained  their information at second-hand is to

impair  the  value  of  their  testimony  as  that  of  contemporary

witnesses.

Attention  B. — Again,  the  value  of  evidence  depends  upon  the  degree

not  attract- jj^  which  the  facts  were  noticed  by  the  witness  at  the  time  of

ed  till  Mo-  .  ,.  . •'  ,  • 1, ^^ ^ J

hammad  had  their  occurrence. If  attention  was  not  specially  attracted,
publicly jj  would  be  in  vain  to  expect  a  full  and  careful  report ;  and

assumed  ^

prophetic after  the lapse of  many years, the utmost  that  could be
°'^'^^  looked  for  would  be  a  bare  general  outline. This  principle

applies  forcibly  to  the  biography  of  Mohammad  up  to  the
time  when  he  became  the  prominent  leader  of  a  party.
Before,  there  was  nothing  remarkable  about  him.  A  poor
orphan,  a  quiet,  inoffensive  citizen,  he  was  perhaps  of  all  the
inhabitants  of  Mecca  the  least  likely  to  have  the  eyes  of  his
neighbours  turned  upon  him,  and  their  memory  and  imagina-
tion busy  in  noting  the  events  of  his  life,  and  conjuring  up
anticipations  of  coming  greatness.  The  remark  may  be
extended,  not  merely  to  the  era  when  he  first  laid  claim  to
inspiration  (for  that  excited  the  regard  of  a  few  only  among
his  earliest  adherents) ;  but  to  the  entire  interval  preceding
the  period  when  he  stood  forth  publicly  to  assume  the
prophetic  rank,  oppose  polytheism,  and  enter  into  open
collision  with  the  chiefs  of  Mecca.  Then,  indeed,  he  began
to  be  narrowly  watched  ;  and  thenceforward  the  Companions
of  the  Prophet  are  not  to  be  distrusted  on  the  score  at  least
of  insufficient  attention.

the  practice  of  tradition  came  into  vogue.  Thus  Al-Wakidi :  '  The
reason  why  many  of  the  chief  men  of  the  Companions  have  left  few
traditions,  is  that  they  died  before  there  was  any  necessity  for  referring
to  them.  The  chiefest  among  the  Companions,  Abu  Bekr,  'Othman,
Talha,  &c.,  gave  forth  fewer  traditions  than  others.  There  did  not  issue
from  them  attythitig  like  the  nianber  of  traditions  that  did  from  the
younger  Companions^'


CH.  I.]  TRADITION  li

C. — It  follows  that,  in  traditions  affected  by  either  of  the  For  events

foregoing  rules,  circumstantiality  will  be  a  strong  token  of  ?J'°/ '°

fabrication. And  we  shall  do  well  to  adopt  the  analogous  mndi's  public

canon  of  Christian  criticism,  that  any  tradition  whose  origin  g^^  tu-t"^"

is  not  strictly  contemporary  with  the  facts  related  is  worthless  ground  of

exactly in  proportion to the partictilarity of detail} This  ^"^P'"°"
will relieve us of  a vast  number of  extravagant stories,
in which the minutiae of close narrative and sustained
colloquy  in  early  passages  of  the  Prophet's  life  are  preserved
with  the  pseudo-freshness  of  yesterday.

D. — It  will,  however,  be  just  to  admit  an  exception  for  the  Exception

main outlines of  Mohammad's life,  which under  ordinary  '"  favour

,  - ■  ,  ,  •' ot  leading

circumstances  his  friends  and  acquamtance  would  naturally outlines  of
remember  or  might  learn  from  himself,  and  would  thus  be |Yohammad  s
able  in  after  days  to  call  up  with  tolerable  accuracy. Such,
for  instance,  are  the  death  of  his  father,  his  nurture  as  an
infant  by  the  Beni  Sa'd,  his  mother's  journey  with  him  to
Medina,  and  the  expedition  with  his  uncle  to  Syria  while  yet
a  boy. A  still  wider  exception  must  be  allowed  in  favour  of  Public
public personages and national events, even preceding events,
Mohammad's  birth;  because  the  attention  of  the  people  at
large  would be actively  directed to  these  topics,  while  the
patriarchal  habits  of  the  Arabs  and  their  spirit  of  clanship
would be propitious to tenacious recollection. Thus the
conversation  of  Mohammad's  grandfather  with  Abraha,  the
Abyssinian  invader,  is  far  more  likely  to  be  founded  on  fact
than  any  of  the  much  later  conversations  which  Mohammad
himself  is  said  to  have  had  with  the  monks  on  either  of  his
journeys  to  Syria ;  and  yet  the  leading  facts  regarding  these
journeys  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt.

Under  the  same  exception  will  fall  those  genealogical  and And  na-
historical  facts,  the  preservation  of  which  for  several  centuries ^^^^
by  the  memory  alone,  is  so  wonderful  a  phenomenon  in  the
story  of  Arabia. Here  poetry,  no  doubt,  aided  the  retentive

^  The  remarks  of  Alford  are  strikingly  in  point :  '  As  usual  in
traditional  matter,  on  our  advance  to  later  writers,  we  find  more  and
more  particular  accounts  given  ;  the  year  of  John's  life,  the  reigning
Emperor,  &;c.,  under  which  the  Gospel  was  written.'  Greek  Test.  Proleg.
p.  56.  But  Christian  traditionists  were  mere  tyros  in  the  art  of  discover-
ing such  particulars  in  comparison  with  Muslims,  at  the  talisman  of
whose  pen  distance  vanishes,  and  even  centuries  deliver  up  the  minutest
details  which  they  had  engulfed.


Hi


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[iNTROD.


Second
period. -
From  en-
trance on
public  life
to  taking
of  Mecca,
t.e.  B.H.  10
to  A.H.  8


No  surviv-
ing evi-
dence on
side  of
Meccans  ;
or  against
Mohammad
and  his
party


faculty.  The  rhapsodies  of  the  bard  were  at  once  caught  up
by  his  admiring  clan,  and  soon  passed  into  the  mouths  even
of  the  children.  In  such  poetry  were  preserved  the  names  of
the  chieftains,  their  feats  of  bravery,  their  glorious  liberality,
the  unparalleled  nobility  of  their  breeds  of  camel  and  horse.
Many  of  these  odes  became  national,  and  carried  with  them
the  testimony,  not  of  the  tribe  alone,  but  of  the  whole  Arab
family.  Thus  poetry,  the  passion  for  genealogical  and  tribal
reminiscences,  and  the  singular  capacity  of  imprinting  them
indelibly  on  the  memory  for  generations,  have  secured  to  us
the  interwoven  details  of  many  centuries  with  a  minuteness
and  particularity  that  would  excite  suspicion  were  not  their
reality  in  many  instances  established  by  other  evidence  and
by  internal  coincidence.^

E. — A  second  marked  section  of  time  is  that  which  inter-
venes between  Mohammad's  entrance  on  public  life  and  the
taking  of  Mecca.  Here,  indeed,  we  have  two  opposing
parties,  marshalled  against  each  other  in  mortal  strife,  whose
statements  might  have  been  a  check  one  upon  the  other.
But  during  this  interval  {i.e.  for  some  i8  years),  or  very
shortly  after,  one  of  the  parties  came  wholly  to  an  end.  Its
chief  leaders  were  nearly  all  killed  in  battle,  and  the
remainder  went  over  to  the  victors.  We  have  therefore  no
surviving  evidence  whatever  on  the  side  of  the  Prophet's
enemies.  Not  a  single  advocate  was  left  to  explain  their
actions,  often  misrepresented  by  hatred,  or  to  rebut  the
accusations  of  Mohammad  and  his  followers.  On  the  other
hand,  we  have  no  witnesses  of  any  kind  against  Mohammad

''■  M.  Caussin  de  Perceval,  who,  with  incredible  labour,  has  sought
out  and  arranged  these  facts  into  a  uniform  history,  thus  expresses  his
estmiate  of  the  Arab  genealogical  traditions  :  '  J'ai  dit  que  toutes  les
genealogies  arabes  n'etaient  point  certaines  ;  on  en  trouve  en  efifet  un
grand  nombre  d'evidemment  incompletes.  Mais  il  en  est  aussi  beaucoup
d'authentiques,  et  qui  remontent,  sans  lacune  probable,  jusqu'^  environ
six  siecles  avant  Mahomet.  C'est  un  phenomena  vraiment  singulier
chez  un  peuple  inculte  et  en  general  etranger  k  I'art  de  I'ecriture,  comma
I'etaient  les  Arabes,  que  cette  fidelite  k  garder  la  souvenir  des  ancetres.
Elle  prenait  sa  source  dans  un  sentiment  de  fierte,  dans  I'estima  qu'ils
faisaient  de  leur  noblesse.  Les  noms  de  aieux,  graves  dans  la  memoira
des  enfants,  etaient  les  archives  des  families  A  ces  noms  se  rattachaient
necessairement  quelques  notions  sur  la  vie  des  individus,  sur  les  evene-
ments  dans  lesquels  ils  avaient  figure  ;  et  c'est  ainsi  que  les  traditions  se
perpetuaient  d'age  en  k^^.'—Essai  sur  PHistoire  des  Arabes.,  I.  p.  ix.


CH.  I.]  TRADITION  liii

and  his  party,  whose  one-sided  assertions  might  perhaps
otherwise  have  been  often  liable  to  question.  The  in-
temperate and  unguarded  language  of  the  fathers  of
tradition  is  sufficient  proof  that,  in  speaking  of  adversaries,
their  opinion  was  seldom  impartial,  and  their  judgment  not
always  unerring.

F. — It  may  be  urged  in  reply  that  the  great  body  of  the To  what
hostile  Meccans  who  eventually  went  over  to  Islam  would Meccan
still  form  a  check  upon  any  material  misrepresentation of  party,  as
their  party. It  may  be  readily  admitted  that  they  did  form corporated
some  check on  the  perversion  of  public  opinion  in  matters with  Mus-
not  vitally  connected  with  the  credit  of  Islam  and  its  Founder, proved  a
Their  influence  would  also  tend  to  preserve  the  reports  of  '^^.^'^^  "p^''

,  - . . misrepre-

their  own  individual  actions,  and  perhaps  those  of  their  sentation
friends  and  relatives,  in  as  favourable  a  light  as  possible.
But  this  influence  at  best  was  partial.  It  must  be  borne  in
mind  that  the  enemies  of  the  Prophet  who  now  joined  his
ranks  acquired  at  the  same  time,  or  very  shortly  after,  all  the
esprit  de  corps  of  Islam.^  And,  long  before  the  stream  of
tradition  commenced,  these  very  men  had  learned  to  look
back  upon  the  heathenism  of  their  own  career  at  Mecca  with
horror  and  contempt.  The  stains  of  a  Believer's  previous
life  were,  on  his  conversion,  washed  away,  and  imparted
no  tarnish  to  his  subsequent  character.  He  had  sinned
'ignorantly  in  unbelief;  but  now,  both  in  his  own  view  and
in  the  eyes  of  his  comrades,  he  was  another  man.  He  might
now,  therefore,  well  speak  of  his  mad  opposition  to  '  the
Prophet  of  the  Lord '  and  the  divine  message,  with  as
hearty  a  reprobation  as  others ;  nay,  the  violence  of  reaction
might  make  his  language  even  stronger.  Such  are  the
witnesses  who  constitute  our  only  check  upon  the  ex  parte
story  told  of  the  long  struggle  with  the  idolaters  of  Mecca.

G. — It  is  therefore  incumbent  upon  us,  in  estimating  the  Evidence
folly,  injustice,  and  cruelty  of  the  Unbelievers  at  Mecca,  to  glpo^n^nts
make  much  allowance  for  the  hostile  tendency  of  the  ofMoham-
evidence.  On  the  other  hand,  looking  to  the  merit  of  suffer-  J^cei^°d  ^
ing  for  the  faith,  we  may  suspect  exaggeration  in  the  tales  of  with  cau-
hardship  and  persecution  endured  by  Believers  at  their  hands.

*  Thus  A.bu  Sufyan,  leader  in  the  last  stage  of  opposition  to
Mohammad,  became  shortly  after  a  zealous  Muslim,  and  fought  under
the  banners  of  his  own  son  in  the  first  Syrian  campaign.


liv


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


So  also
with  Jew-
ish, Chris-
tian, and
Pagan
tribes  of
Arabia


Similar
considera-
tions apply
to  disaffect-
ed inhr-bi-
tants  of
Medina


II.  Sub-
ject-mat-
ter ;  per-
sonal^
party,  or
national
bias

I.  Personal
ambition  of
being  asso-
ciated with
Mohammad


Above  all,  the  history  of  those  who  died  in  unbelief,  before
the  conquest  of  Mecca,  and  under  the  ban  of  Mohammad,
must  be  subject  to  a  rigid  criticism.  For  such  men  as  Abu
Jahl  and  Abu  Lahab,  hated  and  cursed  by  the  Prophet,  what
Believer  dare  be  the  advocate?  To  the  present  day,  the
hearty  ejaculation,  The  Lord  curse  him  !  is  linked  by  every
Muslim  with  the  name  of  those  '  enemies  of  the  Lord,  and  of
his  Prophet'  What  voice  would  be  raised  to  correct  the
pious  exaggerations  of  the  faithful  in  the  stories  of  their
execrable  deeds,  or  to  point  out  just  causes  of  provocation
which  they  may  have  received?  Impious  attempt,  and  mad
perversity !  Again  and  again  was  the  sword  of  'Omar
brandished  over  the  neck  of  a  luckless  offender  for  conduct
far  more  excusable  and  far  less  offensive  to  Islam.

H. — Precisely  similar  limitations  must  be  brought  to  bear
on  the  evidence  against  the  Jewish  inhabitants  in  the  vicinity
of  Medina,  whom  Mohammad  either  expatriated,  brought
over  to  his  faith,  or  utterly  extirpated.  The  various  Arab
tribes  also,  whether  Christian  or  Pagan,  whom  Mohammad
at  different  times  of  his  life  attacked,  come  more  or  less
under  the  same  category.

I.  The  same  considerations  apply  also,  though  in  a
modified  form,  to  the  '  Hypocrites,'  or  disaffected  population
of  Medina,  who  covertly  opposed  the  claim  of  Mohammad
to  temporal  authority  over  that  city.  The  Prophet  did  not
wage  the  same  war  of  defiance  with  these  as  he  did  with  his
Meccan  opponents,  but  sought  to  counteract  their  influence
by  skilful  tactics.  Neither  was  this  class  so  suddenly  rooted
out  as  the  idolaters  of  Mecca  ;  they  rather  vanished  gradually
before  the  increasing  authority  of  Islam.  Still  its  leaders
are  held  in  abhorrence  by  the  traditionists,  and  the  historian
must  keep  a  jealous  eye  on  the  testimony  against  them.

11. — The  subject-matter  of  tradition  itself,  both  as
regards  the  motives  of  its  authors  and  the  views  of  early
Muslim  society  at  large,  will  help  us  to  an  estimate  of  its
credibility.  The  chief  aspects  in  which  this  argument  may
be  treated  refer  \.o  personal,  party,  and  national  hiz-S,.

A. — Individual  prepossession  and  self-interested  motives
would  cause  exaggeration,  false  colouring,  and  even  invention.
Besides  the  more  obvious  cases  falling  under  this  head,  there
is a fertile class which  originates  in  the  ambition  of  the


CH.  I.]  TRADITION  Iv

narrator  to  be  associated  with  Mohammad.  The  name  of
the  Prophet  threw  a  halo  around  every  object  connected  with
it ;  while  his  friendship  imparted  a  rank  and  dignity  acknow-
ledged by  the  universal  voice  of  Islam.  It  is  difficult  to
conceive  the  reverence  and  court  enjoyed  by  his  widows,
friends,  and  servants.  Interminable  inquiries  were  put  to
them  ;  and  their  responses  received  with  implicit  deference.
All  who  possessed  personal  knowledge  of  the  Prophet,  and
especially  those  who  had  been  honoured  with  his  familiar
acquaintance,  were  admitted  by  common  consent  into  the
envied  circle  of  Muslim  aristocracy  ;  and  many  a  picturesque
scene  is  sketched  by  traditionists  of  the  crowds  which  listened
to  these  men  as  they  delivered  their  testimony  in  the  Mosques
of  Al-Kufa  or  Damascus.  The  sterling  value  of  such  quali-
fications would  induce  imitation.  Some  who  may  have  had
but  a  distant  and  superficial  knowledge  of  Mohammad  would
be  tempted,  by  the  consideration  it  imparted,  to  counterfeit
a  more  perfect  intimacy ;  and  the  endeavour  to  support  their
equivocal  position  by  particularity  of  detail  would  lead  the
way  to  loose  and  unfounded  narratives  of  the  life  and
character  of  the  Prophet.  Equally  misleading  was  the
ambition,  traceable  throughout  the  traditions  of  Companions,
of  being  closely  connected  with  any  of  the  supposed  mysteri-
ous visitations  or  supernatural  actions  of  Mohammad.  To
have  been  noticed  in  the  Revelation  was  the  highest  honour
that  mortal  man  could  aspire  to ;  and  in  any  way  having
been  linked  with  the  heavenly  phases  of  the  Prophet's  life,
reflected  a  divine  lustre  on  the  fortunate  aspirant.^  Thus  a
premium  was  put  upon  the  invention  or  exaggeration  of
superhuman  incidents.

B. — Under  the  same  head  are  to  be  classed  the  attempts Exaggera-
of  narrators  to  exaggerate  their  labours  and  exploits,  and  to ^>on  of  per-

oo  _  .  sonal  merit

multiply  their  losses  and  perils  in  the  service  of  the  Prophet, in  the  ser-
The  tendency thus  to  appropriate a special,  and  often  an j^'^j^j^^^  ^
altogether unwarrantable, merit  is  obvious on the  part  of

'  Thus  'A'isha's  party  having  been  long  delayed  when  with  the
Prophet  on  a  certain  expedition,  the  verse  permitting  the  substitution  of
sand  for  lustration  was  in  consequence  revealed.  The  honour  conferred
upon  her  father  by  this  indirect  connection  with  a  divine  revelation  is
thus  eulogised  :  'This  is  not  the  least  of  the  divine  favours  poured  out
upon  you,  ye  house  of  Abu  Bekr  ! '


Ivi  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd.

many  of  the  Companions.^ A  reference  to this  tendency

may  even  occasionally  tend  to  exculpate  the  Prophet  from

questionable  actions. For  example,  Ibn  Omeiya,  in  narrating

his  mission  by  Mohammad  to  assassinate  Abu Sufyan,  so

magnifies  the  dangers  and  exploits  of  his  adventure  as  might

have  involved  that  dark  mission  itself  in  suspicion,  were  there

not  collateral  proof  to  support  it.

Small  It  may  be  objected, — Would  not  untrue  or  exaggerated

L!!!^L^ tales  like  these  receive  a  check  from  other  parties,  free  from

tions  and the interested motives of  the narrator  ? They would to

beinT^  some  extent. But  to  prove  a  negative  position  is  generally

checked difficult,  and  it  would  not  often  be  attempted  without  some

strong impelling cause, especially  in the early  spread of

Islam,  when the public mind was in the highest degree

impressible and credulous. Such traditions, then, were

likely  to  be  opposed only  when they  interfered with the

private  claims  of  others,  or  ran  counter  to  public  opinion,  in

which  case  they  would  fall  into  discredit  and  disuse. Other-

^  We  have  many  examples  of  the  glory  and  honour  lavished  upon
those  who  had  suffered  persecution.  Thus  when  'Omar  was  Caliph,
Khabbab  showed  him  the  scars  of  the  stripes  he  had  received  from  the
unbelieving  Meccans  twenty  or  thirty  years  before.  'Omar  seated  him
upon  his  couch,  saying  that  there  was  but  one  man  more  worthy  of  this
favour  than  Khabbab  (as  having  been  also  tortured),  namely,  Bilal.  But
Khabbab  replied  :  'And  why  is  he  more  worthy?  He  had  his  friends
among  the  idolaters  whom  the  Lord  raised  up  to  help  him.  But  I  had
none.  I  well  remember  one  day  they  kindled  a  fire,  and  threw  me
therein  upon  my  back  ;  and  a  man  stainped  with  his  foot  upon  my  chest,
my  back  being  all  the  while  upon  the  ground.  And  when  they  uncovered
my  back,  lo  !  it  was  blistered  and  white.'

The  same  principle  led  the  Muslims  to  magnify  the  hardships  which
Moha7nmad himself  endured  ;  such  as  'A'isha's  strange  exaggeration  of
the  Prophet's  poverty  and  frequent  starvation,  which  she  carries  so  far
as  to  say  that  she  had  not  even  oil  to  burn  in  her  chamber  while
Mohammad  lay  dying  there.  The  subsequent  affluence  and  luxury  of
the  conquering  nation,  also,  led  them  by  reaction  fondly  to  contrast  it
with  their  former  simplicity  and  want,  and  even  to  weep  at  the  remem-
brance. Thus  of  the  same  Khabbab  it  is  recorded  :  He  had  his  winding-
sheet  made  ready  of  fine  Coptic  cloth  ;  he  compared  it  with  the  wretched
pall  of  Hamza  (killed  at  Ohod),  and  contrasted  his  own  poverty  when  he
possessed  not  a  dinar,  with  his  present  condition  :  '  and  now  I  have  in
my  chest  by  me  in  the  house  40,000  pieces  of  gold.  Verily,  I  fear  that
the  sweets  of  the  present  world  have  hastened  upon  us.  Our  companions
have  received  their  reward  in  Paradise  ;  but  truly  I  dread  lest  my  reward
consist  in  these  benefits  I  have  obtained  after  their  departure.'


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


Ivii


wise  they  would  be  carried  down  upon  tlie  traditional  stream
of  mingled  legend  and  truth,  and  with  it  find  a  place  in  the
unquestioning  record  of  the  Second  century.

C. — We  have  undoubted  evidence  that  the  bias  of  PARTY
effected  a  deep  and  abiding  impress  upon  tradition.  Where
this  spirit  tended  to  produce  or  embellish  a  tale  adverse  to
the  interests  of  another  party,  and  the  denial  of  the  facts
involved  nothing  prejudicial  to  the  honour  of  Islam,
endeavour  might  be  made  to  rebut  the  fictitious  statement,
and  the  discussion  so  produced  would  subserve  the  purity  of
tradition.  But  this  could  seldom  occur.  The  tradition
would  often  affect  that  section  alone  in  whose  favour  it
originated,  and  therefore  would  not  be  controverted.  The
story  would  probably  at  the  first  be  confined  within  the  limits
of  the  party  which  it  concerned,  and  no  opportunity  afforded
for  its  contradiction  until  it  had  taken  root  and  acquired  a
prescriptive  claim.  Under  any  circumstances,  the  considera-
tions advanced  in  the  preceding  paragraph  are  equally
applicable  here ;  so  that  without  doubt  a  vast  collection  of
exaggerated  tales  have  come  down  to  us,  owing  their
existence  to  party  spirit.

By  the  bias  of  party  is  not  to  be  understood  simply  the
influence  of  faction,  but  likewise  the  partiality  and  prejudice
of  lesser  circles  forming  the  ramifications  of  Muslim  society.
The  former  we  are  less  in  danger  of  overlooking.  Where
the  full  development  of  faction  laid  bare  the  passions  and
excesses  to  which  it  gave  rise,  the  reader  is  on  his  guard
against  misrepresentation ;  he  receives  with  caution  the
darkened  or  resplendent  phases  of  such  characters  as  'All  and
A1-' Abbas,  Mu'awiya  and  Abu  Sufyan.  But,  though  on  a
less  extensive  scale,  the  influences  of  tribe,  family,  and  the
smaller  associations  of  party  clustering  around  the  several
heroes  of  Islam,  were  equally  real  and  effective.  The  spirit
of  clanship,  which  ran  so  high  among  the  Arabs  that
Mohammad  endeavoured  in  vain  at  Medina  to  supplant  it
by  a  so-called  '  Brotherhood,'  perpetuated  the  confederacies
and  antipathies  of  ante-Mohammadan  Arabia  far  down  into
the  annals  of  Islam,  and  often  exerted,  as  in  the  rivalries  of
the  Keis  and  Modar  Clans,  a  potent  influence  upon  the
destinies  of  the  Caliphate  itself.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that
these combinations and prejudices imparted  a  strong  and


2.  Party.
Party  tra-
ditions
come  into
general
currency


Prejudicial
influence  of
such  asso-
ciations as
Tribe,
Family,
Patron.  &c.


Iviii


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


3.  National
bias  ;  com-
mon to
whole  of
Islam  ;
therefore
most  fatal


Tendency
to  exalt
Moham-
mad, and
ascribe  to
him  super-
natural
attributes


often  a  deceptive  hue  to  the  sources  of  tradition.  As  an
example,  may  be  specified  the  rivalry  which  led  the  several
families  or  parties  to  claim  the  earliest  converts  to  Islam  until
in  the  competition  they  arrived  at  the  conclusion,  and  conse-
quently propagated  the  tradition,  that  some  of  their  patrons
or  ancestors  were  Muslims  before  Mohammad  himself,

D. — We  now  come  to  the  class  of  motives  incomparably  the
most  dangerous  to  the  purity  of  Tradition,  namely,  those
which  were  common  to  the  zvhole  Muslim  body.  In  the  previous
cases  the  bias  was  confined  to  a  fragment,  and  the  remainder
of  the  nation  might  form  a  check  upon  the  fractional
aberration.  But  here  the  bias  was  universal,  pervading  the
entire  medium  through  which  we  have  received  tradition,  and
leaving  us,  for  the  correction  of  its  divergencies,  no  check
whatever.

To  this  class  must  be  assigned  all  traditions  the  object  of
which  is  to  glorify  Mohammad,  and  to  invest  him  with
supernatural  attributes.  Although  in  the  Kor'an  the  Prophet
disclaims  the  power  of  working  miracles,  yet  he  implies  that
there  existed  a  continuous  intercourse  between  himself  and
the  agencies  of  the  other  world.  The  whole  Kor'an,  indeed,
assumes  to  be  a  message  from  the  Almighty,  communicated
through  Gabriel,  Besides  being  the  medium  of  revelation,
that  favoured  angel  is  often  referred  to  as  bringing  directions
from  the  Lord  for  the  guidance  of  his  Prophet  in  the  common
concerns  of  life.  Familiar  intercourse  with  heavenly
messengers,  thus  countenanced  by  the  Prophet,  was  implicitly
believed  by  his  followers,  and  led  them  even  during  his  life-
time to  regard  him  with  superstitious  awe.  On  a  subject
so  impalpable  to  sense  and  so  congenial  with  imagination,
it  may  be  fairly  assumed  that  reason  had  little  share  in
controlling  the  fertile  productions  of  fancy ;  that  the  con-
clusions of  his  susceptible  and  credulous  followers  far
exceeded  the  premises  granted  by  Mohammad ;  that  even
simple  facts  were  construed  by  excited  faith  as  pregnant  with
supernatural  power  and  unearthly  companionship  ;  and  that,
after  the  object  of  their  veneration  had  passed  from  their
sight,  fond  devotion  perpetuated  and  enhanced  the  fascinat-
ing legends.  If  the  Prophet  gazed  into  the  heavens,  or  looked
wistfully  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left,  it  was  Gabriel  with
whom he  was  holding  mysterious  converse. Passing  gusts


CM.  I.


TRADITION


lix


raised  a  cloud  from  the  sandy  track ;  the  pious  Believer
exulted  in  the  conviction  that  it  was  the  dust  of  the  Arch-
angel with  his  mounted  squadrons  scouring  the  plain,  as
they  went  before  them  to  shake  the  foundations  of  some
doomed  fortress.  On  the  field  of  Bedr,  three  stormy  blasts
swept  over  the  marshalled  army ;  again,  it  was  Gabriel  with
a  thousand  horse  flying  to  the  succour  of  Mohammad,  while
Michael  and  Seraphil  each  with  a  like  angelic  troop  wheeled
to  the  right  and  to  the  left  of  the  Muslim  front.  Nay,  the
very  dress  and  martial  uniform  of  these  helmed  angels  are
detailed  by  the  earliest  and  most  trustworthy  biographers
with  as  much  na'ivct^  as  if  they  had  been  veritable  warriors  of
flesh  and  blood  ;  while  the  heads  of  the  enemy  were  seen  to
drop  off  before  the  Muslim  swords  had  even  touched  them,
because  the  unseen  scimitars  did  the  work  more  swiftly  than
the  grosser  steel  of  Medina !  Such  is  the  specimen  of  the
vein  of  legend  and  extravagance  which  runs  throughout  even
the  purest  sources  of  tradition.

It  will frequently  be  a  question,  extremely  difficult to Difficulty
decide,  what portions of  these supernatural stories either pfd'scnm-

'  '■  .  ^  mating

originated  in  Mohammad  himself,  or  received  his  countenance  ; what  origi-
and  what  portion  owed  its  birth,  after  he  was  gone,  to  the ^^}^^  ^''^
excited  imagination  of  his  followers. No  doubt,  facts  have mad  in  such
not seldom been adorned or distorted  by  a superstitious ^
fancy. The  subjective  conceptions  of  the  fond  believer  have
been  reflected  back  upon  the  biography  of  the  Prophet,  and
have  encircled  even  the  realities  of  his  life,  like  the  figures
of  our  saints,  with  a  lustrous  halo. The  false  colouring  and
fictitious  light  so  deluge  the  picture,  as  often  to  place  its
details  altogether  beyond  the  reach  of  analytical  criticism.^

E.  —  To the same universal desire  of glorifying their Miracles
Prophet,  must  be  ascribed  the  miraculous  tales  with  which
even  the  earliest  biographies  abound. They  are  such  as  the

^  The  corpse  of  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh  lay  in  an  empty  room.  Mohammad
entered  alone,  picking  his  steps  carefully,  as  if  he  walked  in  the  midst  of
men  seated  closely  on  the  ground.  On  being  asked  the  cause,  he
replied  :  'True,  there  were  no  men  in  the  room,  but  it  was  so  filled  with
angels,  all  seated  on  the  ground,  that  I  found  nowhere  to  sit  down,  until
one  of  the  angels  spread  out  his  wing  for  me  on  the  ground,  and  I  sat
thereon  '  It  is  almost  impossible  to  say  what  in  this  is  Mohammad's
own,  and  what  has  been  concocted  for  him.  Other  supernatural  tales
connected  with  the  same  occasion  will  be  seen  below.


Ix


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


That  it
mentions  a
miracle
does  not
altogether
discredit  a
tradition


Tales  and
legends,
how  far
ascribable
to  Mo-
hammad


following :  A  tree  from  a  distance  moves  towards  the
Prophet,  ploughing  up  the  earth  as  it  advances,  and  then
similarly  retires ;  oft-repeated  attempts  at  murder  are  mir-
aculously averted  ;  distant  occurrences  are  instantaneously
revealed,  and  future  events  foretold ;  a  large  company  is  fed
from  victuals  hardly  adequate  for  the  supply  of  a  single
person ;  prayer  draws  down  immediate  showers  from  heaven,
or  causes  their  equally  sudden  cessation.  A  frequent  class  of
miracles  is  for  the  Prophet  to  touch  the  udders  of  dry  goats
which  immediately  distend  with  milk ;  or  to  make  floods  of
water  well  up  from  parched  fountains,  gush  forth  from  empty
vessels,  or  issue  from  betwixt  his  fingers.  With  respect  to
all  such  stories,  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  they  are  opposed  to
the  clear  declarations  and  pervading  sense  of  the  Kor'an.^

It  by  no  means,  however,  follows  that,  because  a
tradition  relates  a  miracle,  the  collateral  incidents  are  thereby
discredited.  It  may  be  that  the  facts  were  fabricated  to
illustrate  or  embellish  a  popular  miracle;  but  it  is  also
possible  that  the  miracle  was  invented  to  adorn,  or  to  account
for,  well  founded  facts.  In  the  former  case,  the  supposed
facts  are  worthless ;  in  the  latter,  they  may  be  true  and
valuable.  In  the  absence  of  other  evidence,  the  main  drift
and  apparent  design  of  the  narrative  is  all  that  can  here  guide
the  critic.

F, — The  same  propensity  to  fabricate  the  marvellous  must
be  borne  in  mind  when  we  peruse  the  childish  tales  and
extravagant  legends  put  by  tradition  into  the  mouth  of
Mohammad.  The  Kor'an,  it  is  true,  imparts  a  far  wider  basis
of  likelihood  to  the  narration  by  Mohammad  of  such  tales,
than  to  his  assumption  of  miraculous  powers.  When  the
Prophet  ventured  to  place  such  fanciful  fictions  as  those  of
'Solomon  and  the  Genii,' ^  of  'The  Seven  Sleepers,'^  or '  The
Adventures  of  Dhu'l-Karnein,''*  in  the  pages  of  a  divine
Revelation,  to  what  puerilities  might  he  not  stoop  in  the
familiarity  of  social  converse !  It  must,  on  the  other  hand,
be  remembered  that  Mohammad  was  taciturn,  laconic,  and
reserved,  and  is  therefore  not  likely  to  have  given  forth  more
than  an  infinitesimal  part  of  the  masses  of  legend  and  fable
which  tradition  represents  as  gathered  from  his  lips. These

^  Cf.  esp.  xiii.  27  ff. ;  xvii.  92  ff.

2  xxvii.  16  ff. . '^  xviii.  8  ff.  ^  xviii.  82  ff.


CH.  I.]  TRADITION  Ixi

are  probably  the  growth  of  successive  ages,  each  of  which
added  its  contribution  to  the  nucleus  of  the  Prophet's  pregnant
words,  if  indeed  there  ever  was  such  a  nucleus  at  all.  For
example,  the  germ  of  the  elaborate  pictures,  and  gorgeous
scenery  of  the  Prophet's  heavenly  journey  lies  in  a  very  short
and  simple  recital  in  the  Kor'an.^  That  he  subsequently
expanded  this  germ,  and  entertained  or  edified  his  Com-
panions with  the  minutiae  which  have  been  brought  down  to
us  by  tradition,  is  possible.  But  it  is  also  possible,  and  (by
the  analogy  of  Mohammad's  miracles)  far  more  probable,
that  the  vast  majority  of  these  fancies  have  no  other  origin
than  the  heated  imagination  of  the  early  Muslims.^

G. — Connected  indirectly  with  Mohammad's  life,  but  more Supposed
immediately  with  the  foundations  of  Islam,  is  another  class  of  jjons'ofMo-
narrations  which  would conjure  up  on  all  sides  prophecies hammad
regarding  the  Founder  of  the  faith  and  anticipations  of  his and  cTris-
approach. These probably, for the most part,  depended tians
upon  some  general  declaration  or  incidental  remark  of  the
Prophet himself, which his enthusiastic followers deemed
themselves  bound  to  prove  and  illustrate. For  example,  the
Jews  are  often  accused in  the  Kor'an  of  wilfully  rejecting
Mohammad,  although,  in  point  of  fact,  '  they  recognised  him
as  they  did  one  of  their  own  sons.'^ Tradition  provides  us,
accordingly,  with  an  array  of  Jewish  rabbins  and  Christian
monks,  who  found  it  written  in  their  books  that  the  last  ot
the  Prophets  was  at  this  time  about  to  arise  at  Mecca,  and
asserted that  not  only  his name,  but  appearance,  manners,
and  character  were  therein  depicted  to  the  life,  so  that  recog-
nition could not but be certain and instantaneous ; and
among  other  particulars,  that  the  very  city  of  Medina  was
named as  the  place  where  he  would  take  refuge  from the
persecution  of  his  people. Again,  the  Jews  are  in  the  Kor'an
accused  of  grudging  that  a  Prophet  should  arise  among  the
Arabs,  and that  their  nation  should  thus be  robbed  of  its
prophetic  dignity  ;  and  so,  in  fit  illustration,  we  have  repeated

^  xvii.  i.

^  Sprenger  holds  that  the  narrative,  in  its  main  features  emanated
from  Mohammad  himself,  because  (says  he)  There  z's  Jio  event  in  his  life,
on  which  we  have  tnore  niunerous  and  genuine  traditions  tlian  on  his
night  journey. The  fact  is  significant,  but  the  conclusion  doubtful.

2  ii.  141  ;  vi.  20.


Ixii


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


Anticipa-
tions of
Islam


History  of
ancestors,
and  early
Arabia,
borrowed
from  Jews


stories  of  Mohammad  having  been  recognised  by  the  rabbins,
and  of  attempts  made  by  them  to  kill  him  ;  and  this,  too,
long  before  he  had  any  suspicion  himself  that  he  was  to  be  a
prophet,  nay  during  his  very  infancy  I  It  is  enough  to  have
alluded  to  this  class  of  fabrications.

H. — Such  unblushing  inventions  will  lead  us  to  treat  with
caution  the  whole  series  of  tales  in  which  it  is  pretended  that
Mohammad  and  his  religion  were  foreskadozved,  so  that  pious
men  anticipated,  long  before  the  Prophet  arose,  many  of  the
peculiar  rites  and  doctrines  of  Islam,  It  was  a  fond  conceit
of  Mohammad  that  Islam  is  as  old  as  Adam,  and  has  been
from  the  beginning  the  faith  of  all  good  men,  who  looked
forward  to  him  as  the  Prophet  charged  with  winding  up  all
previous  dispensations.  It  was  therefore  natural  for  his
credulous  followers  to  carry  out  this  idea,  and  to  invest  the
memory  of  any  serious-minded  man  or  earnest  inquirer  who
preceded  Mohammad  with  some  of  the  dawning  rays  of  the
divine  effulgence  about  to  burst  upon  the  world,

I. — To  the  same  spirit  we  may  attribute  the  palpable
endeavour  to  make  Mohammadan  tradition  and  the  legends
of  Arabia  tally  with  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,
and  with  fewish  tradition.  This  canon  has  little  application
to  the  biography  of  Mohammad  himself,  but  it  has  a  wide
and  most  effective  range  in  reference  to  the  legendary  history
of  his  ancestors  and  of  early  Arabia.  The  desire  to  regard
the  Prophet  of  Islam  as  a  descendant  of  Ishmael,  and  possibly
the  endeavour  to  prove  it,  began  even  in  his  lifetime.  Many
Jews,  versed  in  the  Scriptures,  and  won  over  by  the  induce-
ments of  Islam,  placed  themselves  at  the  service  of  Moham-
mad and  his  followers.  Jewish  tradition  had  long  been
well  known  in  Medina  and  in  the  countries  over  which  Islam
early  spread,  and  the  Muslim  system  was  now  made  to  fit
upon  it ;  for  Islam  did  not  ignore,  but  professed  merely  to
supersede,  Judaism  and  Christianity,  as  the  whole  does  a  part,
or  rather  as  that  which  is  complete  swallows  up  the  inchoate.
Hence  arose  such  strange  anachronisms  as  the  attempt  to
identify  Kahtan  with  Joktan  ^  (between  whom,  at  the  most
moderate  estimate,  fifteen  centuries  intervene) ;  and  thus  also
were  cast  the  earlier  links  of  the  Abrahamic  genealogy  of
Mohammad,  as  well  as  numberless  tales  of  Ishmael  and  the

^  Gen.  X.  25  f.


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


Ixiii


Israelites,  all  in  a  semi-Jewish  semi-Arab  mould.  These,
though  professing  to  be  original  traditions,  can  generally  be
recognised  as  mere  plagiarisms  from  rabbinical  lore,  or  as
Arabian  legends  forced  into  accommodation  with  them.

J. — Of  analogous  nature  may  be  classed  such  traditions  as
affirm  that  Jews  and  Christians  mutilated  or  interpolated  their
Scriptures.  After  repeated  examination  of  the  Kor'an,  I
have  been  unable  to  discover  any  grounds  for  believing  that
Mohammad  himself  ever  expressed  a  doubt  in  regard  either
to  the  authority  or  the  genuineness  of  the  Old  and  New
Testaments,  as  extant  in  his  time.^  He  was  profuse  in
assurances  that  his  system  was  in  close  correspondence
with  both,  and  that  he  had  been  foretold  by  former  prophets.
As  compliant  Jews  and  Christians  were  at  hand  to  confirm
his  words,  and  as  the  Bible  was  little  known  among  the
generality  of  his  followers,  these  assurances  were  implicitly
believed.  But  as  Islam  spread  abroad  and  began  to  include
countries  where  the  Holy  Scriptures  were  familiarly  read,
the  discrepancies  between  them  and  the  Kor'an  became
patent.  The  sturdy  believer,  with  an  easy  conscience,  laid
the  blame  at  the  door  of  the  dishonest  Jews  and  Christians,
the  former  of  whom  their  Prophet  had  accused  in  the  Kor'an
of  'hiding'  and  'dislocating'  the  prophecies  regarding  him-
self; and,  according  to  Muslim  w^ont,  a  host  of  stories  with
details  of  Jewish  fabrication  soon  grew  up,  exactly  suited  to
the  charge.2

If  it  appear  strange  that  extravagant  and  unreasonable
tales  of  the  kind  described  in  the  last  few  paragraphs  should
not  have  been  contradicted  by  the  more  upright  and  reason-
able Muslims  of  the  first  age,  and  thus  nipped  in  the  bud,  it
must  be  remembered  that  criticism  and  freedom  of  opinion
were stifled under the crushing dogmas of Islam. Any

1  The  reader  will  find  all  passages  of  the  Kor'an  relating  to  the
Scriptures  in  a  little  work  called  The  Coran  and  the  Testimony  it  bears  to
the  Holy  Scriptures,  published  by  the  S.P.C.K.  [Passages  which  seem  to
infer  the  contrary  are  iv.  48  ;  '  Some  of  the  Jews  pervert  the  words  from
their  proper  places,'  etc.]

2  As  examples,  take  the  following.  A  Copt,  reading  his  uncle's
Bible,  was  struck  by  finding  two  leaves  closely  glued  together.  On
opening  them,  he  discovered  copious  details  regarding  Mohammad,  as  a
Prophet  immediately  about  to  appear.  His  uncle  was  displeased  at  his
curiosity  and  beat  him,  saying  that  the  Prophet  had  not  yet  arisen.


Traditions
as  to  Jew-
ish and
Christian
Scriptures
being  muti-
lated and
interpo-
lated


Why  such
extrava-
gant and
unfounded
traditions
not  con-
tradicted


Ixiv


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD,


Traditions
unfavour-
able to
Moham-
mad become
obsolete


simpleton  might  fancy,  and  every  designing  man  could  with
ease  invent,  such  tales  ;  when  once  current,  the  attempt  to
disprove  them  would  be  difficult  and  dangerous.  Supposing
that  they  contradicted  no  well-known  fact  or  received  dogma,
by  what  arguments  were  they  to  be  rebutted?  If  anyone
had  contended  that  human  experience  was  opposed  to  the
marvellous  foreknowledge  of  the  Jews  regarding  the  person
of  Mohammad,  he  would  have  been  scouted  as  an  infidel.
Honest  inquiry,  such  as  might  touch  the  foundations  of
Islam,  was  not  tolerated.  Who  would  dare  to  argue  that  the
ascription  of  a  miracle  to  Mohammad  was  in  itself  improbable,
that  the  narrator  might  have  laboured  under  a  false  impres-
sion, or  that  in  the  Kor'an  itself  miraculous  powers  were
disclaimed  by  the  Prophet?  The  argument  would  have
placed  the  neck  of  the  honest  inquirer  in  jeopardy  ;  for  it  has
been  already  shown  that  the  faith  and  the  polity  of  Islam
were  one,  and  that  free  opinions  and  heresy  were  synonymous
with  conspiracy,  treason,  and  rebellion.^  And  thus,  under  the
shelter  of  the  civil  arm  and  the  fanatical  credulity  of  the
people,  these  marvellous  legends  grew  up  in  perfect  security
from  the  attacks  of  doubt  and  of  rational  inquiry.

K. — The  converse  is  likewise  true ;  that  is  to  say,
traditions,  founded  upon  good  evidence,  and  undisputed
because  notorious  in  the  first  days  of  Islam,  gradually  fell
into  disrepute,  or  were  entirely  rejected,  because  they
appeared  to  dishonour  Mohammad  or  countenance  some
heretical  opinion.  The  nature  of  the  case  renders  it  impos-
sible to  prove  this  position  so  fully  as  the  preceding,  since

^  Take  as  an  illustration  the  following.  On  the  expedition  to  Tebuk,
Mohammad  prayed  for  rain,  which  accordingly  descended.  A  perverse
doubter,  however,  said  :  '  It  was  but  a  chance  cloud  that  happened  to
pass.'  Shortly  after,  the  Prophet's  camel  strayed  ;  again  the  doubter
said:  ' Doth  not  Mohammad  deem  himself  a  Prophet?  He  professeth
to  bring  intelligence  from  the  Heavens  ;  yet  is  he  unable  to  tell  where
his  own  camel  is  ! '  'Ye  servants  of  the  Lord  ! '  exclaimed  his  comrade,
'There  is  a  plague  in  this  place,  and  I  knew  it  not.  Get  out  from  my
tent,  enemy  of  the  Lord  !  Wretch,  remain  not  in  my  presence  ! '
Mohammad  had,  of  course,  in  due  time,  supernatural  intimation  conveyed
to  him,  not  only  of  the  doubter's  speech,  but  of  the  spot  where  the  camel
was  ;  and  the  doubter  afterwards  repented,  and  was  confirmed  in  the
faith.  'Omar's  sword  was  readily  unsheathed  to  punish  such  sceptical
temerity,  and  Mohammad  himself  once  and  again  visited  it  in  the  early
part  of  his  Medina  career  with  condign  punishment.


en.  I.]  TRADITION  Ixv

there  can  have  survived  but  little  trace  of  such  traditions  as
were  early  and  entirely  dropped.  But  we  discover  vestiges
of  a  spirit  that  would  necessarily  produce  such  results,
working  even  in  the  second  and  third  centuries.  We  find
that  the  momentary  lapse  and  compromise  of  Mohammad
with  the  idolatry  of  Mecca  is  well  supported  by  the  earliest
and  the  best  authorities.  But  theologians  began  to  deem  it
dangerous  or  heretical  to  suppose  that  Mohammad  should
have  thus  degraded  himself '  after  he  had  received  the  truth  ' ;
and  the  occurrence  is  therefore  denied,  or  entirely  omitted,
by  some  of  the  earliest  and  by  most  of  the  later  biographers,
though  the  facts  are  so  patent  that  the  more  candid  fully
admit  them.^  The  principle  thus  found  in  existence  in  the
second  and  third  centuries,  may  be  presumed  to  have  been
at  work  also  in  the  first.

L. — The  system  of  pious  frauds  is  not  abhorrent  to  the Pious
axioms of Islam. Deception, in the current theologfy,  is ^".f"*^®,,

^  '  '3-'  '  allowable

under  certain  circumstances  allowable.  The  Prophet  himself,  in  islam
by  precept  as  well  as  by  example,  encouraged  the  notion  that
to  tell  an  untruth  is  on  some  occasions  allowable ;  and  what
occasion  would  approve  itself  as  more  justifiable,  nay  meri-
torious, than  that  of  furthering  the  interests  of  Islam  ?  Early
Muslims  would  suppose  it  to  be  fitting  and  right  that  a  divine
religion  should  be  supported  by  the  evidence  of  miracles,  and
they  no  doubt  believed  that  they  were  doing  God  service  by
building  up  such  testimony  in  its  favour.  The  case  of  our
own  religion,  whose  purer  morality  renders  such  attempt  the
less  excusable,  shows  that  pious  fabrications  ot  this  descrip-
tion easily  commend  themselves  to  the  conscience,  wherever
there  is  the  inclination  and  the  opportunity  for  their
perpetration.

There  were  indeed  conscientious  men  among  the  early Difficulty
Muslims,  who  would  have  scrupled  at  such  pious  fraud:  but of^'^tm-

. ,. .  ,  guishing

these  are  the  very  individuals  from  whom  we  have  the  fewest consden-
traditions. We read of some cautious and scrupulous ^'°"^  *""

•c^  nesses

^  The  author  of  the  Mawahib  al-Lediojlya  traces  the  omission  of
the  passage  to  fear  of  heresy  and  injury  to  Islam.  'It  is  said  that  this
story  is  of  an  heretical  character  and  has  no  foundation.  But  it  is  not
so;  it  is  really  well  founded.'  'Again  [another  author]  rejects  it  on  the
ground  that  if  it  had  really  happened,  many  of  those  who  had  believed
would  have  become  apostates,  which  was  not  the  case.'

e


Ixvi  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd.

Companions  who,  perceiving  the  difficulty  of  reciting
accounts  of  their  Prophet  with  perfect  accuracy,  and  perhaps
offended  at  the  effrontery  of  the  ordinary  propagators  of
garbled  and  unfounded  traditions,  abstained  entirely  from
repeating  the  sayings  of  the  Prophet.^  But  regarding  those
Companions  from  whom  the  great  mass  of  tradition  is  drawn,
and  their  immediate  successors,  it  does  not  appear  that  we
are  now  in  possession  of  any  satisfactory  means  for  dividing
them  into  separate  classes,  of  which  the  trustworthiness
would  vary  to  any  great  extent.  With  respect,  indeed,  to
some,  it  is  known  that  they  were  more  constantly  than  others
with  Mohammad,  and  had  therefore  better  opporJ:unities  for
acquiring  information ;  some,  like  the  garrulous  'A'isha,  were
specially  given  to  gossiping  tales  and  trifling  frivolities ;  but
none  of  them,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  was  free  from  the
tendency  to  glorify  the  Prophet  at  the  expense  of  careful
recital,  or  could  be  withheld  from  the  marvellous  by  the  most
palpable  violations  of  probability  or  reason.  Such  at  least  is
the  impression  derived  from  their  evidence  in  the  shape  in
which  it  has  reached  us.

'  Thus  'Omar  declined  to  give  certain  information,  saying:  'If  it
were  not  that  I  feared  lest  I  should  add  to  the  facts  in  relating  them,  or
take  therefrom,  verily  I  would  tell  you.'  Similar  traditions  are  given
regarding  'Othman.  Ibn  Mas'ud  was  so  afraid  of  repeating  Mohammad's
words  wrongly,  that  he  always  guarded  his  relation  by  the  conditional
clause — 'He  spake  something  like  this,  or  near  unto  it ;'  but  one  day,  as
he  repeated  a  tradition,  the  unconditional  formula  of  repetition — '  Thus
spake  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord'' — escaped  his  lips,  and  he  became  oppressed
with  anguish,  so  that  the  sweat  dropped  from  his  forehead.  Then  he
said  :  '  If  the  Lord  so  will,  the  Prophet  may  have  said  more  than  that,  or
less,  or  near  unto  it.'  Again,  Sa'd  was  asked  a  question,  and  he  kept
silence,  saying  :  ''  I  fear  that  if  I  tell  you  one  things  ye  will  go  and  add
thereto,  as  fron  me,  a  huftdred.'  Thus  also  one  inquired  of  Ibn  az-Zubeir  :
'Why  do  we  not  hear  thee  telling  anecdotes  regarding  the  Prophet,  as
such  and  such  persons  tell ? '  He  replied:  'It  is  very  true  that  I  kept
close  by  the  Prophet  from  the  time  I  first  believed  (and  therefore  am
intimately  acquainted  with  his  words);  but  I  heard  him  say,  "Whosoever
shall  repeat  a  lie  concerning  me,  his  resting-place  shall  be  in  hell-fire."'
So  in  explaining  why  several  of  the  principal  Companions  had  left  no
traditions,  Al-Wakidi  writes :  '  From  some  there  are  no  remains  of
tradition  regarding  the  Prophet,  although  they  were  more  in  his
company,  sitting  and  hearing  him,  than  others  who  have  left  us  many
traditions  ;  and  this  we  attribute  to  their  fear'  (of  giving  forth  erroneous
traditions).


CH.  T.]  TRADITION  Ixvii

M. — The  aberrations  from  fact  hitherto  noticed  are  Examples
presumed  to  have  proceeded  from  some  species  of  bias,  the  °j  '^'^^V'^  •,
nature  of  which  I  have  been  endeavouring  to  trace.  But  the  cation
testimony  of  the  Companions,  as  deh'vered  to  us,  is  so
unaccountably  fickle  and  capricious  that,  even  where  no
motive  whatever  can  be  guessed  at,  and  where  there  were
the  fullest  opportunities  of  observation,  traditions  often  flatly
contradict  one  another.  For  instance,  a  score  of  persons
affirm  that  Mohammad  dyed  his  hair :  they  mention  the
substance  used ;  some  not  only  maintain  that  they  were  eye-
witnesses of  it  during  the  Prophet's  life,  but  after  his  death
produced  relics  of  hair  on  which  the  dye  was  visible.  A  score
of  others,  possessing  equally  good  means  of  information,
assert  that  he  never  dyed  his  hair,  and  that,  moreover,  he  had
no  need  to  do  so,  as  his  grey  hairs  were  so  few  that  they
might  be  counted.^  Again,  with  respect  to  his  Signet  ring—
a  matter  involving  no  faction,  family  interest,  or  dogma-
tradition  is  most  discordant.  One  party  relate  that,  feeling
the  want  of  a  seal  for  his  despatches,  the  Prophet  had  a
signet  ring  prepared  for  that  purpose  of  pure  silver.  Another
party  assert  that  Khalid  ibn  Sa'ld  made  for  himself  an  iron
ring  plated  with  silver ;  and  that  Mohammad,  taking  a  fancy
to  it,  appropriated  it  to  his  own  use,  A  third  tradition  states
that  the  ring  was  brought  by  Ibn  Sa'ld  from  Abyssinia  ;  and
a  fourth  that  Mo'adh  had  it  engraved  for  himself  in  the
Yemen.  One  set  of  traditions  hold  that  Mohammad  wore
this  ring  on  his  right  hand,  another  on  his  left ;  one  that  he
wore  the  seal  inside,  others  that  he  wore  it  outside ;  one  that
the  inscription  upon  it  was  The  truth  of  God,  while  the  rest
declare  that  it  was  Mohammad,  Prophet  of  God.  These
traditions  all  refer  to  one  and  the  same  ring ;  because  it  is
repeatedly  added  that,  after  Mohammad's  death,  it  was  worn

1  Even  the  exact  number  of  his  white  hairs  is  given  by  different
authorities  variously,  as  17,  18,  20,  or  30.  Some  say  that  when  he  oiled
his  head  these  appeared  ;  others  that  the  process  of  oiling  concealed
them.  As  to  the  colour  used,  the  accounts  also  differ.  One  says  he
employed  Henna  and  Katam  which  gave  a  reddish  tinge,  but  that  he
liked  yellow  best ;  another  mentions  a  jet-black  dye,  while  others  say  the
Prophet  forbade  this  ;  e.g.  Mohammad  said  :  '  Those  who  dye  their  hair
black  like  the  crops  of  pigeons,  shall  never  smell  the  smell  of  Paradise.'
'  In  the  day  of  judgment  the  Lord  will  not  look  upon  him  who  dyes  his
hair  black.'


Ixviii


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


Unsup-
ported tra-
dition is
insufficient
evidence


HI.  Con-
siderations
confirming
tradition

Agreement
between
indepen-
dent tradi-
tions


by  Abu  Bekr,  by  'Omar,  and  by  'Othman,  and  was  lost  by
the  latter  in  the  well  Aris.^  There  is  yet  another  tradition
that  neither  the  Prophet  nor  any  of  his  in:imediate  successors
ever  wore  a  ring  at  all.  Now  these  varying  narratives  are
not  given  doubtfully,  as  conjectures  which  might  either  be
right  or  wrong ;  but  they  are  told  with  the  full  assurance  of
certainty,  and  with  such  minute  circumstantiality  as  to  leave
the  impression  on  the  simple  reader's  mind  that  each  of  the
narrators  had  the  most  intimate  acquaintance  with  the
subject.

To  what  tendency,  then,  or  habit  of  mind,  but  sheer  love
of  story-telling,  are  we  to  attribute  such  gratuitous  and
wholesale  inventions?  In  fine,  we  may  from  all  that  has
been  said,  conclude  that  tradition  cannot  be  received  with  too
much  caution,  or  exposed  to  too  rigorous  a  criticism ;  and
that  no  important  statement  should  be  accepted  as  securely
proved  by  tradition  alone,  unless  there  be  some  farther
ground  of  probability,  analogy,  or  collateral  evidence  in  its
favour.

III. — We  now  proceed  to  the  considerations  which  should
be  regarded  as  coftfinning  the  credit  of  a  tradition.

A. — General  agreement  between  traditions  independent
one  of  another,  or  which,  though  traceable  to  a  common
origin,  have  descended  by  different  chains  of  witnesses,  may
be  regarded  as  a  presumption  of  credibility.  The  sources  of
tradition  were  numerous  ;  and  the  stream  reaches  us  through
many  separate  channels.  Evidence  of  this  description  may
therefore  afford  a  cumulative  presumption  that  matter
common  to  many  separate  traditions  was  currently  reported
or  believed  at  the  period  immediately  succeeding  the
Prophet's  death.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  close  agreement
may  be  a  ground  of  distrust ;  it  may  argue  that,  though
attributed  to  different  sources,  the  traditions  really  belong  to
one  and  the  same  family,  perhaps  of  spurious  origin,  long
subsequent  to  the  time  of  Mohammad.  If  the  uniformity  be
so  great  as  to  exclude  circumstantial  variety,  it  will  be  strong
ground  for  believing  that  either  the  common  source  of  such
traditions  is  not  of  old  date,  or  that  the  channels  of  their
conveyance  have  not  been  kept  distinct.  Some  degree  of
incidental  discrepancy  must  be  looked  for,  and  will  improve
1  At-Tabari,  i.  2856  f.


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


rather  than  injure  the  character  of  the  evidence.  Thus  the
frequent  variations  as  to  the  day  of  the  week  on  which
remarkable  events  occurred  are  just  what  we  should  expect
in  independent  traditions  having  their  origin  in  hearsay  ;  and
the  simplicity  with  which  these  are  placed  in  juxtaposition
speaks  strongly  for  the  honesty  of  the  Collectors  as  having
gathered  them  bond  fide  from  various  and  independent
sources,  as  well  as  having  refrained  from  any  attempt  to
blend  or  harmonise.

A  like  argument  may  be  applied  to  the  several  parts  of  a
tradition.  Certain  portions  of  distinct  versions  of  the  same
subject-matter  may  agree  almost  verbally  together,  while
other  portions  may  contain  circumstantial  variations ;  and  it
is  possible  that  the  latter  may  have  a  bo7id  fide  independent
origin,  which  the  former  could  not  pretend  to.  Thus  the
story  of  Mohammad's  infantile  days,  which  professes  to  have
been  derived  from  his  nurse  Halima,  has  been  handed  down
to  us  in  three  distinct  traditions.  *  These  three  accounts,*
says  Sprenger,  'agree  almost  literally  in  the  marvellous,  but
they  differ  in  the  facts.' ^  The  marvellous  was  derived  from  a
common  source  of  fabrication,  but  the  facts  from  original
authorities.  Hence  the  uniformity  of  the  one,  and  the
variation  in  the  other.

Verbal  coincidence  may  sometimes  involve  a  species  of
evidence  peculiar  to  itself;  it  may  point  to  a  common
recorded  original  of  date  older  probably  than  that  at  which
most  of  the  other  traditions  were  reduced  to  writing.  There
being  no  reason  to  believe  that  any  such  documents  were
framed  till  some  considerable  time  after  Mohammad's  death,
they  can  assume  none  of  the  merit  of  contemporaneous
remains.  But  they  may  claim  the  advantage  of  a  greater
antiquity  of  record  than  the  mass  of  ordinary  tradition,  as  in
the  history  by  Az-Zuhri  of  the  Prophet's  military  conquests,
recorded  probably  before  the  close  of  the  first  century.

B. — Correspondence  at  any  point  with  facts  mentioned  in
the  Kor'an  will  generally  impart  credit  to  the  traditional
narrative.  Some  of  the  most  important  incidents  connected
with  Mohammad's  battles  and  campaigns,  as  well  as  a  variety
of  domestic  and  political  matters,  are  thus  attested.  Such
apparent  confirmation  may,  however,  be  deceptive,  for  the
^  Mohat/imad,  p.  78,  note  3.


Agreement
between
portions  of
indepen-
dent tradi-
tions


Verbal
coincidence
may  point
to  a  com-
mon
written
original


Corre-
spondence
with  tiie
Kor'an
valuable
confirma-
tion


Ixx  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd.

allusion  in  the  Kor'an  may  have  given  rise  to  the  tradition.
The  story  may  have  originated  in  some  illustrative  supposi-
tion or  paraphrastic  comment  on  the  text ;  and,  gradually
changing  its  character,  been  transmitted  to  posterity  as  a
recital  of  fact.  Take  for  example  the  following  verse  in  the
Kor'an  (v.  14) :  Remember  the  favour  of  thy  Lord  unto  thee,
when  certain  men  designed  to  stretch  forth  their  hands  upon
thee,  and  the  Lord  held  back  their  hands  from  thee.  By  some
this  passage  is  supposed  to  refer  to  Mohammad's  escape
from  Mecca ;  but,  the  craving  after  the  circumstantial  and
marvellous  not  being  satisfied  with  this  reasonable  interpreta-
tion, several  different  occasions  have  been  given  on  which
the  hand  of  the  enemy,  in  the  very  act  of  brandishing  a
sword  over  Mohammad's  head,  was  miraculously  stayed  by
Gabriel.^  Again,  the  discomfiture  of  the  army  of  Abraha
shortly  before  the  birth  of  Mohammad,  is  thus  poetically
celebrated  in  Sura  cv. :  Ajid  did  not  the  Lord  send  against
them  flocks  of  little  birds,  which  cast  upon  them  small  clay
stones,  and  made  them  like  unto  the  stubble  of  ivhich  the  cattle
have  eatefi  ?  This  seems  only  a  highly  coloured  metaphor
setting  forth  the  general  destruction  of  the  army  by  the
ravages  of  smallpox  or  some  similar  pestilence.  But  it  has
afforded  a  starting-point  for  the  extravagances  of  tradition,
which  gives  a  detailed  statement  of  the  species  of  bird,  the
size  and material  of  the  stones,  the  mode  in  which they

^  In  the  attack  upon  the  Beni  Ghatafan,  we  learn  from  Al-Wakidi
that  whilst  Mohammad  was  resting  under  a  tree,  the  enemy's  leader
came  stealthily  up,  and,  snatching  his  sword,  exclaimed:  'Who  is  there
to  defend  thee  against  me  this  day.'*  'The  Lord,'  replied  the  Prophet,
Immediately  Gabriel  struck  the  foe  a  blow  upon  his  chest,  which  caused
the  sword  to  fall  from  his  hand  ;  thereupon  Mohammad  in  his  turn
seized  the  sword  and  retorted  the  question  on  his  adversary,  who  forth-
with became  a  convert;  'and  with  referejice  to  t/iis,'  it  is  added,  ''was
Siira  V.  14  revealed?

The  tale  is  a  second  time  clumsily  repeated  by  the  biographers  almost
in  the  same  terms,  on  the  occasion  of  his  expedition  to  Dhat  ar-Rika' ;
and  here  Ibn  Ishak  adds  :  'With  special  reference  to  this  event.  Sura  v.
14  was  revealed  ;  but  others  attribute  the  passage  to  the  attempt  of  Amr
ibn  Jahsh,  one  of  the  Beni  an- Nadir,'  who  (as  is  pretended)  tried  to  roll
down  a  stone  upon  the  Prophet  from  the  roof  of  the  house  in  which  he
sat. Ibn  Hisham,  p.  663.

Thus  we  have  three  or  four  different  incidents  to  which  the  text  is
applied,  some  of  which  are  evidently  fabricated  to  suit  the  passage  itself.


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


Ixxi


Struck  the  enem)',  the  kind  of  wound  inflicted,  &c.,  as  if  the
portent  had  but  just  occurred  within  sight  of  the  narrators;
and  yet  the  whole  has  evidently  no  other  foundation  than
the  verse  above  quoted,  which  the  credulous  Muslims,  inter-
preting literally,  deemed  it  necessary  to  clothe  with  ample
illustration.  Such  are  examples  of  the  numberless  legends
which,  though  purely  imaginary,  have  been  reared  upon  a
Kor'anic  basis.^

C. — When  a  tradition  contains  statements  which,  /ro;/i  tJie
]\Iusli7Ji's  poi)it  of  view,  would  reflect  unfavourably  on  the
Prophet,  that  will  be  held  in  its  favour.  Such  would  be
the  tradition  of  an  indignity  shown  to  him  by  his  followers,
or  an  insult  from  his  enemies  after  his  emigration  (for  then
the  period  of  humiliation  had  passed) ;  his  failure  in  any
enterprise  or  laudable  endeavour ;  anything,  in  fine,  at
variance  either  in  fact  or  doctrine  with  the  principles  and
tendencies  of  Islam,  then  there  will  be  strong  reason  for
admitting  it  as  authentic  ;  because,  otherwise,  it  seems  hardly
possible  that  a  tradition  of  the  kind  could  be  fabricated,  or,
having  been  fabricated,  that  it  could  obtain  currency  among
the  followers  of  Mohammad.  At  the  same  time  we  must  be
careful  not  to  apply  the  rule  to  all  that  is  considered  by
ourselves  discreditable  or  opposed  to  morality.  Cruelty  and
revenge,  however  ruthless,  when  practised  against  infidels,
were  regarded  by  the  first  followers  of  Islam  as  highly
meritorious ;  and  the  rude  civilisation  of  Arabia  admitted
with  complacency  a  coarseness  of  language  and  behaviour,
which  we  should  look  upon  as  reprehensible  indecency.
These  and  similar  exceptions  must  be  made  from  this  canon
of  otherwise  universal  application.

D. — There  is  embodied  in  tradition  a  source  of  informa-
tion far  more  authentic  than  any  yet  alluded  to,  though
unfortunately  of  very  limited  extent, — I  mean  the  transcripts
of  treaties  purporting  to  have  been  dictated  by  Mohammad,
and  engrossed  in  his  presence.  It  has  been  already  shown
that  ordinary  traditions  were  not  recorded  in  his  lifetime ;
and  that,  even  were  we  to  admit  an  occasional  resort  to  early
notes  or  memoranda, there  is no  evidence  regarding  their

'  As  illustrative  of  similarly  fabricated  stories  in  the  early  history  of
the  Church,  the  legend  of  St  Paul's  battle  with  the  wild  beasts  may  be
referred  to  as  growing  out  of  i  Cor.  xv.  32. See  Stanley  in  loco.


Disparage-
ment of
Mohammad


Treaties
contempo-
raneously
recorded


Their  au-
thority far
superior  to
that  of
ordinary
tradition  ;


Ixxii


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[iNTROD.


Especially
in  regard  to
Jewish  and
Christian
tribes


Written
details  of
embassies
preserved
in  several
tribes


subsequent  fate,  nor  any  criteria  for  distinguishing  traditions
so  derived  from  those  that  originated  and  were  long
sustained  by  purely  oral  means.  To  a  very  different
category  belong  the  treaties  of  Mohammad.  They  consist
of  compacts  entered  into  with  surrounding  tribes,  which  were
at  the  time  reduced  to  writing,  and  attested  by  one  or  more
of  his  followers.  They  are  of  course  confined  to  the  period
succeeding  the  Prophet's  acquisition  of  political  influence,
and  from  their  nature  limited  to  the  recital  of  a  few  simple
facts.  But  these  facts  again  form  valuable  points  of  support
to  the  traditional  outline  ;  and,  especially  where  they  detail
the  relations  of  Islam  with  the  neighbouring  Jewish  and
Christian  tribes,  are  of  the  highest  interest.

In  Al-Wakidi's  biography  is  a  section  expressly  devoted
to  the  transcription  of  such  treaties,  and  it  contains  two  or
three  scores  of  them.  Over  and  again,  the  author  (at  the
end  of  the  second  or  beginning  of  the  third  century)  states
that  he  had  copied  these  from  the  original  documents,  or
recorded  their  purport  from  the  testimony  of  those  who  had
seen  them.  'They  were  still  in  force,'  writes  Sprenger,  'in
the  time  of  Harun  al-Rashid  (a.h.  170-193),  and  were  then
collected.'  ^  This  is  quite  conceivable,  for  they  were  often
recorded  upon  leather,  and  would  invariably  be  preserved
with  care  as  charters  of  privilege  by  those  in  whose  favour
they  were  concluded.  Some  of  the  most  interesting,  as  the
terms  allowed  to  the  Jews  of  Kheibar  and  to  the  Christians
of  Nejran,  formed  the  basis  of  political  events  in  the  Cali-
phates of  Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar ;  the  concessions  made  in
others  to  Jewish  and  Christian  tribes  are  satisfactory  proof
that  they  were  not  fabricated  by  Muslims ;  while  it  is  equally
clear  that  they  would  never  have  been  acknowledged  if
counterfeited  by  a  Jewish  or  a  Christian  hand.  Whenever,
then,  there  is  fair  evidence  in  favour  of  such  treaties,  they
may  be  placed,  as  to  historical  authority,  almost  on  a  par
with  the  Kor'an  itself

The  narrative  of  official  deputations  to  Mohammad  is
sometimes  stated  to  have  been  derived  from  the  family  or
tribe  which  sent  the  embassy,  and  which  had  preserved  a
written  memorial  of  the  circumstances.  Accounts  so
obtained  may  undoubtedly  be  viewed  as  founded  on  fact,
^  Mohammad,  p.  63.


CH.  I.]


TRADITION


Ixxiii


for  the  family  or  clan  would  naturally  treasure  up  in  the
most  careful  way  any  memorials  of  the  manner  in  which
the  Prophet  had  received  and  honoured  them,  although  there
would,  no  doubt,  be  a  tendency  in  such  statements  to  self-
aggrandisement.^

E. — Another  traditionary  source,  supported  by  authority
peculiar  to  itself,  consists  of  the  verses  and  poetical  fragments
attributed  to  the  time  of  Mohammad.  Some  of  these  pro-
fess to  be  the  composition  of  persons  who  died  before  the
Prophet,  as  Abu  Talib,  his  uncle ;  others,  of  those  who
survived  him,  as  Hassan  ibn  Thabit,  the  poet  of  Medina.
There  can  be  no  question  as  to  the  great  antiquity  of  these
remains,  though  we  may  not  always  be  able  to  fix  with
exactness  the  period  of  their  composition.  With  respect  to
those  which  purport  to  be  of  date  preceding  the  Prophet's
rise  to  power,  when  we  consider  the  poetical  habits  of  the
nation,  their  faculty  of  preserving  poetry  by  memory,-  the
ancient  style  and  language  of  the  pieces  themselves,  and
the  likelihood  that  carefully  composed  verses  were  from  the
first  committed  for  greater  security  to  writing,  it  cannot
certainly  be  deemed  improbable  that  such  poems  or  frag-
ments should  in  reality  have  been  composed  by  the  parties
to  whom  they  are  ascribed.  It  is,  on  the  other  hand,  quite
possible  that  poetry  of  date  long  after  the  death  of
Mohammad,  but  descriptive  of  some  passage  in  his  life,  may
gradually  have  come  to  be  regarded  as  composed  by  a  con-
temporary poet  upon  the  occasion,  or  as  the  actual  effusion
of  the  actors  in  the  scene  to  whom,  by  poetical  fiction,  the

^  Thus  Al-Wakidi :  '  My  informant,  Mohammad  ibn  Yahya,  relates,
that  he  found  it  in  the  writings  of  his  father,  that,'  &c. ;  and  again,
'  'Amr  al-'Odhri  says,  he  found  it  written  in  the  papers  of  his  father,
that,'  &c.  ;  proceeding  with  the  narrative  of  a  deputation  from  the  tribe
to  Mohammad.

-  Burckhardt's  testimony  shows  that  the  faculty  still  remains.
'Throughout  every  part  of  the  Arabian  desert,  poetry  is  equally  esteemed.
Many  persons  are  found  who  make  verses  of  true  measure,  although  they
cannot  either  read  or  write  ;  yet  as  they  employ  on  such  occasions  chosen
terms  only,  and  as  the  purity  of  their  vernacular  language  is  such  as  to
preclude  any  grammatical  errors,  these  verses,  after  passing  from  mouth
to  mouth,  may  at  last  be  committed  to  paper,  and  will  most  commonly
be  found  regular  and  correct  I  presume  that  the  greater  part  of  the
regular  poetry  of  the  Arabs  which  has  descended  to  us,  is  derived  from
similar  compositions.' — Notes  on  the  Bedouins,  I.  251  ;  see  also  p.  373.


Poetical
remains
h:ive
special
authority.
I.  Those
ascribed  to
a  period
before  the
rise  of
Mohammad


Ixxiv  SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY  [introd.

modern  author  attributes  it.  As  a  general  rule,  it  may  be
laid  down  that  wherever  there  is  betrayed  an  anticipation  of
Mohammad's  prophetical  dignity  or  victories,  the  poetry  may
at  once  be  concluded  as  an  afterthought,  triumphant  Islam
having  reflected  some  rays  of  its  refulgence  upon  the  bare
points  of  its  early  career.  Tried  by  this  rule,  there  are
fragments  which  may  be  ascribed,  as  more  or  less  genuine,
to  the  men  whose  names  they  bear ;  but  there  is  also  much
which,  from  patent  anachronism  either  in  fact  or  spirit,  is
evidently  the  composition  of  a  later  age.^
Poets  who  Pieces  said  to  have  been  recited  by  poets  who  survived

Mohammad  Mohammad,  there  is  every  reason  for  believing  to  be  the
composition  of  the  persons  to  whom  they  are  ascribed.  But
whether  they  were  composed  before  the  Prophet's  death,
even  when  so  represented,  is  a  more  difficult  question  ;  and
their  authority  will  in  some  measure  depend  on  the  answer.
Under  any  circumstances  they  must  be  of  great  value,  as
the  work  of  Mohammad's  contemporaries.  Wherever  they
bear  upon  historical  events,  they  are  of  much  use  as  adding

1  The  following  glaring  anachronism  shows  with  what  caution  poetry
of  this  class  must  be  received.  When  Mohammad  with  his  followers
performed  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca  under  the  treaty  of  Hodeibiya,  the
leader  of  his  camel,  as  he  encircled  the  Ka'ba,  shouted  verses  of  hostile
defiance  against  Koreish,  who  had  retired  by  compact  to  the  overhanging
rocks  and  thence  viewed  the  Prophet  and  his  people.  Among  these
verses  was  the  couplet :  'We  shall  slay  you  on  the  score  of  the  interpreta-
tion of  it  (the  Kor'an),  as  we  slew  you  on  the  score  of  its  revelation'  (z>.
for  rejecting  it).  Now  this  evidently  belongs  to  a  period  long  subsequent,
when,  Islam  having  been  broken  up  into  parties,  men  fought  against
each  other  for  their  several  'interpretations'  of  the  Kor'an,  and  looked
back  to  the  struggle  with  the  idolaters  of  Mecca  as  to  a  bygone  era.
Yet  the  verses  are  ascribed  both  by  Al-Wakidi  and  Ibn  Ishak  to  the
Hodeibiya  armistice,  i.e.  a  period  anterior  even  to  the  conquest  of  Mecca.
Ibn  Hisham,  p.  789.

As  a  further  example,  I  may  refer  to  the  rhetorical  contest  held  before
Mohammad  between  his  own  followers  and  the  embassy  of  the  Beni
Temlm.  Anticipations  of  universal  conquest  are  developed  in  the
orations  of  the  Mohammadan  party.  Thus  the  threat  is  used  by  Thabit
ibn  Keis  that  the  Muslims  ''  ivoiild  fight  against  all  the  world  till  they
were  converted.^  This  was  language  appropriate  only  to  the  time  when
the  Arabs  had  issued  from  Arabia.  The  speeches  and  poems  were,  no
doubt,  composed  afterwards  as  suitable  to  the  occasion,  and,  like  the
orations  of  classical  history,  attributed  to  the  speakers  of  the  original
scene. Ibn  Hisham,  p.  935.


CH.  I.J


TRADITION


Ixxv


confirmation  to  the  corresponding  traditions;  for,  whether
handed  down  by  writing,  or  by  memory  alone,  their  poetical
form  is  a  material  safeguard  against  change  or  interpolation.
As  examples,  may  be  specified  the  odes  of  Hassan  ibn
Thabit  on  the  'Battle  of  the  Ditch,'  and  on  'the  taking  of
Mecca';  and  the  poem  of  Ka'b  ibn  Malik,  descriptive  of
the  oath  of  fealty  by  the  Medina  converts  at  the  '  Second
pledge  of  Al-'Akaba,'  in  which  are  mentioned  the  names  of
the  twelve  leaders  chosen  by  the  Prophet.  Besides  illustrating
specific  facts,  this  early  poetry  is  often  instructive,  from  its
exhibition  of  the  spirit  of  the  first  Muslims  towards  their
unconverted  brethren,  and  the  biting  satire  employed  against
the  enemies  of  Islam.

But  while  these  poetical  pieces  attest  many  facts  we  are Their
already acquainted with,  they reveal none  which,  without useful  a
them, we should not otherwise have known. They are confirma-
valuable  because  cotifirmatory  of  tradition,  and,  as  the  earliest
literary remains  of  a  period  which  contained  the germ  of
such mighty  events,  they  deserve  our  best  attention  ; but
they  give  us  little  fresh  insight  into  the  history  or  character
of  the  Prophet.


tory  of  tra-
dition


Such,  then,  are  the  criteria  which  should  be  applied  to  Conclusion
Mohammadan  tradition.  It  is  obvious  that  the  technical  rule
of '  respectable  names,'  used  by  the  Collectors  as  the  connecting
chain  of  evidence,  can  carry  no  authority  with  us  ;  that  every
tradition,  separately  subjected  to  close  examination,  must
stand  or  fall  upon  its  own  merits ;  and  that,  even  after  its
reception  as  generally  credible,  the  component  parts  are  still
severally  liable,  upon  a  close  scrutiny  of  internal  evidence,
to  suspicion  and  rejection.  The  sure  light  of  the  Kor'an
will  be  the  pole-star  of  the  historian  ;  and  by  it  he  will  judge
tradition.  Where  in  its  absence  tradition  stands  alone,  he
will  maintain  a  jealous  guard  against  the  misleading  tendencies
which  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain,  and  will  reject  what-
ever bears  their  traces.  In  the  remainder  he  will  find
ample  and  trustworthy  materials  for  the  biography  of  the
Prophet.


I will now notice briefly the EARLY HISTORIANS OF Early
Mohammad. We  have  seen  that  towards  the  end of  the ^'o^^a-

PHIES.


Ixxvi


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[iNTROD.


Az-Zuhri
and  other
compilers  of
biographi-
cal collec-
tions


Biogra-
phies

compiled  in
second  cen-
tury A.H.


Extant  bio-
graphies


Difference
from  ordi-
nary col-
lections


first  century  the  general  practice  of  recording  tradition  was
first  systematically  set  on  foot.  One  of  the  persons  known
to  have  been  employed  in  the  task  was  Az-Zuhri,  who  died
A.H.  124,  aged  72,  It  has  been  even  stated  that  both  he  and
his  master  'Orwa  (who  died  as  early  as  A.H.  94)  compo.sed
regular  biographies  of  Mohammad ;  but  the  grounds  are
uncertain.  Be  this  as  it  may,  there  is  no  doubt  that  Az-Zuhri
at  least  made  separate  collections  of  the  traditions  bearing
on  various  episodes  of  the  Prophet's  life,  certainly  on  that
relating  to  his  military  career.  It  is  conjectured  by  Sprenger,
that  such  compilations  gave  rise  to  the  uniformity  of  narrative
and  coincidence  of  expression  observable  in  many  parts  of
the  various  biographies  of  Mohammad,  and  especially  in  the
history  of  his  expeditions  and  battles.  The  supposition  is
probable  ;  at  all  events  the  work  of  Az-Zuhri  was  one  of
such  sources.  He  lived  at  the  court  of  the  Omeiyad  Caliphs,
and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  his  accounts  are  as
unbiassed  as  could  be  expected  from  any  Muslim  author.
There  is  nothing  of  Az-Zuhri  extant  in  independent  form,
but  he  is  largely  quoted  by  subsequent  biographers ;  and
their  account  of  Mohammad's  military  operations  is  prob-
ably in  great  part  the  reproduction  of  materials  collated  by
him.

Two  other  authors  are  mentioned  as  having  written
biographies  of  Mohammad  early  in  the  second  century,
MUSA  IBN  'Okba  and  Abu  Mas'har.  Neither  of  their
works  is  extant ;  but  the  latter  is  extensively  referred  to  by
At-Tabari,  To  these  may  be  added,  as  no  longer  available,
the  histories  of  Abu  Ishak,  who  died  A.H.  188,  and
AL-Mada'INI,  who  survived  to  the  beginning  of  the  third
century.  Though  the  latter  published  many  works  on  the
Prophet,  not  one  of  them  is  now  known  to  exist.

The  earliest  biographical  writers  whose  treatises  are
extant  more  or  less  in  their  original  state  are : — I.  Ibn
Ishak;  II.  Ibn  Hisham  ;  III.  Al-Wakidi,  and  his  Secretary
Ibn  Sa'd  ;  IV.  At-Tabari.  These  works,  though  professing,
like  the  traditional  collections,  to  be  composed  exclusively
of  trustworthy  traditions,  differ  from  them  in  the  following
particulars.^

^  Biographical  works  are  called  Siyar  (pi.  of  Sim),  while  the  Collec-
tions of  tradition  are  termed  Hadith.


CH.  I.]  EARLY  HISTORIANS  Ixxvii

First. — The  traditional  matter  is  confined  to  biographical First.—
subjects,  and  is  arranged  in  chronological  order. Commencing p.""''"'^jl.  *»
with  anticipatory  and  genealogical  notices,  the  work  advances cai  matter
to  the  birth  of  Mohammad,  and  traces  with  some  degree  of  can°Tr-^'
method the various  periods of  his  life. To  each  stage  a  ranged
separate  chapter  is  devoted ;  and  all  traditions  which  have
any  bearing  whatever  on  the  subject,  are  thrown  together  in
that  chapter,  and  arranged  with  more  or  less  of  intelligible
sequence. The  practice  of  the  Collectors  as  to  the  quotation
of  their  authorities  is  generally  observed  ;  namely,  that  each
separate  tradition  must  be  supported  by  its  original  witness,
and  the  chain  of  witnesses  specified  by  name  which  connects
the  biographer  with  that  authority. This  induces  the  same
motley and fragmentary appearance which marks the
traditional Collections. The biography of Mohammad, in
fact,  resembles  a  collection  of '  table  talk.' It  is  a  compilation
rather  than  an  original  composition.

Second. — Traditions are sometimes fused together, or Second.—

reduced into a uniform  story. Such is more particularly Traditions

•'  r  J sometimes

the  case  in  descriptions  of  Mohammad's  military  life,  where formed  into
the  expeditions  are  often  detailed  in  an  unbroken  narrative. ^°""';^'^'^

^  _  ' nairative

the authorities  for  which  are  generally  thrown  together  at
the  beginning.

Third. — This process at times  induces  some  degree  of Third.— k
critical examination of  the  several  traditions so  collected. "'^/I^"[^  °^

cri  Lic3,i

Where  the  authorities  differ,  we  find  the  biographer  occasion-  collation

ally  stating  his  opinion  as  to  which  is  the  correct  exposition

of  fact. Verbal  differences  are  sometimes mentioned,  and

various  readings  noted. Satisfactory  evidence  is  thus  afforded

of  the  labour  bestowed  by  the  biographers  in  bringing  together

all  authentic  tradition  which  could  illustrate  their  subject,  and

of  the  accuracy  with  which  they  recorded  it.

The  following  account  of  the  four  authors  whose  works
are  more  or  less  extant  will  enable  the  reader  to  form  an
estimate  of  their  value  as  biographical  authorities.

I.  Mohammad  IBN Ishak  is  the  earliest  biographer  of Mohammad
whom  any  extensive  remains,  the  authorship  of  which  can ibn  Ishak
certainly  be  distinguished,  have  reached  us. He  died  AH.
151,  that  is,  some  twenty  years  after  the  overthrow  of  the
Omeiyad dynasty. His work was published under the
auspices  and  influence  of  the  'Abbasid  Princes,  and  was  in


Ixxviii


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD,


Tesiimonies
to  his
authoiily


Ibn  Ishak
one  of  the
two  chief
sources  of
subsequent
biographies


fact  composed  '  for  the  use '  of  the  Caliph  Al-Mansur,  the
second  of  that  line.  Its  accuracy  has  been  impugned.  But
from  the  portions  which  have  come  down  to  us  there  seems
no  ground  for  believing  that  Ibn  Ishak  was  less  careful
than  other  traditionists;  while  the  high  character  generally
ascribed  to  him,  and  the  confidence  with  which  he  is  quoted
by  later  authors,  leave  little  doubt  that  the  aspersions  cast
upon  him  have  no  good  foundation.

In  the  biographical  dictionary  of  Ibn  Khallikan  we  find
the  following  testimonies  in  his  favour :  *  Mohammad  ibn
Ishak  is  held  by  the  majority  of  the  learned  as  a  sure
authority  in  traditions,  and  none  can  be  ignorant  of  the  high
character  borne  by  his  work,  the  Maghdzi  (military  expedi-
tions). Whoever  wishes  to  know  the  early  Muslim  conquests,
says  Az-Zuhri, /^^  hi'tn  refer  to  Ibn  IsJidk ;^  and  Al-Bukhari
himself  cites  him  in  his  history.  Ash-Shafi'i  said:  Whoever
wishes  to  obtain  a  complete  acquaintance  with  the  early  Muslim
conquests,  must  borrow  his  information  from  Ibn  Ishak.
Sufyan  ibn  'Oyeina  declared  that  he  never  met  any  one
who  cast  suspicions  on  Ibn  Ishak's  recitals;  and  Sho'ba  ibn
al-Hajjaj,  was  heard  to  say,  ^Mohammad  ibn  Ishak  is  the
Commander  of  tJie  Faithful,  meaning  that  he  held  that  rank
as  a  traditionist.  .  .  .  As-Saji  mentions  that  Az-Zuhri's
pupils  had  recourse  to  Mohammad  ibn  Ishak,  whenever
they  had  doubts  respecting  the  exactness  of  any  of  the
traditions  delivered  by  their  master  ;  such  was  the  confidence
they  placed  in  his  excellent  memory.  It  is  stated  that
Yahya  ibn  Ma'In,  Ahmed  ibn  Hanbal,  and  Yahya  Sa'ld
al-Kattan,  considered  Mohammad  ibn  Ishak  as  a  trustworthy
authority,  and  quoted  his  traditions  in  proof  of  their  legal
doctrines.  ...  It  was  from  Ibn  Ishak's  works  that  Ibn
Hisham  extracted  the  materials  of  his  biography  of  the
Prophet,  and  every  person  who  has  treated  on  this  subject
has  been  obliged  to  take  Ibn  Ishak  for  his  authority  and
guide.'  ^

These  testimonies  are  conclusive  of  the  popularity  of  Ibn
Ishak  in  the  Muslim  world,  and  of  his  general  fidelity  as  a
writer.  But  the  surest  proof  of  his  character  and  authority
is  that  his  statements  have  been  embodied  in  all  subsequent
biographies  of  the  Prophet,  excepting  that  of  Al-Wakidi,  who
^  Ibn  Khallikan  (De  Slane),  vol.  ii.  p.  677  f.


CH.  I.]


EARLY  HISTORIANS


Ixxix


in  comparison  with  others  quotes  sparingly  from  him  ;  and
that  in  fact  the  two  works  of  Ibn  Ishak  and  Al-Wakidi  con-
tain between  them  the  chief  materials  on  which  later  writers
have  drawn  for  authentic  details  of  the  Prophet's  life.

No  copy  of  Ibn  Ishak's  biography,  in  its  original  form,  is
novv^  available.  But  the  materials  have  been  so  extensively
adopted  by  Ibn  Hisham,  and  wrought  into  his  history  in  so
complete  and  unaltered  a  form,  that  we  have  probably  not
lost  much  by  the  absence  of  the  work  itself.

II.  Ibn  Hisham,  who  died  a.h.  213  (or  218),  made  the
labours  of  Ibn  Ishak  the  basis  of  his  biography  of  Moham-
mad. Copies  of  this  work  are  extant,  and  are  known  to  the
European  historians  of  the  Prophet.  The  following  extract
from  Ibn  Khallikan  will  place  before  the  reader  all  that  it  is
necessary  to  know  regarding  the  life  of  this  author :  '  Ibn
Hisham,  the  author  of  the  Sirat  ai'-Rasiil,  or  Biography  of  the
Prophet,  is  spoken  of  in  these  terms  by  Abu'l-Kasim  as-
Suhaili,  in  his  work  entitled  Raud  al-Unuf,  or  The  Fresh
Pastures,  which  is  a  commentary  on  the  Sira,  and  was  com-
posed in  the  year  569  A.H.  (i  173-4  A.D.).  He  was  celebrated
for  his  learning,  and  possessed  superior  information  in
genealogy  and  grammar.  His  native  place  was  Old  Cairo,
but  his  family  were  of  Al-Basra.  He  composed  a  genealogical
work  on  the  tribe  of  Himyar  and  its  princes ;  and  I  have
been  told  that  he  wrote  another  work,  in  which  he  explained
the  obscure  passages  of  poetry  cited  in  [Ibn  Ishak's]  biography
of  the  Prophet.^  His  death  occurred  at  Old  Cairo  A.H.  213.
This  Ibn  Hisham  is  the  person  who  extracted  and  drew  up
the  "  History  of  the  Prophet"  from  Ibn  Ishak's  work,  entitled
"  The  Wars  and  Life  of  Mohammad."  As-Suhaili  explained
its  difficulties  in  a  commentary,  and  it  is  now  found  in  the
hands  of  the  public  under  the  title  of  Sirat  ibn  HisJidvi,  i.e.
"The  Biography  of  Mohammad,  by  Ibn  Hisham." '^

There  is  reason  to  suspect  that  Ibn  Hisham  was  not  quite
so  trustworthy  as  his  great  authority  Ibn  Ishak.  Certainly
there  is  one  instance  which  throws  suspicion  upon  him  as  a
witness,  disinclined  at  least  to  tell  the  whole  truth.  We  find
in  At-Tabari  a  quotation  from  Ibn  Ishak,  in  which  is  described
the  temporary  lapse  of  Mohammad  into  idolatry ;  and  the
same incidents are also given by Al-Wakidi from other

*  [Haji  Khalfa,  7308  and  1347.]  "  Ibn  Khallikan,  vol.  ii.  p.  128.


Not  extant
but  largfely
available
in  Ibn
Hisham


Ibn  Hr-

SHAM  : His
character


Suspicions
of  his  can-
dour and
fidelity


Ixxx


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[iNTROD.


Arrange-
ment and
composi-
tion


Al-Wakidi
His  char-
racter  and
writings


original  sources.  But  no  notice  whatever  of  the  fact  appears
in  the  biography  of  Ibn  Hisham,  though  it  is  professedly
based  upon  the  work  of  Ibn  Ishak.  His  having  thus  studi-
ously omitted  all  reference  to  so  important  an  incident,  for
no  other  reason  apparently  than  because  he  fancied  it  to  be
discreditable  to  the  Prophet,  cannot  but  lessen  our  confidence
generally  in  this  book.  Still,  it  is  evident  from  a  comparison
of  his  text  with  the  quotations  made  by  At-Tabari  from  the
same  passages  of  Ibn  Ishak  (the  two  ordinarily  tallying  word
for  word  with  each  other)  that  whatever  he  did  excerpt  from
his  author  was  faithfully  and  accurately  quoted.

The  arrangement  and  composition  of  Ibn  Hisham  are
careful,  if  not  elaborate.  The  traditions  are  well  classified,
and  the  narrative  proceeds  with  much  of  the  regularity  of  an
ordinary  biography.  The  frequent  fusion  of  traditions,  how-
ever, renders  it  sometimes  difficult  to  single  out  the  separate
authorities,  and  to  judge  of  them  on  their  individual  merits.^

III.  Al-Wakidi,  or,  as  his  full  name  runs,  Mohammad
ibn  ^Oniar  Al-  Wdkidi,  was  born  at  Medina  about  A.H.  130,  and
died  A.H.  207.  He  studied  and  wrote  exclusively  under  the
'Abbasids.  He  enjoyed  their  patronage,  and  passed  a  part  of
his  life  at  their  court,  having  in  his  later  days  been  appointed
a  Kadi  of  Baghdad.  In  judging,  therefore,  of  his  learning  and
■prejudices,  we  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  the  influence  of
the  'Abbasid  dynasty  bore  strongly  and  continuously  upon
him.  His  traditional  researches  were  vast,  and  his  works
voluminous.  The  following  is  from  Ibn  Khallikan :  '  Al-
Wakidi  was  a  man  eminent  for  learning,  and  the  author  of

1  'Even  of  this  work  copies  are  rare.' — Sprenger.  The  fact  is  that
the  literary  public  among  Mohammadans  do  not  affect  the  early  and
original  sources  of  their  Prophet's  life,  and  hardly  ever  use  them.  They
prefer  the  modern  biographies  with  their  marvellous  tales.

An  abridged  edition  of  Ibn  Hisham  was  made  at  Damascus  A.H.  •jo'j
(a.d.  1307)  by  one  Ahmed  ibn  Ibrahim.  The  abridgment  consists  chiefly
in  the  omission  in  each  case  of  the  long  series  of  witnesses  leading  up  to
the  Companion  who  first  gave  forth  the  tradition.  A  beautiful  manu-
script, in  the  handwriting  of  the  abbreviator  himself^  was  met  with  by  Dr
Sprenger  in  Delhi,  and  has  been  used  both  by  Dr  Sprenger  and  myself.
I  have  placed  a  portion  of  this  valuable  MS.,  with  an  English  abstract  of
its  contents,  in  the  India  Office  Library.

[The  standard  edition  of  the  Arabic  text  of  Ibn  Hisham  is  that  of
Ferdinand  WUstenfeld,  1858- 1860,  and  it  has  been  translated  into  German
by  Gustav  Weil,  1864.]


CH.  I.]


EARLY  HISTORIANS


Ixxxi


some  well-known  works  on  the  conquests  of  the  Muslims,  and
other  subjects.  His  Kitdb  ar-Ridda,  a  work  of  no  inferior
merit,  contains  an  account  of  the  apostacy  of  the  Arabs  on
the  death  of  the  Prophet,  and  of  the  wars  between  his
followers  and  Toleiha,  Al-Aswad,  and  Museilima,  the  false
prophets.  .  .  .  His  Secretary,  Mohammad  ibn  Sa'd,  and  a
number  of  other  distinguished  men,  delivered  traditional
information  on  his  authority.  He  held  the  post  of  Kadi  in
the  eastern  quarter  of  Baghdad,  and  was  appointed  by  the
Caliph  Al-Ma'mun  to  fill  the  same  office  at  'Askar  al-Mahdi.
The  traditions  received  from  him  are  considered  of  feeble
authority,  and  doubts  have  been  expressed  on  the  subject  of
his  veracity.  Al-Ma'mun  testified  a  high  respect  for  him,
and  treated  him  with  marked  honour.'^

Notwithstanding  the  extraordinary  fertility  of  his  pen,
none  of  the  works  of  Al-Wakidi  have  reached  us  in  their
original  form,  with  the  exception  of  the  Alaghdsi,  or  '  History
of  the  Wars  of  the  Prophet,'  a  copy  of  which  was  recently  dis-
covered in  Syria,  and  has  now  been  published  in  the  Biblio-
theca  Indica?-

Happily,  his  Secretary,  Ibn  Sa'd,  profited  by  the  labours
of  his  master,  and  through  him  we  enjoy  largely  the  results.
The  Secretary  is  thus  described  by  Ibn  Khallikan  :  '  Moham-
mad ibn  Sa'd  was  a  man  of  the  highest  talents,  merit,  and
eminence.  He  lived  for  some  time  with  Al-Wakidi  in  the
character  of  a  Secretary,  and  for  this  reason  became  known
by  the  appellation  "  The  Secretary  of  Al-Wakidi." '  .  .  .  He
composed  an  excellent  work  in  fifteen  volumes  on  the
different  classes  of  Mohammad's  Companions  and  the  Suc-
cessors ;  it  contains  also  a  history  of  the  Caliphs,  brought
down  to  his  own  time.  He  left  also  a  smaller  edition.  His
character  as  a  veracious  and  trustworthy  historian  is  univer-
sally admitted.  It  is  said  that  the  complete  collection  of  Al-
Wakidi's  works  remained  in  the  possession  of  four  persons,

^  Ibn  Khallikan,  vol.  iii.  p.  6i  f.

2  [Under  the  title  History  of  M uhammad' s  Campaigns^  by  Aboo  'Abd
OUah  Mohammad  'bin  Omar  al-Wdkidy,  edited  by  Alfred  von  Kremer,
Calcutta,  1856.  A  German  translation,  with  slight  abbreviations,  has
been  published  by  Julius  Wellhausen,  under  the  title  Muhavimed  i?i
Medina.  Das  ist  Vakidis  Kitab  alMagkazi,  Berlin,  1882.  To  this  last
work  the  references  for  this  period  will  be  made  instead  of  to  the
Calcutta  text.]

/


The  '  Ma-
ghazi '  his
only  work
extant  in
original
form


But  results
of  his  la-
bours pre-
served by
his  Secre-
tary Mo-
hammad
ibn  Sa'd


Ixxxii


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[iNTROD.


The  Secre-
tary of
Al-Wakidi


His  works


Composed
mainly  of
detached
traditions


the  first  of  whom  was  his  Secretary,  Ibn  Sa'd.  This  distin-
guished writer  displayed  great  acquirements  in  the  sciences,
the  traditions,  and  traditional  literature ;  most  of  his  books
treat  of  the  traditions  and  law.  The  Khatib  Abu  Bekr,
author  of  the  '  History  of  Baghdad,'  speaks  of  him  in  these
terms  :  '  We  consider  Mohammad  ibn  Sa'd  as  a  man  of  unim-
peached  integrity,  and  the  traditions  which  he  delivered  are  a
proof  of  his  veracity,  for,  in  the  greater  part  of  the  informa-
tion handed  down  by  him,  we  find  him  discussing  it  passage
by  passage.'  At  the  age  of  sixty-two  he  died  at  Baghdad,
A.H.  230,  and  was  interred  in  the  cemetery  outside  the
Damascus  gate.'^

In  the  fifteen  volumes  here  noticed,  the  Secretary  is
supposed  to  have  embodied  the  researches  of  his  master,
together  with  the  fruits  of  his  own  independent  labour.  The
first  volume  has,  fortunately  for  the  interests  of  literature  and
truth,  been  preserved  to  us  in  an  undoubtedly  genuine  form.
It  contains  the  Sv-a  or  'Biography  of  Mohammad,'  with
detailed  accounts  of  the  learned  men  of  Medina,  and  of  all
the  Companions  of  the  Prophet  who  were  present  at  Bedr.
This  treatise  (if  we  except  some  special  narratives,  as  portions
of  the  military  expeditions)  is  composed  entirely  of  detached
traditions,  which  are  arranged  in  chapters  according  to
subject,  and  in  fair  chronological  order.  The  chain  of
authority  is  generally  traced  in  detail  to  the  fountain-head  for
each  tradition,  separately ;  and  so  carefully  is  every  fragment
of  a  tradition  bearing  on  each  subject  treasured  up  and
gathered  together,  that  we  often  find  a  dozen  or  more  tradi-
tions reiterated  in  detail  one  after  another,  though  they  are
all  couched  perhaps  in  precisely  the  same  words,  or  in  expres-
sions closely  resembling  one  another.  We  likewise  meet
continually  with  the  most  contradictory  authorities  placed
side  by  side  without  any  remark  ;  and  sometimes  (but  the
occasion  is  comparatively  rare)  the  author  gives  his  opinion
as  to  their  relative  credibility.^


1  Ibn  Khallikan,  vol.  iii.  p.  64  f.

2  For  a  copy  of  this  invaluable  volume  we  are  indebted  to  the  inde-
fatigable research  of  Sprenger,  who  discovered  it  in  a  library  at  Cawnpore.
This  manuscript  is  written  in  an  ancient  but  very  distinct  character,  and
is  in  excellent  preservation.  It  was  transcribed  at  Damascus,  A.H.  718
(a.d.  13 1 8),  by  a  scholar  named  Al-Hakkari,  who  traces  up,  link  by  link,


CH.  I.]  EARLY  HISTORIANS  Ixxxiii

Al-Wakidi  is  said  to  have  been  a  follower  of  the  'Alid  sect.  Authority
Like  others,  he  probably  yielded  to  the  prevailing  influences  of  Al-Wakidi
of  the  day,  which  tended  to  exalt  the  Prophet's  son-in-law  as  Secretary
well  as  all  the  progenitors  of  the  'Abbasid  race.  But  there  is
not  the  slightest  ground  for  doubting  that  his  character  is
equal,  if  not  superior,  to  that  of  any  other  historian  of  his
time.  Of  the  biography,  at  all  events,  compiled  by  his  Secre-
tary, Sprenger  has  well  vindicated  the  authority  and  faithful-
ness. '  There  is  no  trace,'  says  he,  '  of  a  sacrifice  of  truth  to
design,  or  of  pious  fraud,  in  his  work.  It  contains  few
miracles ;  and  even  those  which  are  recorded  in  it  admit  of
an  easy  explanation.'  Concurring  generally  in  this  praise,  I
do  not  hesitate  to  designate  the  compilation  as  the  fruit  of
an  honest  endeavour  to  bring  together  the  most  credible
authorities  current  at  the  end  of  the  second  century,  and  to
depict  the  life  of  Mohammad  with  as  much  truth  as  from  such
sources  was  possible ;  it  is  marked  by  at  least  as  great
sincerity  as  we  may  expect  to  find  in  any  extant  Moham-
madan  author.  But  Sprenger's  admiration  carries  him  too
far,  when  he  affirms  that  the  miracles  it  contains  are  either
few  in  number  or  of  easy  explanation.  They  are,  on  the
contrary,  nearly  as  numerous  as  those  we  find  in  Ibn  Hisham.
It  is  very  evident  that  the  criticism  of  Al-Wakidi  and  his
Secretary  extended  little,  if  at  all,  beyond  that  of  their  con-
temporaries. They  were  mere  compilers  of  current  traditions  ;
and  these,  if  attested  by  reputable  names,  were  received,
however  fabulous  or  extravagant,  with  a  blind  and  implicit
credulity.

IV. At-Tabari, or Abji Jd'fd^ ibn Jarir  at-Tabari,  at-Tabari

from  the  pupil  to  the  master  (by  whom  it  was  successively  taught,  or  by
whom  copied)  the  guarantee  of  the  authenticity  of  the  volume,  till  the
chain  reaches  to  the  Secretary,  Mohammad  ibn  Sa'd  himself  This
rare  MS.  having  come  into  my  possession  was  presented  (with  a  careful
digest  of  its  contents  in  English)  to  the  India  Office  Library.  A  beautiful
transcript,  made  for  my  own  use  at  Delhi,  I  purpose  depositing  in  the
Library  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  where  it  may  readily  be  con-
sulted. There  is  but  one  other  copy  believed  to  be  extant,  which  is  in
the  Library  of  Gotha.

[Ibn  Sa'd's  Great  Book  of  the  Classes  (Tabakat)  which  includes
biographies  of  famous  Muslims  down  to  his  own  time,  has  been  pub-
lished at  Leyden.  The  first  part  deals  with  the  life  of  Mohammad
down  to  the  Hijra  ;  the  second  with  his  Raids.  Both  of  these  are
referred  to  in  the  foot-notes  as  '  Ibn  Sa'd.']


Ixxxiv


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


Volume
with  bio-
graphy of
Mohammad


flourished  in  the  latter  part  of  the  third  century  of  the
Muslim  era.  The  following  is  from  Ibn  Khallikan :
'At-Tabari  was  an  Imam  (or  leader)  in  many  various
branches  of  knowledge,  such  as  Koranic  interpretation,
traditions,  jurisprudence,  history,  &c.  He  composed  some
fine  works  on  various  subjects,  and  these  productions  are
a  testimony  of  his  extensive  information  and  great  abilities.
He  was  one  of  the  Miijtaliid  Inidins  (Defenders  of  the  Faith)
as  he  judged  for  himself  and  adopted  the  opinions  of  no
particular  doctor.  .  .  .  He  is  held  to  merit  the  highest
confidence  as  a  transmitter  of  traditional  information,  and
his  history  is  the  most  authentic  and  the  most  exact  of
any.  .  .  .  He  was  born  A.H.  224  at  Amul  in  Tabarestan,  and
he  died  at  Baghdad  A.H.  310.'^

At-Tabari,  happily  styled  by  Gibbon  'the  Livy  of  the
Arabians,'  composed  annals  not  only  of  Mohammad's  life,
but  of  the  progress  of  Islam.  The  Arabic  original  of  the
latter  has  long  been  known,  but  it  commences  only  with  the
Prophet's  death.  Of  the  previous  chapters,  hitherto  available
only  through  an  untrustworthy  Persian  translation,  no  trace,
until  a  very  few  years  ago,  could  anywhere  be  found.

Here  again  the  literary  world  is  indebted  to  Dr  Sprenger,
by  Sprenger  ^^-^^^  having  been  before  the  Mutiny  deputed  by  the  Indian
Government  to  examine  the  libraries  of  Lucknow,  succeeded
in  tracing,  from  amongst  a  heap  of  neglected  manuscripts,  a
portion  of  the  long-lost  volume.^  It  begins  with  the  birth  of
Mohammad  :  but  it  terminates  with  the  siege  of  Medina,
that  is,  five  years  before  the  Prophet's  death.  The  discovery
of  this  portion  of  At-Tabari  in  its  original  language  is,  after
that  of  Al-Wakidi  and  his  Secretary,  the  most  important
event  affecting  the  biography  of  Mohammad  which  has
occurred  for  many  years. It  has  a  marked  bearing  on  the

^  Ibn  Khallikan  (De  Slane),  vol.  ii.  p.  597.

2  The  fortunate  discovery  is  thus  described  by  Sprenger  :  '  One  of
the  most  important  books  which  it  was  my  good  luck  to  find  during  my
late  mission  to  Lucknow  is  the  fourth  volume  of  the  history  of  Tabari
(who  died  in  A.H.  310),  of  which  I  believe  no  other  copy  is  known  to
exist.  It  is  a  volume  in  a  small  quarto  of  451  pages,  fifteen  lines  in  a
page.  Ten  pages  are  wanting.  The  writing  is  ancient  and  bold,  and
though  not  without  errors,  generally  very  correct.  I  should  say,  from
the  appearance,  the  copy  is  500  years  old.  The  intrinsic  merits  of  the
work  are  not  so  great  as  might  be  expected. Two-thirds  of  the  book


discovered


CH.  I.]


EARLY  HISTORIANS


Ixxxv


sufficiency  and  completeness  of  Ibn  Ishak  (as  known  to  us
through  Ibn  Hishfim)  and  of  Al-Wfikidi.  The  estimate
given  by  Sprenger  (not  an  exaggerated  one),  that  two-
thirds  of  the  work  of  At-Tabari  are  composed  of  extracts
quoted  formally  from  Ibn  Ishak  and  Al-Wakidi,  proves  not
only  that  these  two  biographers  were  in  his  day  held  as
trustworthy,  but  likewise  that  they  were  the  standard  writers
and  the  cJiief  authorities  on  the  subject,  up  to  at  least  the
close  of  the  third  century.  The  remaining  materials  of
At-Tabari,  derived  from  a  variety  of  sources,  possess,  as
observed  by  Sprenger,  a  peculiar  interest,  because  accessible
in  no  other  quarter.  Yet  these  sources  in  no  case  bear  the
character  of  a  complete  and  authoritative  biography,  but  only
of  occasional  or  miscellaneous  fragments,  nor  do  they  bring
to  light  any  new  or  important  features  in  Mohammad's  life.
Quoted  by  At-Tabari,  they  are  sometimes  valuable  as  supple-
mentary to  the  accounts  given  by  Ibn  Ishak  and  Al  Wakidi,
or  confirmatory  of  them  ;  but  they  are  oftener  symptomatic
of  the  growth  of  a  less  honest  and  scrupulous  selection  than
that  of  the  earlier  Collectors.  Now,  as  At-Tabari  was  an
intelligent  and  diligent  historian,  and  evidently  neglected
no  useful  and  trustworthy  sources  within  his  reach,  we  are
entitled  to  conclude  that,  beside  Ibn  Ishak  and  Al-Wakidi,
there  were  available  in  At-Tabari's  time  no  other  authorita-
tive works,  or  sources  of  essential  importance,  relating  to  the
biography  of  Mohammad.  Had  any  existed,  they  must  have
been  within  reach,  and  if  so  would  unquestionably  have  been
made  use  of  in  his  Annals.

To  the  three  biographies,  then,  of  Ibn  Hisham,  of
Al-Wakidi  as  rendered  by  his  Secretary,  and  of  At-
Tabari,  the  judicious  historian  of  Mohammad  will,  as  his
original  authorities,  confine himself He will also receive

consist  of  extracts  from  Ibn  Ishac  and  Wakidy,  and  only  one-third  or
thereabouts  contains  original  traditions.  Some  of  these  are  very  valu-
able, inasmuch  as  they  contain  information  not  to  be  found  anywhere
else.'  I  have  been  fortunate  enough  to  secure  this  MS.  also,  and  have
placed  it  with  that  of  Al-Wakidi  and  Ibn  Hisham  in  the  India  Office
Library.  It  has  been  used  in  editing  the  complete  works  of  At-Tabari
now  being  printed  at  Leyden.

[This  edition  is  now  complete.  It  is  arranged  in  three  series.  The
biography  of  Mohammad  is  comprised  in  Series  I.,  vol.  iii.  and  part  of
vol.  iv.]


Especially
as  proving
complete-
ness of  our
other  au-
thorities,
Ibn  Ishak
and  Al-
Wakidi


Historical

sources

recounted


Ixxxvi


SOURCES  FOR  THE  BIOGRAPHY


[INTROD.


No  subse-
quent
works
carry  his-
torical
weight


Opinion  of
Sprenger


Early
writers
alone  au-
thoritative


with  a  similar  respect,  such  traditions  in  the  general
Collections  of  the  earliest  traditionists,  Al-Bukhari,  Muslim,
At-Tirmidhi,  and  others,  as  may  bear  upon  his  subject.
But  he  will  reject  as  evidence  all  later  authors,  to  whose
so-called  traditions  he  will  not  allow  any  historical  weight
whatever.

In  the  absence  of  any  History  or  Collection  of  traditions,
compiled  before  the  accession  of  the  'Abbasids,  the  works
above  specified  present  us  with  all  the  credible  information
regarding  the  Arabian  prophet  which  mankind  are  ever
likely  to  obtain.  It  is  clear  that  our  authorities  compiled
with  zeal  and  assiduity  all  traditions  which  could  illustrate
their  subject.  They  were  contemporary  with  those  tradition-
gatherers  who  compassed  sea  and  land  in  the  enthusiastic
search  after  any  trace  of  Mohammad  yet  lingering  in  the
memories,  or  in  the  family  archives,  of  his  followers.  What-
ever authentic  information  really  existed  must  already  have
become  public  and  available.  It  cannot  be  imagined  that,
in  the  unwearied  search  of  the  second  century,  any  trust-
worthy tradition  could  have  escaped  the  Collectors;  or,
supposing  this  possible,  that  it  could  have  survived  that
age  in  an  unrecorded  shape.  Every  day  diminished  the
chance  that  any  stray  traditions  should  still  be  floating
downward  on  the  swift  and  troubled  current  of  time.  Later
historians  could  not  by  any  possibility  add  a  single  source  of
information  to  what  these  authors  have  given  us.  What  they
did  add,  and  that  abundantly,  consisted  of  worthless  and
fictitious  matter,  gathered  from  the  spurious  traditions  and
romances  of  later  times.  After  the  era  of  our  three
biographers  the  springs  of  fresh  authority  absolutely  fail.

The  verdict  of  Sprenger  is  therefore  just,  and  of  the
deepest  importance:  'To  consider  late  historians  like
Abulfeda  as  autJiorities^  and  to  suppose  that  an  account
gains  in  certainty  because  it  is  mentioned  by  several  of
them,  is  highly  uncritical ;  and  if  such  a  mistake  is  committed
by  an  Orientalist,  we  must  accuse  him  of  culpable  ignorance
in  the  history  of  Arabic  literature.'

Our  early  authors  were,  besides,  in  an  incomparably
better  position  than  men  in  later  days,  for  judging  of  the
character  and  authenticity  of  each  tradition.  However  blind
their  reception  of  the  supposed  authorities  that  lay  far  back


CH.  I.]  EARLY  HISTORIANS  Ixxxvli

close  to  the  fountain-head,  they  must  have  possessed  the
ability,  as  we  are  bound  to  concede  to  them  the  intention
and  desire,  to  test  the  credit  and  honesty  of  the  tradition-
mongers  of  their  own  age,  and  of  that  immediately  preceding.
An  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  character  and  circum-
stances of  these  would  often  afford  grounds  for  distinguishing
recently  fabricated  or  mistaken  narratives  from  ancient  and
bo7id  fide  tradition ;  and  for  rejecting  many  infirm  and
worthless  stories,  which  later  historians,  with  an  indis-
criminate appetite,  have  greedily  devoured.

I  have  thus,  as  proposed,  endeavoured  to  sketch  the  Review
original  sources  for  the  biography  of  Mohammad.  I  have
examined  the  Kor'an,  and  have  admitted  its  authority  as
an  authentic  and  contemporary  record.  I  have  inquired
into  the  origin  and  history  of  Mohammadan  tradition,  and
shown  that  it  contains  the  elements  of  truth  ;  and  I  have
endeavoured  to  indicate  some  canons,  by  which  fact  may
be  distinguished  from  the  legend  and  fiction  commingled
with  it.  I  have  enumerated  those  early  biographical
compilations  which  can  alone  be  regarded  as  worthy  of
attention,  and  have  shown  that  no  later  authors  are
possessed  of  an  original  and  independent  authority.  The
principles  thus  laid  down,  if  followed  with  sagacity,  per-
severance, and  impartiality,  will  enable  the  inquirer  to  arrive
at  a  fair  approximation  to  historical  fact.  Many  Gordian
knots  regarding  the  Prophet  of  Arabia  will  remain  unsolved,
many  paradoxes  still  vainly  excite  curiosity  and  baffle
explanation.  But  the  groundwork  of  his  career  will  be
laid  down  with  confidence ;  the  details  will  be  substantially
filled  in  with  all  reasonable  amplitude  ;  and  the  student  will
be  able  to  determine  with  certainty  the  leading  features  of  his
life  and  character.


CHAPTER II


ARABIA BEFORE THE TIME  OF MOHAMMAD


Geographi-
cal outline
of  Arabia


Western
Coast


Arid  and
inhospit-
able char-
acter of
the  soil


Arabia  is  usually  described  as  a  triangle,  having  a  right
angle  at  the  Strait  of  Bab  al-Mandeb.  It  may  be  more
correct  to  regard  it  as  of  an  oblong  shape.  The  sides
bounded  by  the  Red  Sea  on  one  hand,  and  by  the  Persian
Gulf  and  Euphrates  on  the  other,  are  the  longest;  while  the
southern  side  protracted  towards  the  Strait  of  Ormuz,  and
washed  by  the  Indian  Ocean,  is  broader  than  the  northern,
of  which  the  Syrian  confine  is  narrowed  by  the  westerly  bend
of  the  Euphrates.

Along  the  western  side  of  the  peninsula  a  chain  of  lofty
mountains  follows  closely  the  line  of  the  coast,  from  whence
the  mariner  sees  its  dismal  and  repulsive  rocks  of  reddish
sandstone  and  porphyry,  at  times  pressing  near  enough  to  be
laved  by  the  waves  of  the  sea,  at  times  receding  so  as  to  form
a  broad  margin  of  low  land,  called  the  Tihama.  Between  the
sea  and  the  crest  of  this  range  is  the  mountainous  region  of
the  Hijaz,  within  which  lie  Mecca  and  Medina.  The  hills,  as
you  recede  from  the  coast,  rise  one  above  another,  with  vales
or  Wddis  between  them,  till  the  granite  peaks  of  the  chief
range  overtop  the  whole.  The  traveller  who  has  toiled  up  the
weary  ascent  finds  to  his  surprise  that,  instead  of  a  similar
declivity  on  the  eastern  side,  he  has  reached  the  level  of  a
grand  plateau,  the  Nejd  or  elevated  central  steppe  of  Arabia,
stretching  away  towards  the  Persian  Gulf

In  this  great  peninsula,  1,400  miles  in  length,  and  half  as
many  in  breadth,  there  is  not  a  single  river  deserving  the
name.  The  south-west  quarter,  indeed,  abounds  in  perennial
streams  which,  watering  its  fields  and  groves,  have  given  to  it


CH.  II.]  EARLY  HISTORICAL  NOTICES  Ixxxix

the  name  of  the  Yemen,  '  Araby  the  Blest.' ^  But  elsewhere
the  leading  feature  is  a  weary  waste  of  sand  and  rock.  The
floods  lose  themselves  in  the  thirsty  land,  and  seldom  or
never  reach  the  sea.  But  underneath  the  dried-up  channels
a  stratum  of  water  is  often  found  which  supports  a  rich
vegetation,  and  breaks  out  here  and  there  in  springs.  Such
are  the  wadis  or  oases  '^  of  the  desert,  which,  contrasting  with
the  wild  bleak  wilderness  around,  charm  the  traveller  by  an
indescribable  freshness  and  verdure.

Until  the  7th  century,  when  Muslim  conquest  drew  aside Early  his-
the  veil,  Central  Arabia  was  an  unknown  land. Only  on  the ^°'''5^l

'  -'  notices  01

extreme  northern  and  southern  confines  did  it  touch  the  Arabia
outer  world.  In  ancient  times  notices  of  Arabia  are  few  and
meagre.  In  the  days  of  Jacob  we  find  Arab  traders  carrying
the  spiceries  of  Gilead  on  their  camels  down  to  Egypt.
During  the  reign  of  Solomon  a  naval  station  was  formed  at
Elath,  the  modern  Acaba ;  the  '  kings  of  Arabia '  and  its
merchantmen  supplied  Judaea  with  the  rarities  of  the  East;
and  so  widely  throughout  the  peninsula  was  the  fame  of  the
Jewish  monarch  noised  abroad,  that  the  queen  of  Sheba  came
from  the  far  south  to  visit  him.  In  the  reign  of  Augustus,
^lius  Gallus,  starting  with  a  Roman  army  from  the  northern
shores  of  the  Red  Sea,  penetrated  to  the  south  probably  as
far  as  Ma'reb  and  Saba ;  but  after  some  months  was  forced,
by  treachery  and  scarcity  of  water,  to  retrace  his  steps.
Comparatively  modern  as  is  this  expedition  in  the  annals  of
Arabia,  not  a  vestige  of  it  is  traceable  in  the  national
traditions  and  poetry  of  Arabia ;  and  (stranger  still)  with
very  few  exceptions  it  has  been  found  impossible  to  identify
the  many  names  recorded  by  Pliny  and  Strabo  in  their
account  of  the  invasion  with  any  known  localities  or  tribes.^

But  though  thus  hidden  for  long  ages  from  external  view. Caravan
we  know  that  a  great  stream  of  trade  was  all  the  time  passing
through  the peninsula,  which made  the  Arabs  in  fact  the

^  [Al- Yemen  really  means  '  the  South  Land.'  '  The  Blest '  is  from  the
Latin  Felix,  which  again  comes  from  the  'Apa/3ta  Ev8ai/j.wv  of  Strabo,
which  itself  is  a  mistranslation  of  Yemen  as  if  it  were  Yumn,  'good
fortune.']

2  [Oasis  is  probably  nothing  else  than  the  Arabic  word  7Vcld7,  though
it  has  come  to  mean  something  different.]

^  [But  cf.  Caussin  de  Perceval,  Essai  sur  PHistoire  des  Arabes,  vol.  i.
P-  73  ]


trade


xe


ARABIA  BEFORE  MOHAMMAD


[INTROD.


Two  routes

through

Arabia


Mercantile
prosperity
of  Arabia


carriers  of  the  world  between  the  east  and  west.  In  those
days  the  sea  was  dreaded,  and  commerce  confined  almost
exclusively  to  the  land.  A  continent,  now  the  greatest
obstacle  to  traffic,  was  then  its  chief  facility.  The  steppes  of
Central  Asia  and  Arabia  were  the  ocean  of  the  ancients,  and
companies  of  camels  their  fleets.  But  the  way  was  long  and
perilous ;  and  hence  the  necessity  for  caravans  travelling  at
fixed  periods  and  by  determined  routes.  '  The  course  of  the
caravan,'  says  Heeren,  *  was  not  a  matter  of  free  choice,  but
of  established  custom.  In  the  vast  steppes  of  sandy  deserts,
which  they  had  to  traverse,  nature  had  sparingly  allotted  to
the  traveller  a  few  scattered  places  of  rest,  where  under  the
shade  of  palm  trees,  and  beside  the  cool  fountains  at  their
feet,  the  merchant  and  his  beast  of  burden  might  enjoy  the
refreshment  rendered  necessary  by  so  much  suffering.  Such
places  of  repose  became  entrepots  of  commerce,  and  not
unfrequently  the  sites  of  temples  and  sanctuaries,  under  the
protection  of  which  the  merchant  prosecuted  his  trade,  and  to
which  the  pilgrim  resorted.^

Through  Arabia  there  were  two  main  routes  between
Syria  and  the  Indian  Ocean.  One  struck  north  from
Hadramaut  to  Gerra,  the  modern  Lachsa,  on  the  Persian
Gulf,  and  thence  by  Palmyra  to  Palestine  and  Tyre.  The
western  (with  which  we  are  more  immediately  concerned)
started  from  the  same  quarter,  and  ran  parallel  with  the  Red
Sea,  avoiding  on  the  one  hand  the  parched  deserts  of  Nejd,
and  the  impracticable  cliffs  of  the  coast  upon  the  other.
Mecca,  the  ancient  Macoraba,  was  probably  the  half-way
station  between  Arabia  Felix  and  Arabia  Petraea.  The
traffic  afforded  a  wide  field  of  employment  to  the  Arab  tribes.
Some  settled  in  the  various  emporia,  and  became  traders  on
their  own  account.  Others,  without  abandoning  their
nomad  habits,  were  carriers  of  the  trade.

The  commerce  assumed  great  dimensions,  and  enriched
the  nation.  About  600  B.C.  Ezekiel's  denunciation  of  haughty
Tyre  marks  the  busy  intercourse  which  then  replenished  the
Phenician  markets  with  the  products  of  Arabia  and  the  East.2

1  Heere?is  Researches  :  Africa,  vol.  i.  p.  23.  The  concluding  sentence
bears  upon  the  origin  and  rise  of  Mecca.  But  it  will  still  be  a  question,
which  had  the  priority,  the  temple  or  the  mercantile  station  ?

^  Ezek.  xxvii.  19-24,  which  Heeren  translates  :  '  IVadan  and  Javan


CH.  II.]


CARAVAN  ROUTES


results


Several  centuries  later,  we  learn  from  Roman  writers  that  the
Arabs  of  the  Hljaz  still  carried  on  the  same  traffic ;  and,
which  is  remarkable,  the  number  of  stages  from  Hadramaut
to  Ayla,  given  by  them  as  seventy,  corresponds  exactly  with
the  number  at  the  present  day.  From  the  stately  ruins
which  in  the  Syrian  desert  still  denote  the  sites  of  ancient
emporia,  some  conception  may  be  formed  of  the  prosperity
and  wealth  of  the  merchant  princes  inhabiting  them.  And,
no  doubt,  at  the  southern  terminus  also  there  were  in  Yemen
and  Hadramaut  cities  which  might  vie,  though  in  a  ruder  and
simpler  way,  with  the  queenly  Palmyra.

It  was  an  evil  hour  for  Arabia  when  Roman  enterprise,  Failure  of
early  in  the  Christian  era,  established  a  maritime  traffic  from  ^^^  ^^g^^.
Egypt  direct  to  the  Yemen  and  the  East,  and  thus  inflicted  a  trous
fatal  blow  on  the  caravan  trade  of  the  peninsula.  The  land
commerce  melted  away,  and  the  mercantile  stations  were
deserted.  Such,  after  the  lapse  of  sixteen  centuries,  is  the
tale  which  the  ruins  of  Petra,  Jerash,  and  Philadelphia  still
attest.  The  drying  up  of  the  tide  of  merchandise  which  from
time  immemorial  had  fertilised  Arabia,  and  the  abandonment
of  many  populous  cities  dependent  on  it,  cannot  fail  to  have
caused  widespread  disorganisation  and  distress.  The  Bedawi
carriers  might  betake  themselves  to  their  desert  wastes  again  ;
but  the  settled  population,  with  no  such  resource,  were  forced
to  emigrate  in  quest  of  sustenance  elsewhere.  To  this  cause
may  most  probably  be  traced  those  great  emigrations  from
the  south  of  Koda'a  and  Azd  tribes,  which  tradition  tells  us
took  place  in  the  second  century.  These  all  tended  north-
wards, some  to  Mecca  and  Syria,  some  to  Central  Arabia,  and
others  to  the  Persian  Gulf  and  Al-Hlra.

brought  thee,  from  Sanaa,  sivord  blades,  cassia  and  cinnamon,  in  exchange
for  thy  wares.  The  merchants  of  Saba  attd  of  Raatna  traded  with  thee ;
the  best  spices,  precious  stones,  arid  gold  brought  tJiey  to  thee  for  thy  wares.
Haran,  Canna,  Aden,  Saba,  traded  with  thee.'  He  adds  :  '  Some  of  these
places,  as  Aden,  Canna,  and  Haran,  all  celebrated  seaports  on  the
Indian  Sea,  as  well  as  Saba  (or  Mariaba)  and  Sanaa  still  the  capital  of
Yemen,  have  retained  their  name  unchanged  to  the  present  day  ;  the  site
of  others,  as  Wadan,  on  the  Straits  of  Bab  el  Mandcb,  rest  only  on
probable  conjecture.  These  accurate  statements  of  the  prophet  at  all
events  prove  what  a  special  knowledge  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine  had
of  Happy  Arabia,  and  how  great  and  active  the  intercourse  with  that
country  must  have  been.' — Hecreris  As.  Res.  vol.  ii.  p.  98


Emigration
northwards


ARABIA  BEFORE  MOHAMMAD


[iNTROD.


Kingdoms
of  Ghassan
and  of
Al-Hira


Their  de-
cadence in
the  seventh
century


There  were  but  a  few  points  at  which,  in  ancient  times,
Arabia  touched  the  outer  world.  The  northern  region,
stretching  from  Syria  to  the  Euphrates,  was  occupied  in  the
2nd  century  by  some  of  those  tribes  which  had,  according  to
native  tradition,  about  that  time  immigrated  from  the  south,
and  of  whom  we  frequently  hear  in  the  later  annals  of  the
Roman  empire.  To  the  west  in  the  Syrian  desert,  with
their  capital  at  Palmyra,  was  the  dynasty  of  the  Ghassanids  ;
and  to  the  east,  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  the  kingdom
of  Al-Hira  ;  the  former,  as  a  rule,  adhered  to  the  Roman,  the
latter  to  the  Persian,  empire.  At  some  points  we  can  even
identify  the  heroes  of  Arab  story  with  those  of  western
history.  Thus,  'Odheina  and  Zebba  of  Tadmor  are,  without
doubt,  the  Odenathus  and  Zenobia  of  Palmyra.  In  the
marvellous  tales  of  Zebba,  her  beauty,  wealth,  and  knowledge
of  many  languages,  and  her  capture  at  the  tunnel  which  she
had  constructed  under  the  Euphrates,  we  can  dimly  read  the
story  of  Zenobia,  her  splendid  reign,  her  rebellion  and
defence  of  Palmyra,  and  her  seizure  by  the  Romans  as  she
endeavoured  to  escape  across  the  river.  The  princes  of  Al-
Hlra,  again,  are  often  mentioned  by  the  Greek  and  Roman
historians,  in  the  wars  of  the  5th  and  6th  centuries,  as
adherents  of  the  Persian  cause.  Suddenly  as  a  thunder-
cloud their  troops  would  darken  some  fated  spot  on  the
Roman  border,  and  sweeping  in  their  train  devastation,
captivity,  and  death,  as  suddenly  disappear,  scorning  pursuit,
and  leaving  no  trace,  but  in  their  ravages,  behind.

The  dynasty  of  Palmyra,  with  the  western  tribes,  had
embraced  Christianity  in  the  time  of  Constantine ;  to  the
east  our  Faith  was  later  of  gaining  ground,  and  indeed  was
not  adopted  by  the  court  of  Al-Hira  till  near  the  end  of  the
6th  century.  Early  in  the  7th,  that  kingdom  fell  from  its
dignity  as  an  independent  power,  and  became  a  satrapy  of
Persia.  The  Ghassanid  rule  also  broke  up  into  various  petty
sections,  and  eventually  merged  into  the  Roman  empire.
The  Persian  inroads  in  the  reign  of  Phocas  and  early  years
of  Heraclius,  gave  the  Syrian  tribes  a  shock  from  which  they
never  recovered.  Thus  the  decadence  of  kingdoms  on  both
sides  of  the  desert  was  destined  to  smooth  the  victorious
path  of  the  Arabian  conqueror.

Turning  now  to  the  south,  we  find  Hadramaut  and  the


CH.  II.]  PRINCIPAL  STATES  xciii

Yemen  ruled  by  the  Himyarites,  a  dynasty  of  which  tradition  Kingdom
carries  the  origin  back  into  the  obscurity  of  ages.  In  the  maurand^
4th  century  an  embassy  from  Constantius  visited  this  court,  the  Yemen
headed  by  a  Christian  bishop.  In  523  A.D.  the  throne  was
seized  by  a  bigoted  and  dissolute  usurper.  A  proselyte  to
Judaism,  he  perpetrated  frightful  cruelties  on  the  Christians
of  the  neighbouring  province  of  Nejran  who  refused  to
embrace  his  faith.  Trenches  filled  with  combustible  materials
were  lighted,  and  the  martyrs  cast  into  the  flames.  Tradi-
tion gives  the  number  thus  miserably  burned,  or  slain  by
the  sword,  at  twenty  thousand.  However  exaggerated,  there
can  be  no  doubt  of  the  bloody  character  of  the  tyrant's  reign.
An  intended  victim  escaped  to  the  court  of  Justinian,  and,
holding  up  a  half-burned  Gospel,  invoked  retribution.  At
the  Emperor's  desire  the  Negus  crossed  from  Ethiopia  and
defeated  the  usurper ;  and  thus  the  Himyarites  were  sup-
planted by  a  Christian  government  under  an  Abyssinian
viceroy.  But  African  rule  was  distasteful  to  the  people  ;  an
appeal  was  made  to  Persia,  and  before  the  end  of  the  6th
century  the  Abyssinians  were  expelled,  and  the  Yemen  sank
into  a  simple  dependency  of  Persia.

Thus,  whether  we  look  to  the  north  or  the  south,  it  was Arabia  be-
but  the  farther  outskirts  of  the  Peninsula  which  came  into  r"^^ 7

hammad  un-
even casual contact  with the  civilised  world. The  rest  of  known  to

Arabia  was  absolutely  unknown;  and  excepting  through  the  ^,0^^^'^*^'^

medium  of  countrymen  engaged  in  merchandise,  or  settled

on  the  confines  of  Syria,  the  Arabs  themselves  had  but  little

knowledge  of  anything  beyond  their  own  deserts. For  any

community  of  interest  with  nations  beyond,  they  might  have

been  at  the  very  antipodes  of  the  Roman  empire. It  is  not

till the 5th century  that  native  tradition,  as  preserved by

Mohammadan  writers,  begins  to  shed  a  fitful  and  shadowy

light upon the political and religious condition of the

country. Before,  therefore,  turning  to  Mecca,  we  shall  take

a rapid survey of  Arabia at  the period  of  Mohammad's

appearance.

The  habits  of  the  nomad  tribes  roaming  over  the  Peninsula Political

are  singularly  changeless  ; and  Arabia,  as  we  find  it  in  the  ^°"||'"o"

6th  century,  differs  little  from  the  Arabia  of  Abraham  and Peninsula

of  Job. The leading  feature  has  ever  been  impatience  of

restraint, and the consequent independence of the clan,


ARABIA  BEFORE  MOHAMMAD


[INTROD.


Political
and  re-
ligious
state  of
Arabia

Subdivi-
sion and  in-
dependence
of  Arab
tribes  a  for-
midable
obstacle  to
union


the  fainily,  and  the  individual.  The  affairs  of  each  tribe,  or
combination  of  tribes,  are  guided  by  a  Sheikh,  their  popular
representative ;  but  there  is  no  bond  that  of  necessity  holds
them  permanently  together,  and  dissentients  may  secede  at
pleasure.  With  a  code  of  honour  bordering  on  jealousy,
personal  hostility  and  tribal  warfare  are  ever  liable  to  occur ;
new  combinations  arise,  and  old  ones  disappear ;  some  cling
to  their  ancestral  haunts,  and  some,  with  characteristic
restlessness,  roam  abroad,  or  even  migrate  to  distant  parts.
On  the  other  hand,  a  strong  cohesive  power,  counteracting
these  disintegrating  tendencies,  conserves  the  tribal  constitu-
tion, binds  together  the  members  of  each  body,  and  interests
them  in  its  safety  and  honour.  So  strong,  indeed,  is  this
conservatism,  that  after  the  lapse  of  twelve  centuries  we  find
at  the  present  day  some  tribes,  as  the  Beni  'Adwan  and
Hawazin,  the  same  in  name  and  lineage,  and  inhabiting  the
same  localities,  as  in  the  days  of  Mohammad.

The  first  peculiarity,  then,  which  attracts  our  attention  is
the  subdivision  of  the  Arabs  into  innumerable  bodies,
governed  by  the  same  code  of  honour  and  morals,  exhibiting
the  same  manners,  speaking  for  the  most  part  the  same
language,  but  each  independent  of  the  others ;  restless  and
often  at  war  amongst  themselves  ;  and  even  where  united  by
blood  or  by  interest,  ever  ready  on  some  insignificant  cause
to  separate  and  give  way  to  an  implacable  hostility.  Thus
at  the  era  of  Islam  the  retrospect  of  Arabian  history  exhibits,
as  in  the  kaleidoscope,  an  ever-varying  state  of  combination
and  repulsion,  such  as  had  hitherto  rendered  abortive  any
attempt  at  a  general  union.  The  freedom  of  Arabia  from
foreign  conquest  was  owing  not  so  much  to  the  difficulties  of
its  parched  and  pathless  wilds,  as  to  the  endless  array  of
isolated  clans,  and  the  absence  of  any  head  or  chief  power
which  might  be  made  the  object  of  subjugation.  The
problem  had  yet  to  be  solved,  by  what  force  these  tribes
could  be  subdued,  or  drawn  to  one  common  centre ;  and  it
was  solved  by  Mohammad,  who  struck  out  a  political  system
of  his  own,  universally  acceptable  because  derived  from
elements  common  to  all  Arabia ;  vigorous,  because  based
upon  the  energy  of  a  new  religious  life;  rapidly  and  irre-
pressibly  expansive,  because  borne  forward  by  inducements,
irresistible  to  an  Arab,  of  war  and  plunder.


CH.  II.] POLITICAL  AND  RELIGIOUS  CONDITION  xcv

The  prospects  of  Arabia  before  the  rise  of  Mohammad Small  pros-
were  as  unfavourable  to  religious  reform  as  they  were  to ^elMou
political  union  or  national  regeneration. The  foundation  of  reform
Arab  faith  was  a  deep-rooted idolatry,  which  for  centuries
had  stood  proof,  with  no  palpable  symptom  of  decay,  against
every attempt at evangelisation from Egypt and Syria.
Several  causes increased  the  insensibility  of  Arabia  to  the Christi-
Gospel. A  broad  margin  of  hostile  Judaism  on  the  northern ^"n[^eTb"
frontier neutralised the effects of Christian teaching,  and Judaism
afforded  shelter  to  the  paganism  beyond. Thus  Jewish  influ-
ence spread  far  towards  the  south,  and  was  there  supported
by  the  powerful  Jewish  settlement  in  the  Yemen,  which  at
times  even  sought  to  proselytise  the  neighbouring  tribes.

But  more  than  this,  the  idolatry  of  Mecca  had  formed  a Combina-
compromise  with Judaism,  and  had  admitted  enousfh  of  its V°j  ^".^

,  ,  ,  r  Judaical

legends,  and  perhaps  of  its  tenets  also,  to  steel  the  national  legends
mind  against  the  appeal  of  Christianity.  Idolatry,  simple
and  naked,  may  be  comparatively  powerless  against  the
attacks  of  reason  and  the  Gospel ;  but,  aided  by  some
measure  of  truth,  it  can  maintain  its  ground  against  the
most  urgent  persuasion.  To  advance  the  authority  of
Abraham  for  the  worship  of  the  Ka'ba,  and  vaunt  his  legacy
of  divinely  inculcated  rites,  would  be  a  triumphant  reply  to
the  invitations  either  of  Judaism  or  of  Christianity.  More-
over, the  Christianity  of  the  7th  century  was  itself  decrepit
and  corrupt.  It  was  disabled  by  contending  schisms,  and
had  substituted  the  puerilities  of  superstition  for  the  pure
and  expansive  faith  of  the  early  ages.

Northern  Arabia,  long  the  battle-field  of  Persia  and  the Unsettled
Empire, was peculiarly unfavourable to Christian effort. f[°"^'^''  *"

11  11  •  r 1  ^"^  north

Alternately  swept  by  the  armies  of  the  Chosroes  and  of
Constantinople,  of  Al-Hira  and  the  Ghassanids,  the  Syrian
frontier  presented  little  opportunity  for  the  advance  of
peaceful  Christianity.

The  vagrant  habits  of  the Nomads  themselves  eluded Habits  of
the importunity of missionary endeavour : while their ^^^  Arabs

'■  "^  •'  '  opposed  to

haughty  temper and vindictive  code  equally resented the Christi-

peaceful  and  forgiving  precepts  of  the  Gospel. A  nominal ^"'^^

adhesion  to  Christianity,  as  to  any  other  religion,  may  indeed

be  obtained  without  participation  in  its  spirit  or  subjection

to  its  moral  requirements ;  but  such  formal  submission  could


ARABIA  BEFORE  MOHAMMAD


[iNTROD.


Political
influence  of
Christi-
anity from
without.
I.  From
the  North


2.  From

the  North-
east


3.  From
the  South


4.  From
the  West


The  penin-
sula pre-
sented no
prospect  of
hopeful
change


have  resulted  alone  from  the  political  supremacy  of  a
Christian  power,  not  from  the  persuasion  of  a  religious
agency.  Let  us  inquire,  then,  what  political  inducements  at
this  time  bore  upon  Arabia  from  without.

To  the  North,  we  find  that  Egypt  and  Syria,  representing
the  Roman  empire,  exercised  at  the  best  but  a  remote
influence  upon  Arabian  affairs  ;  and  even  that  was  neutralised
by  the  victories  of  Persia.  The  weight  of  Constantinople,  if
ever  brought  to  bear  directly  upon  Arabia,  was  but  lightly  and
transiently  felt.  The  kingdom  of  Ghassan,  on  the  borders  of
Syria,  was  indeed  at  once  Arabian  and  Christian,  but  it  yielded
to  Al-Hira  the  palm  of  supremacy,  and  never  exercised  any
important  bearing  on  the  affairs  and  policy  of  central  Arabia.

Turning  to  the  North-east,  we  observe  that  the  prospects
of  Christianity  had  improved  by  the  conversion  of  the  court
of  Al-Hira  and  many  of  its  subject  tribes.  But  Al-Hira
itself  was  only  a  vassal ;  for  its  native  dynasty  had  lately
been  replaced  by  the  direct  government  of  Persia,  a  strong
opponent  of  Christianity.  Thus  the  authority  of  Pagan
Persia  over  the  northern  and  eastern  Arabs  more  than
counterbalanced  the  influence  of  Christianity  in  the  west.

To  the  South,  the  Faith  had  suffered  an  important  loss.
The  prestige  of  a  Christian  monarchy,  though  but  an  Ethi-
opian, was  gone ;  and  in  its  room  had  arisen  a  Persian
satrapy,  under  the  shadow  of  which  the  ancient  Himyarite
idolatry,  and  once  royal  Judaism,  flourished  apace.^  On  the
West  there  lay  the  Christian  kingdom  of  Abyssinia,  but  it
was  divided  from  Arabia  by  the  Red  Sea ;  and  the  Negro
race,  even  if  brought  into  closer  contact,  could  never  have
exercised  much  influence  upon  the  Arab  mind.

Thus  the  star  of  Christianity  was  not  in  the  ascendant :
in  some  respects  it  was  declining.  There  was  no  hope  from
external  aid  ;  and,  apart  from  such  aid,  the  strong  influence
of  Judaism,  and  almost  universal  submission  to  national
idolatry,  rendered  the  conversion  of  Arabia  a  doubtful  and  a

^  Gibbon  attaches,  perhaps,  too  much  importance  to  the  change :
'This  narrative,' he  says,  'of  obscure  and  remote  events  is  not  foreign
to  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Roman  empire.  If  a  Christian  power  had
been  maintained  in  Arabia,  Mohammad  must  have  been  crushed  in  his
cradle,  and  Abyssinia  would  have  prevented  a  revolution,  which  has
changed  the  civil  and  religious  state  of  the  world.' — Decline  and  Fall,
chap.  xlii.


CH.  II.]


INFLUENCE  OF  CHRISTIANITY


distant  prospect.  During  the  youth  of  Mohammad,  the
aspect  of  the  Peninsula  was  strongly  conservative ;  perhaps
never  at  any  previous  time  was  reform  more  hopeless.

Causes  are  sometimes  conjured  up  to  account  for  results
produced  by  an  agent  apparently  inadequate  to  effect  them.
Mohammad  arose,  and  forthwith  the  Arabs  were  aroused  to
a  new  and  a  spiritual  faith ;  hence  the  conclusion  that
Arabia  was  fermenting  for  the  change,  and  prepared  to
adopt  it.  To  us,  calmly  reviewing  the  past,  pre- Islamite
history  belies  the  assumption.  After  five  centuries  of
Christian  evangelisation,  we  can  point  to  but  a  sprinkling
here  and  there  of  Christian  converts; — the  Beni'l-Harith  of
Nejran  ;  the  Beni  Hanifa  of  Al-Yemama  ;  some  of  the  Beni
Tai'  at  Teima ;  and  hardly  any  more.  Judaism,  vastly  more
powerful,  had  exhibited  spasmodic  efforts  at  proselytism  ;
but,  as  an  active  and  converting  agent,  the  Jewish  faith  was
no  longer  operative.  In  fine,  viewed  in  a  religious  aspect,
the  surface  of  Arabia  had  been  now  and  then  gently  rippled
by  the  feeble  efforts  of  Christianity  ;  the  sterner  influences  of
Judaism  had  been  occasionally  visible  in  a  deeper  and  more
troubled  current ;  but  the  tide  of  indigenous  idolatry  and
Ishmaelite  superstition,  setting  strongly  from  every  quarter
towards  the  Ka'ba,  gave  ample  evidence  that  the  faith  and
worship  of  Mecca  held  the  Arab  mind  in  a  rigorous  and
undisputed  thraldom.

Yet,  even  amongst  a  people  thus  enthralled,  there  existed
elements  which  a  master  mind,  seeking  the  regeneration  of
Arabia,  might  work  upon.  Christianity  was  well  known ;
living  examples  there  were  amongst  the  native  tribes ;  the
New  Testament  was  respected,  if  not  revered,  as  a  book  that
claimed  to  be  divine ;  in  most  quarters  it  was  easily
accessible,  and  some  of  its  facts  and  doctrines  admitted
without  dispute.  The  tenets  of  Judaism  were  even  more
familiar,  and  its  legends,  if  not  its  sacred  writings,  known
throughout  the  peninsula.  The  worship  of  Mecca  was
founded  upon  patriarchal  traditions  common  at  once  to
Christianity  and  Judaism.  Here,  then,  was  ground  on  which
the  spiritual  fulcrum  might  be  planted  ;  a  wide  field  in  close
connection  with  the  truth,  inviting  scrutiny  and  upward
movement.  No  doubt,  many  an  Arab  heart,  before
]\Iohammad,  had  responded to the  voice,  casually  heard  it


Arabia
obstinately
fixed  in  the
profession
of  idolatry


Still  ma-
terial pre-
pared by
Judaism
and  Chris-
tianity


xcviii  ARABIA  BEFORE  MOHAMMAD  [introd.

may  be,  of  Christianity  and  of  Judaism  :  many  an  honest
Bedawi  spirit  confessed  of  the  law  that  it  was  just  and  good :
many  an  aspiring  intellect,  as  the  eye  travelled  over  the
spangled  expanse  of  heaven,  concluded  that  the  universe
was  supported  by  ONE  great  Being  ;  and  in  time  of  need,
many  an  earnest  soul  had  accepted  with  joy  the  Christian
sacrifice.  Koss,  bishop  of  Nejran,  was  not  the  first,  nor
perhaps  the  most  eloquent  and  earnest,  of  Arab  preachers
who  sought  to  turn  their  fellows  from  the  error  of  their  ways,
and  reasoned  with  them  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and
judgment  to  come.
It  was  Mo-  The material for a great change was here. But it

w^rked^th  *^^'*'^*^  ^°  ^^  wrought;  and  Mohammad  was  the  workman,

material  The  fabric  of  Islam  no  more  necessarily  grew  out  of  the
into  shape  g^ate  of  Arabia,  than  a  gorgeous  texture  grows  from  the
slender  meshes  of  silken  filament ;  or  the  stately  ship  from
unhewn  timber  of  the  forest ;  or  the  splendid  palace  from
rude  masses  of  rock.  Had  Mohammad,  stern  to  his  early
convictions,  followed  the  leading  of  Jewish  and  Christian
truth,  and  inculcated  upon  his  fellows  their  simple  doctrine,
there  might  have  been  a  'Saint  Mohammad' — more  likely
a  'Mohammad  the  Martyr' — laying  the  foundation
stone  of  the  Arabian  Church.  But  then  (so  far  as  human
probabilities  and  analogy  indicate)  Arabia  would  not  have
been  convulsed  by  his  preaching  to  its  centre,  or  even  any
considerable  portions  of  it  converted.  Instead  of  all  this,
he,  with  consummate  skill,  devised  a  machinery,  by  the
adaptive  energy  of  which  he  gradually  shaped  the  broken
and  disconnected  masses  of  the  Arab  race  into  an  har-
monious whole,  a  body  politic  endowed  with  life  and  vigour.
To  the  Christian,  he  was  as  a  Christian  ;  to  the  Jew  he
became  as  a  Jew ;  to  the  idolater  of  Mecca,  as  a  reformed
worshipper  of  the  Ka'ba.  And  thus,  by  unparalleled  art  and
a  rare  supremacy  of  mind,  he  persuaded  the  whole  of  Arabia,
Pagan,  Jew,  and  Christian,  to  follow  his  steps  with  docile
submission.

Such  a  process  is  that  o^  the  workman  shaping  his  material.
It  is  not  that  of  the  material  shaping  its  own  form,  much  less
(as  some  would  hold)  moulding  the  workman  himself.  It  was
Mohammad  that  formed  Islam  ;  it  was  not  Islam,  or  any  pre-
existing Muslim  spirit,  that  moulded  Mohammad.


CHAPTER Til

PRE-HISTORICAL NOTICES OF MECCA

We  shall  in  this  chapter  consider  such  mythical  and
traditional  notices  of  Mecca  as  may  throw  light  on  the
origin  of  the  Ka'ba  and  its  worship,  and  on  the  ancestry  of
Mohammad.

Native  legend  ascribes  the  building  of  the  Ka'ba  to  Legendary
Abraham.^  Hagar  (so  the  story  runs)  wandering  in  the  Q°f^]Jig'(,"|
desert  with  her  boy,  reaches  at  length  the  valley  of  Mecca,  by  Ishmael
In  the  agony  of  thirst  she  paces  hurriedly  to  and  fro  between
the  little  hills  of  the  Safa  and  the  Merwa,  seeking  for  water.
Ishmael,  whom  she  had  left  crying  on  the  ground,  kicks
around  him  in  childish  passion,  when  behold  the  spot  bubbles
forth  beneath  his  feet  in  a  clear  stream  of  sweet  water.  It  is
the  v/ell  Zemzem.  Amalekites  and  Arab  tribes  from  the
Yemen,  attracted  by  the  fountain,  settle  there ;  Ishmael
grows  up  amongst  them,  and  marries  the  daughter  of  their
chief  In  fulfilment  of  the  divine  command  received  in  a
vision,  Abraham  is  about  to  offer  up  his  son  upon  an
eminence  in  the  neighbourhood,  when  his  arm  is  stayed  and
a  vicarious  sacrifice  accepted.  On  a  subsequent  visit,  the
patriarch,  assisted  by  his  son,  erected  the  temple  where  it
now  stands,  and  reconstituted  the  primeval  rites  of
pilgrimage.

Descending  from  this  myth,  we  find  little  more  than  bare  Traditional
genealogical  tables  (borrowed  palpably  from  the  Jews)  in  history  to
which  it  is  sought  to  trace  up  generation  by  generation  the
Koreishite  stock  to  Abraham.  It  is  not  till  we  reach  the
Christian  era  that  tradition  commences,  and  soon  begins  to
teem  with  tales  and  legends  in  which,  mingled  with  a  mass
of  fiction,  there  may  be  grains  of  fact.  The  guardianship  of
1  At-Tabari,  i.  270  ff.,  1130  ff.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  2r  ff.


EARLY  HISTORY  OF  MECCA


[INTROD.


Kosai  as-
sumes gov-
ernment ;
middle  of
5th  century


Ka'ba  (belonging  to  the  Koreishite  ancestry  in  virtue  of
descent  from  Ishmael)  was  usurped  by  the  tribe  of  Jurhum,
which  remained  long  in  possession  of  the  temple  and
supremacy  of  Mecca.^  In  the  2nd  century  some  of  the
numerous  tribes  migrating  (as  we  have  seen)  from  the
Yemen  northwards,  settled  in  the  vicinity.  Most  of  these
passed  on  eventually  to  Medina,  Syria,  and  Al-Hira ;  but  a
remnant,  called  Khoza'a,  remained  behind,  and  in  their
turn  seized  upon  the  government  of  Mecca.-  The  Jurhum
dynasty  was  thus  ousted  in  the  3rd  century,  and  their  last
king,  on  retiring  from  Mecca,  buried  in  the  well  Zemzem  his
treasures ;  among  these  were  two  gazelles  of  gold,  and
swords  and  suits  of  armour,  of  which  we  shall  hear  more
hereafter.

For  200  years  the  Khoza'a  remained  masters  of  Mecca,
certain  inferior  offices  of  the  Ka'ba  being  alone  retained  by
families  of  the  original  stock.  It  was  reserved  for  Kosai,  a
bold  adventurer  of  Koreish,  to  supplant  the  usurpers,  and  by
force  of  arms  resume  for  its  rightful  owners  the  supreme
control  of  Mecca.^  Gathering  his  kindred  around  him,  he
settled  them  in  the  sacred  valley,  enlarged  the  city,  and
assigned  to  each  family  a  separate  quarter.  Near  the  Ka'ba
he  built  a  council-house  in  which,  under  his  presidency,  was
transacted  all  important  business.  From  thence  caravans
set  out ;  there  the  returning  traveller  first  alighted ;  and
there,  when  war  was  waged,  the  banner  was  mounted  and
consigned  to  the  standard  bearer  by  Kosai  or  his  sons,
Kosai  also  assumed  the  chief  offices  connected  with  the
local  worship.  The  keys  of  the  Ka'ba  were  in  his  hands  ;
the  giving  of  drink  to  the  pilgrims  and  providing  them  with
food  were  his  sole  prerogative,  which,  administered  with
princely  hospitality,  invested  his  name  in  the  eyes  of  all
Arabia  with  a  peculiar  lustre.  The  assumption  of  these
functions  consolidated  the  power  of  Kosai  as  the  Sheikh  of
Mecca  and  chief  of  the  surrounding  territory ;  and  tradition
adds  that  'his  ordinances  were  obeyed  and  venerated,  as
people  obey  and  venerate  the  observances  of  religion,  both
before  and  after  his  death.'  This  same  Kosai  was  ancestor,
at  the  fifth  remove,  of  the  Arabian  Prophet.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  71  f.  '  Ibid.  p.  75.

3  At-Tabari,  i.  1092  flf  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  36  fif.


CH III. J


THE  KA'BA


The  ceremonies  of  pilgrimage  thus  handed  down  by
Kosai  were  substantially  the  same  as  we  find  them  in  the
time  of  Mohammad  ;  and,  with  some  modifications  intro-
duced by  Mohammad  himself,  the  same  as  practised  at  the
present  day.  The  centre  of  them  all  is  the  Ka'ba,  to  visit
which,  to  kiss  the  Black  Stone  imbedded  in  the  eastern
corner,  and  to  make  seven  circuits  round  the  sacred  edifice,
is  at  all  times  and  seasons,  meritorious.  The  '  Lesser
pilgrimage'  (otherwise  called  ^Oinra)^  in  addition  to  these
acts,  includes  the  passing  to  and  fro  with  hasty  steps  seven
times  between  the  eminences  of  the  Safa  and  the  Merwa.
This  may  be  performed  with  merit  at  any  season  of  the
year,  but  especially  in  the  sacred  month  of  Rejeb.  Before
entering  the  holy  territory,  the  votary  assumes  the  pilgrim
garb,  and  at  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremonies  shaves  his
head  and  pares  his  nails.

The  'Greater  pilgrimage'  can  be  performed  only  in  the
holy  month  Dhu'l-Hijja.  In  addition  to  the  ceremonies  of
the  Lesser,  it  embraces  the  tour  of  'Arafat,  a  small  granite
hill  in  the  mountains,  ten  or  twelve  miles  east  of  Mecca.
The  pilgrims,  starting  from  Mecca  on  the  8th  of  the  month,
stay  the  following  day  at  '  Arafat,  and  having  ascended  the
hill,  hasten  back  the  same  evening  three  or  four  miles  to
Al-Muzdelifa.  Next  day,  returning  half-way  to  Mecca,  they
stay  at  Mina,  where  they  spend  the  two  or  three  succeeding
days.  Small  stones  are  cast  by  the  pilgrims  at  certain
objects  in  the  Mina  valley,  and  the  pilgrimage  is  concluded
by  the  sacrifice  of  victims  there.

The  Harani  or  sacred  tract  several  miles  round  Mecca
was  hallowed  and  inviolable,  and  had  from  time  immemorial
been  so  regarded.  Four  months  of  the  year  were  held
sacred  ;  three  consecutive,  and  one  separate.^  During  this
period  war  was  by unanimous consent suspended, hostile

1  The  consecutive  months  were  the  last  two  of  the  Old  year,  and  the
first  of  the  New  ;  the  other  was  the  seventh,  Rejeb.

An  innovation  was  introduced  (as  is  said,  by  Kosai)  by  which  the  first
rrionth  of  the  year  might  be  commuted  into  the  second,  i.e.  Moharram
into  Safar.  Kosai  may  have  wished,  by  abridging  the  long  three  months'
recess  of  peace,  to  humour  the  warlike  Arabs,  as  well  as  to  obtain  for
himself  the  power  of  holding  a  month  either  sacred  or  secular  as  might
best  suit  his  purpose.  The  office  of  intercalation  and  commutation  was
called  Nasd'j  and  the  person  holding  it,  Nasi'.


Rites  of  the
Ka'ba


Lesser  pil-
grimage


Greater
pilgrimage


Sacred  en-
virons of
Mecca  and
four  holy
months


EARLY  HISTORY  OF  MECCA


[INTROD.


The  luni-
solar  year
of  Mecca


Origin  of
the  Ka'ba
and  its
worship


No  Abra-
hamic  ele-
ment in  its
chief  cere-
monies


Remote  an-
tiquity of
the  Ka'ba


feeling  was  suppressed,  and  amnesty  reigned  throughout
Arabia.  Pilgrims  from  every  quarter  could  then  safely  repair
to  Mecca,  and  fairs  in  various  parts  were  thronged  by  those
whom  merchandise,  or  the  contests  of  poetry  or  social  rivalry,
brought  together.

There  is  reason  to  suppose  that  the  year  was  originally
lunar,  and  so  continued  till  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,
when  in  imitation  of  the  Jews  it  was  turned,  by  the  inter-
jection of  a  month  at  the  close  of  every  third  year,  into
a  luni-solar  period.  If  by  this  change  it  was  intended  to
make  the  season  of  pilgrimage  correspond  invariably  with
the  autumn,  when  a  supply  of  food  for  the  vast  multitude
would  be  easily  procurable,  that  object  was  defeated  by  the
remaining  imperfection  of  the  cycle ;  for  the  year  being  still
shorter  by  one  day  and  a  fraction  than  the  real  year,  each
recurring  season  accelerated  the  time  of  pilgrimage ;  so  that
when,  after  two  centuries,  intercalation  was  altogether  pro-
hibited by  Mohammad,  the  days  of  pilgrimage  had  moved
from  October  gradually  backward  to  March,

In  reviewing  the  history  of  Mecca,  the  origin  of  the
temple  and  of  the  local  worship  demands  further  scrutiny.
Muslim  belief  attributes  both  to  Abraham,  and  connects  part
of  the  ceremonial  with  Biblical  legend ;  but  the  story  is
plainly  a  fable.  The  following  considerations  strengthen  the
conviction  that  Mecca  and  its  rites  cannot  possibly  claim  any
such  origin.  First. — There  is  no  trace  of  anything  Abrahamic
in  the  essential  elements  of  the  superstition.  To  kiss  the
Black  Stone ;  to  make  the  circuit  of  the  Ka'ba,  and  perform
other  observances  at  Mecca,  Arafat,  and  the  vale  of  Mina  ;  to
keep  the  sacred  months  and  to  hallow  the  sacred  territory —
have  no  conceivable  connection  with  Abraham,  or  with  the
ideas  which  his  descendants  would  be  likely  to  inherit  from
him.  Such  rites  originated  in  causes  foreign  to  the  country
chiefly  occupied  by  the  children  of  Abraham  ;  they  were
either  strictly  local ;  or,  in  so  far  as  based  on  the  idolatry
prevailing  in  the  south,  were  imported  by  immigrants  from
the  Yemen.

Second. — A  very  high  antiquity  must  be  assigned  to  the
main  features  of  the  religion  of  Mecca.  Although  Herodotus
does  not  refer  to  the  Ka'ba,  yet  he  names  as  one  of  the  chief
Arab  divinities,  Alilat  ;  and  this  is  strong  evidence  of  the


CH.  III.]


THE  KA'BA


worship  at  that  early  period  oi  Al-Ldt,  the  great  idol  of  Mecca.^
He  likewise  alludes  to  the  veneration  of  the  Arabs  for
stones.  Diodorus  Siculus,  writing  about  half  a  century  before
our  era,  says  of  Arabia  washed  by  the  Red  Sea,  '  there  is,  in
this  country,  a  temple  greatly  revered  by  the  Arabs.'  These
words  must  refer  to  the  Holy  House  of  Mecca,  for  we  know
of  no  other  which  ever  commanded  such  universal  homage.
Early  historical \x?i<^\\\on  gives  no  trace  of  its  first  construction.
Some  authorities  assert  that  the  Amalekites  rebuilt  the
edifice,  which  they  found  in  ruins,  and  retained  it  for  a  time
under  their  charge.  All  agree  that  it  was  in  existence  under
the  Jurhum  tribe  (about  the  time  of  the  Christian  era),  and,
being  injured  by  a  flood  of  rain,  was  then  repaired.  Tradi-
tion represents  the  Ka'ba  as  from  time  immemorial  the  scene
of  pilgrimage  from  all  quarters  of  Arabia : — from  the  Yemen
and  Hadramaut,  from  the  shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  the
deserts  of  Syria,  and  the  distant  environs  of  Al-Hira  and
Mesopotamia,  men  yearly  flocked  to  Mecca.  So  extensive
a  homage  must  have  had  its  beginnings  in  an  extremely
remote  age ;  and  a  similar  antiquity  must  be  ascribed  to  the
essential  concomitants  of  the  local  worship — the  Ka'ba  with
its  Black  Stone,  the  sacred  territory,  and  the  holy  months.
The  origin  of  a  superstition  so  ancient  and  so  universal  must
be  looked  for  within  the  peninsula  itself,  and  not  in  any
foreign  country.

Third. — The  native  systems  of  Arabia  were  Sabeanism,
Idolatry,  and  Stone-worship — all  closely  connected  with  the
religion  of  Mecca.  There  is  reason  for  believing  that
Sabeanism,  or  the  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  existed
from  an  early  period  in  Arabia.  The  book  of  Job  contains
historical  notices  of  the  system,  and  certain  early  names  in  the
Himyar  dynasty  imply  its  prevalence.  As  late  as  the  fourth
century,  we  find  sacrifices  offered  in  the  Yemen  to  the  sun,
moon,  and  stars.  The  seven  circuits  of  the  Ka'ba  were
probably  emblematical  of  the  revolutions  of  the  planetary
bodies ;  and  we  are  told  that  a  similar  rite  was  observed  in
other  Arabian  fanes.  Again  the  practice  of  idolatry  over-
spread the  whole  peninsula.  We  have  authentic  records  of
ancient  idol  shrines  scattered  in  various  quarters  from  the
Yemen to Duma and even as far as Al-Hira, some of

1  Herod,  iii.  8.


Wide  ex-
tent of  the
worship


Connection
with  sys-
tems native
to  Arabia


I.  Sabean-
ism


2.  Idolatry


civ  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  MECCA  [introd.

them  subordinate  to  the  Ka'ba  and  having  similar  rites.  A
system  thus  widely  diffused  and  thoroughly  organised,  may
3.  Stone-  vvell  be  regarded  as  of  indigenous  growth.  The  most  singular
wors  ip  feature  in  this  worship  was  the  adoration  paid  to  unshapen
stones.  Muslims  hold  that  this  practice  arose  out  of  the
Ka'ba  rites.  '  The  adoration  of  stones  among  the  Ishmaelites,'
says  Ibn  Ishak,  *  originated  in  the  custom  of  men  carrying
a  stone  from  the  sacred  enclosure  of  Mecca  when  they  went
upon  a  journey,  out  of  reverence  for  the  Ka'ba  ;  and  whitherso-
ever they  went  they  set  it  up  and  made  circuits  round  about
it  as  about  the  Ka'ba,  till  at  last  they  adored  every  goodly
stone  they  saw,  forgot  their  religion,  and  changed  the  faith
of  Abraham  and  Ishmael  into  the  worship  of  images.'  The
tendency  to  stone-worship  was  undoubtedly  prevalent  through-
out Arabia  ;  but  it  is  more  probable  that  it  gave  rise  to  the
superstition  of  the  Ka'ba  with  its  Black  Stone,  than  took  its
rise  therefrom.
Supposed  Thus the religion of  Mecca  is,  in  all  essential  points,

Mecca  and  Connected  strictly  with  forms  of  superstition  native  to  Arabia,
its  religion  and  we  may  naturally  conclude  that  it  grew  out  of  them.
The  process  may  be  thus  imagined.  Mecca  owed  its  origin
to  the  convenient  position  which  it  held  between  the  Yemen
and  Petra.  We  have  seen  that,  from  ancient  times,  the
merchandise  of  the  East  passed  through  Arabia ;  and  the
vale  of  Mecca  lay  midway  upon  the  great  western  route.  A
plentiful  supply  of  water  attracted  the  caravans ;  it  became
a  halting  place,  and  then  the  entrepot  of  commerce ;  a
mercantile  population  grew  up  in  the  vicinity,  and  change
of  carriage  took  place  there.  The  carrier's  hire,  the  frontier
customs,  the  dues  of  protection,  and  the  profits  of  direct
traffic,  added  capital  to  the  city  which  may  have  rivalled,
though  in  a  primitive  and  simple  style,  the  emporia  of  Petra,
Jerash,  and  Philadelphia.  The  earliest  inhabitants  were
natives  of  the  Yemen,  and  the  ever-flowing  traffic  maintained
a  permanent  intercourse  between  them  and  their  original
home.  From  the  Yemen,  no  doubt,  they  brought  with  them,
or  subsequently  received,  Sabeanism,  Stone-worship,  and
Idolatry.  These  were  connected  with  the  well  Zemzem,  the
source  of  their  prosperity  ;  and  near  to  it  they  erected  their
fane,  with  its  symbolical  Sabeanism  and  mysterious  Black
Stone. Local  rites  were  superadded  ;  but  it  was  the  Yemen,


CH.  III.]  LEGEND  OF  ABRAHAM  cv

the  cradle  of  the  Arabs,  which  furnished  the  essential
elements  of  the  system.  The  mercantile  eminence  of  Mecca,
while  it  attracted  the  Bedawin  from  all  parts  of  Arabia  by
the  profits  of  the  carrying  trade,  by  degrees  imparted  a
national  character  to  the  local  superstition,  till  at  last  it
became  the  religion  of  all  Arabia.  When  the  southern  trade
deserted  this  channel,  the  mercantile  prestige  of  Mecca
vanished  and  its  opulence  decayed,  but  the  Ka'ba  continued
the  national  temple  of  the  Peninsula.  The  floating  popula-
tion betook  themselves  to  the  desert ;  and  the  native  tribes
(the  ancestry  of  Koreish)  were  overpowered  by  such  southern
immigrants  as  the  Jurhum  and  Khoza'a  dynasties  ;  till  at  last
Kosai  arose  to  vindicate  the  honour,  and  re-establish  the
influence,  of  the  house  of  Mecca.

But,  according  to  this  theory,  how  shall  we  account  for Howre-

the  tradition  current  among  the  Arabs,  that  the  temple  owed conaled

°  ,  '  .  , -"^  with  the

its  origin  to  Abraham  ? This  was  no  Muslim  fiction,  but  the legend  of
popular  belief  long  before  the  time  of  Mohammad. Other- ^^rahamic

" i  i^"  •  _  origin

wise,  it  could  not  have  been  referred  to  in  the  Kor'an  as  an
acknowledged  fact ;  nor  would  certain  spots  around  the
Ka'ba  have  been  connected,  as  we  know  them  to  have  been,
with  the  names  of  Abraham  and  Ishmael.  It  seems  probable  Supposed
that  Abrahamic  tribes  were  early  commingled  with  the  °his'legend
Arabs  coming  from  the  South,  and  that  a  branch  descended
from  Abraham  and  Ishmael,  may  have  settled  at  Mecca  and
there  become  allied  with  the  Yemenite  race.  Abrahamic
legends  still  surviving  in  the  land  would  be  resuscitated  and
strengthened  by  intercourse  with  the  Jews.  The  mingled
stock  from  Syria  and  from  the  Yemen  required  such  a
modification  of  the  local  religion  as  would  correspond  with
their  double  descent.  Hence  Jewish  legends  would  naturally
be  grafted  upon  the  indigenous  worship,  and  rites  of  sacrifice
would  now  for  the  first  time  be  introduced,  or  at  any  rate
now  first  associated  with  the  memory  of  Abraham.

The  Jews  were  also  largely  settled  in  Northern  Arabia, Abrahamic
where  they  acquired  a  considerable  influence. There  were H^^j'^  *^°/""

•'  ^_  Dined  with

extensive  colonies  about  Medina  and  Kheibar,  in  VVadi  al- the  local
Kora,  and  on  the  shores  of  the  yElanitic  gulf These  main- slitTo'n
tained  a  constant  and  friendly  intercourse  with  Mecca  and
the Arab tribes, who looked  with  respect  and  veneration
upon  their  religion  and  their  holy  books. When  once  the


EARLY  HISTORY  OF  MECCA


[iNTROD,


Vantage
ground
thus  gained
by  Mo-
hammad


loose  conception  of  Abraham  and  Ishmael  as  great  fore-
fathers of  the  race  was  superimposed  upon  the  superstition
of  Mecca,  and  had  received  the  stamp  of  native  currency,  it
will  easily  be  conceived  that  Jewish  tradition  and  legend
would  be  eagerly  welcomed  and  readily  assimilated  with
native  legend  and  tradition.  By  a  summary  adjustment,  the
story  of  Palestine  became  the  story  of  the  Hijaz.  The
precincts  of  the  Ka'ba  were  hallowed  as  the  scene  of  Hagar's
distress,  and  the  sacred  well  Zemzem  as  the  source  of  her
relief.  The  pilgrims  hasted  to  and  fro  between  the  Safa  and
the  Merwa  in  memory  of  her  hurried  steps  in  search  of  water.
It  was  Abraham  and  Ishmael  who  built  the  temple,  imbedded
in  it  the  Black  Stone,  and  established  for  all  Arabia  the
pilgrimage  to  'Arafat.  In  imitation  of  him  it  was  that  stones
were  flung  by  the  pilgrims  as  if  at  Satan,  and  sacrifices
offered  at  Mina  in  remembrance  of  the  vicarious  sacrifice  by
Abraham.  And  so,  although  the  indigenous  rites  may  have
been  little  if  at  all  altered  by  the  adoption  of  Israelitish
legends,  they  came  to  be  viewed  in  a  totally  different  light,
and  to  be  connected  in  Arab  imagination  with  something  of
the  sanctity  of  Abraham  the  Friend  of  God.^  The  gulf
between  the  gross  idolatry  of  Arabia  and  the  pure  theism  of
the  Jews  thus  bridged  over,  it  was  upon  this  common  ground
Mohammad  took  his  stand,  and  proclaimed  to  his  people  a


^  To  the  same  source  may  be  traced  the  doctrine  of  a  Supreme  Being,
to  whom  gods  and  idols  were  alike  subordinate.  The  title  Allah  Ta''dla,
THE  MOST  HIGH  GOD,  was  used  long  before  Mohammad  to  designate  this
conception.  But  in  some  tribes,  the  idea  had  become  so  materialised
that  a  portion  of  the  votive  offerings  was  assigned  to  the  great  God,
just  as  a  portion  was  allotted  to  their  idols.  The  notion  of  a  supreme
Divinity  represented  by  no  sensible  symbol  is  clearly  not  cognate  with
any  of  the  indigenous  forms  of  Arab  superstition.  It  was  borrowed
directly  from  the  Jews,  or  from  some  other  Abrahamic  race  among  whom
contact  with  the  Jews  had  preserved  or  revived  the  knowledge  of  the
'  God  of  Abraham.'

Familiarity  with  the  Abrahamic  races  also  introduced  the  doctrine  of
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  the  resurrection  from  the  dead  ;  but
these  were  held  with  many  fantastic  ideas  of  Arabian  growth.  Revenge
pictured  the  murdered  soul  as  a  bird  chirping  for  retribution  against  the
murderer  ;  and  a  camel  was  sometimes  left  to  starve  at  the  grave  of  his
master,  that  he  might  be  ready  at  the  resurrection  again  to  carry  him.
A  vast  variety  of  Biblical  language  was  also  in  common  use,  or  at  least
sufficiently in use to be commonly understood. Faith, Repentance,


CH.  III.]  LEGEND  OF  ABRAHAM  cvii

new  and  spiritual  system,  in  accents  to  which  the  whole
Peninsula  could  respond.  The  rites  of  the  Ka'ba  were
retained,  but  stripped  of  all  idolatrous  tendency,  they  still
hang,  a  strange  unmeaning  shroud,  around  the  living  theism
of  Islam.

Heaven,  and  Hell,  the  Devil  and  his  angels,  the  heavenly  Angels,  Gabriel
the  messenger  of  God,  are  specimens  acquired  from  some  Jewish  source,
either  current  or  ready  for  adoption.  Similarly  famiUar  were  the  stories
of  the  Fall  of  man,  the  Flood,  the  destruction  of  the  cities  of  the  plain,
&c. — so  that  there  was  an  extensive  substratum  of  crude  ideas  bordering
upon  the  spiritual,  ready  to  the  hand  of  Mohammad.


CHAPTER IV


THE FOREFATHERS OF MOHAMMAD


Civil  polity
based  on
the  habits
of  the
Bedawin


General
principles
of  Bedawi
govern-
ment


The  social  institutions  of  Mecca  did  not  essentially  differ
from  those  of  the  wandering  Bedawin.  They  were  to  some
extent  modified  by  their  settled  habitation  and  by  the
pilgrimage  and  surroundings  of  the  Ka'ba.  But  the  ultimate
sanctions  of  society,  and  the  springs  of  political  movement,
were  in  reality  the  same  at  Mecca  then  as  exist  in  Arabia  at
the  present  day.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  at  Mecca  there  was  not,
before  the  establishment  of  Islam,  any  government  in  the
common  sense  of  the  term.  No  supreme  authority  existed
whose  mandate  was  law.  Every  separate  tribe  was  a
republic  governed  by  public  opinion  ;  and  the  opinion  of  the
aggregate  tribes,  who  chanced  for  the  time  to  act  together,
the  sovereign  law.  There  was  no  recognised  exponent  of
the  popular  will ;  each  tribe  was  free  to  hold  back  from  the
decree  of  the  remainder ;  and  no  individual  was  more  bound
than  his  collective  tribe  to  a  compulsory  conformity  with
even  the  unanimous  resolve  of  his  fellow-citizens.  Honour
and  revenge  supplied  the  place  of  a  more  elaborate  system.
The  former  prompted  the  individual,  by  the  desire  of  uphold-
ing the  name  and  influence  of  his  clan,  to  a  compliance  with
the  general  wish ;  the  latter  provided  for  the  respect  of
private  right,  by  the  unrelenting  pursuit  of  the  injurer.  In
effect,  the  will  of  the  majority  did  form  the  general  rule  of
action,  although  there  was  continual  risk  that  the  minority
might  separate  and  assume  an  independent,  if  not  a  hostile,
attitude.  The  law  of  revenge,  too,  though  in  such  a  society
perhaps  unavoidable,  was  then,  even  as  now,  the  curse  of
Arabia. The  stain  of  blood  once  shed  was  not  easily  effaced  :


CH.  IV.]


THE  BEDAWIN


its  price  might  be  rejected  by  the  heir,  and  Hfe  demanded  for
life.  Retahation  followed  retribution  :  the  nearest  of  kin,  the
family,  the  clan,  the  confederate  tribes,  one  by  one  in  a
widening  circle,  identified  themselves  with  the  sufferer,  and
adopted  his  claim  as  their  own  ;  and  thus  a  petty  affront  or
unpremeditated  blow  not  unfrequently  involved  whole  tribes
and  tracts  of  country  in  protracted  and  bloody  strife.  Still,
in  a  system  which  provided  no  legal  power  to  interfere  in
personal  disputes,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  law  of
retaliation  afforded  an  important  check  upon  the  passions
of  the  stronger ;  and  that  acts  of  violence  and  injustice
were  repressed  by  fear  of  retribution  from  the  relatives  or
adherents  of  the  injured  party.  The  benefit  of  the  custom
was  further  increased  by  the  practice  of  patronage  or
guardianship.  The  weak  resorted  to  the  strong  for  pro-
tection ;  and  when  the  word  of  a  chief  or  powerful  man  had
once  been  pledged  to  grant  it,  the  pledge  was  fulfilled  with
chivalrous  scrupulosity.

At  first  sight  it  might  appear  that,  under  this  system,  a
Chief  possessed  no  shadow  of  authority  to  execute  either  his
own  wish  or  that  of  the  people.  But  in  reality  his  powers,
though  vague  and  undefined,  were  large  and  effective.  The
position  of  Chief  always  secured  an  important  share  in
forming  and  giving  expression  to  public  opinion  ;  so  that,
excepting  rare  and  unusual  cases,  he  swayed  the  councils  and
movements  of  his  tribe.  It  was  mainly  by  the  influence
derived  from  the  offices  attaching  to  the  Ka'ba  and  the
Pilgrimage,  that  the  Chiefs  of  Mecca  differed  from  the
Sheikhs  of  the  nomad  tribes,  and  exercised  a  more  regular
and  permanent  rule.

We  have  seen  that  about  the  middle  of  the  5th  century
Kosai  had  concentrated  the  chief  of  these  offices  in  his  own
person.  When  he  became  old  and  infirm,  he  resigned  them
into  the  hands  of  his  eldest  son,  *Abd  ed-Dar.^  From  him
they  descended  to  his  sons  and  grandsons ;  but  the  latter,
who  succeeded  to  the  inheritance  in  the  beginning  of  the  6th
century,  were  too  young  effectually  to  maintain  their  rights,
'Abd  Menaf,  another  son  of  Kosai,  had  been  the  powerful
rival  of  his  brother ;  and  the  sons  of  'Abd  Menaf  inherited
their  father's  influence.  The  chief  were,  Al-Muttalib,  'Abd
'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  84  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1098  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  42.


Offices  con-
ferring
authority
on  Chiefs
of  Mecca


Kosai,

A.D.  440,

and  his  de-
scendants


FOREFATHERS  OF  MOHAMMAD


[INTROD.


Discord
among
Kosai's  de-
scendants


The  offices

amicably

divided


Has  him
born  A.D.
464


Shams,  Naufal,  and  Hashim.^  These  conspired  to  wrest
from  the  descendants  of  'Abd  ed-Dar  the  hereditary  offices
bequeathed  by  Kosai.  Hashim  took  the  lead,  and  grounded
his  claim  on  the  superior  dignity  of  the  family  of  'Abd
Menaf.  But  the  descendants  of  'Abd  ed-Dar  refused  to  cede
their  rights,  and  an  open  rupture  ensued.  Koreish  was
equally  divided,  one  portion  siding  with  the  claimants,  and
the  other  with  the  actual  possessors  of  the  offices.  The
respective  factions,  having  bound  themselves  by  the  most
stringent  oaths,  were  already  marshalled  in  hostile  array,
when  unexpectedly  truce  was  called.  The  conditions  were
to  give  Hashim  and  his  party  the  offices  of  providing  food
and  water  for  the  pilgrims,  while  the  descendants  of 'Abd  ed-
Dar  retained  custody  of  the  Ka'ba  and  Council-hall,  and  the
rijiht  of  mounting  the  banner  on  its  staff  in  war.  Peace  was
restored  upon  these  terms.

Hashim,'^  thus  installed  in  the  office  of  entertaining  the
pilgrims,  fulfilled  it  with  princely  magnificence.  He  was
himself  rich,  and  many  Koreish  had  also  by  trading  acquired
much  wealth.  He  appealed  to  them  as  his  grandfather
Kosai  had  done :  '  Ye  are  the  neighbours  of  God,  and  the
keepers  of  His  house. Pilgrims  to  the  temple  are  His  guests  ;


1  This  was  the  branch  from  which  Mohammad  descended.  The
following  table  illustrates  the  family  influences  which  affected  not  only
the  position  of  the  Prophet,  but  the  destinies  of  the  Caliphate  long  ages
after  ; —

Kosai  (b.  ci>-ca  400  a.d.).


'Abd  ed-Dar.


'Abd  Menaf

(b.  circa  430).


'Abd  al-'Ozza.

I

Asad.


I  I

'Abd  Shams. Naufal.

I

Omeiya.

I

Harb.

I
Abu  Sufyan.  p

I
Mu'awiya.


Hashim
(b.  circa  464).
I
'Abd AL-MUTTALIB

(b.  circa  497).

I


I

Al-Muttalib.


Khuweilid.


Khadija.


I
Al-Auwam.

I
Az-Zubeir.


Al-IIariih.


Ill  II

Abu  Abu  'Abdallah Al-'Abbas. IJamza,

Talib. Lahab. (b.  c/rc«  545).


Ja'far.


I
'All.


I
MOHAMMAD  (b.  570  a.d.).


'Akil.

r

Muslim.
2  Ibn  Hisham,  p  87  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  10S8  f,  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  43  f.


CH.  IV.]  HASHIM  cxi

and  it  is  meet  that  ye  enter tai^i  them  above  all  other  guests.  Ye
are  especially  chosen  unto  this  high  dignity  ;  wJierefore  honour
His  guests  and  refresh  them.  For,  from  distant  cities,  on  their
lean  and  jaded  camels,  they  come  tinto  you  fatigued  and
harassed,  with  hair  dishevelled  and  bodies  covered  with  the
dust  and  squalor  of  the  way.  Then  invite  them  hospitably,  and
ficrnisJi  them  with  zvatcr  in  abundance^  Hashim  set  the
example  by  a  munificent  provision,  and  the  Koreisliites  were
forward  to  contribute,  every  man  according  to  his  abih'ty.
Water  sufficient  for  the  great  assemblage  was  collected  in
cisterns  close  by  the  Ka'ba,  and  at  the  stations  on  the  route
to  'Arafat.  The  distribution  of  food  commenced  upon  the
day  on  which  the  pilgrims  set  out  for  Mina  and  'Arafat,  and
continued  until  they  dispersed.  During  this  period,  that  is,
for  five  or  six  days,  the)'  were  entertained  with  pottage  of
meat  and  bread,  butter  and  barley,  and  with  the  favourite
national  repast  of  dates.

Thus Hashim supported  the  credit  of  Mecca. But  his Feeds  the
name  is  even  more renowned for  the splendid charity bv \T'^^'^  ^^

^  J J Mecca  m  a

which  in  a  time  of  famine  he  relieved  the  necessities  of  his  famine
fellow-citizens.  Journeying  to  Syria,  he  purchased  an
immense  stock  of  flour,  and  conveyed  it  upon  camels  to
Mecca.  The  provisions  were  cooked,  the  camels  slaughtered
and  roasted,  and  the  whole  divided  among  the  citizens.
Destitution  and  mourning  were  turned  into  mirth  and  plenty;
and  it  was  (the  historian  adds)  '  as  it  were  the  beginning  of
new  life  after  the  year  of  scarcity.'

The  foreign  relations  of  Koreish  were  conducted  by  the Commer-
sons  of  'Abd  Menaf. With  the  Roman  authorities,  and  the  ^'i^iJi^J^?^^

_  .  TT- 1  •  •  of  Hashim

Ghassanid  prince,  Hashim himself  concluded  a  treaty;  and and  his

he  is  said to have received from the Emperor  a  rescript °''°^"^''^

authorising Koreish to travel through Syria in security.

'Abd  Shams  made  a  treaty  with  the  Negus,  in  pursuance  of

which Koreish traded with Abyssinia ; Naufal and Al-

Muttalib  entered  into  an  alliance  with  the  king  of  Persia,  who

allowed  the  merchants  of  Mecca  to  traffic  in  Al-'Irak  and

Fars,  and  with  the  kings  of  Himyar,  who  encouraged  their

commercial  operations  in  the  Yemen. Thus  the  affairs  of

Koreish  prospered in  every  direction. To Hashim  is  also

ascribed  the  credit  of  establishing  upon  a  uniform  footing  the

mercantile  expeditions  of  his  people,  so  that  every  winter  a


FOREFATHERS  OF  MOHAMMAD


[iNTROD.


Hashim
challenged
by  Omeiya,
who  is  van-
quished
and  exiled


Hashim
marries
Selma  at
Medina,
who  bears
him  a  son
A.D.  497


caravan  set  out  for  the  Yemen  and  Abyssinia,  while  in  the
summer  a  second  visited  Gaza,  Ancyra,  and  other  Syrian
marts.

The  success  and  glory  of  Hashim  exposed  him  to  the
envy  of  Omeiya,  the  son  of  his  brother  *Abd  Shams.  Omeiya
was  opulent,  and  he  expended  his  riches  in  a  vain  attempt  to
rival  the  splendour  of  his  kinsman's  munificence.  The
Koreishites  perceived  the  endeavour,  and  turned  it  into
ridicule.  Omeiya  was  enraged.  Wlio^  said  he,  is  Hashim?
and  he  defied  him  to  a  trial  of  superiority.^  Hashim  would
willingly  have  avoided  a  contest  with  one  so  much  his
inferior  both  in  years  and  dignity ;  but  the  Koreishites,  who
loved  such  exhibitions,  would  not  excuse  him  ;  he  consented,
therefore,  but  with  the  stipulation  than  the  vanquished  party
should  lose  fifty  black-eyed  camels,  and  be  ten  years  exiled
from  Mecca.  A  Khoza'ite  soothsayer  was  appointed  umpire;
and,  having  heard  the  pretensions  of  both,  pronounced
Hashim  to  be  the  victor.  Hashim  took  the  fifty  camels,
slaughtered  them  in  the  vale  of  Mecca,  and  fed  with  them
all  the  people  present.  Omeiya  set  out  for  Syria,  and
remained  there  the  period  of  his  exile.  The  circumstance  is
carefully  noted  by  Mohammadan  writers  as  the  first  trace  of
that  rivalry  between  the  HdsJiiniite  and  Omeiyad  factions,
which  in  after  ages  shook  the  Caliphate.

Hashim  was  now  advanced  in  years  when,  on  a  mercantile
journey  to  the  north,  he  visited  Medina  with  a  party  of
Koreish.  As  he  traded  there,  he  was  attracted  by  the
graceful  figure  of  a  female,  who  from  an  elevated  position
was  directing  her  people  beneath  to  buy  and  sell  for  her.
She  was  discreet  and  comely,  and  made  a  tender  impression
upon  the  heart  of  Hashim.  He  inquired  of  the  citizens
whether  she  was  single,  and  they  answered  that  she  had  been
married,  but  was  now  divorced.  The  dignity  of  the  lady,
they  added,  was  so  great  amongst  her  people  that  she  would
not  marry,  unless  it  were  stipulated  that  she  should  remain


1  It  is  difficult  to  express  the  idea  implied  by  such  a  contest.  It  was
a  vainglorious  practice,  which  consisted  in  one  person  challenging
another,  and  claiming  to  be  more  noble  and  renowned,  brave  or
generous,  than  he.  Each  disputant  adduced  facts  and  witnesses  to
prove  his  ambitious  pretensions,  and  the  arbiter  adjudged  the  palm  at
his  discretion.


CH.  IV.]


AL-MUTTAI.IB


mistress  of  her  own  concerns,  and  have  at  pleasure  the  power
of  divorce.  This  was  Selma,  daughter  of  'Amr,  of  the
Khazraj  tribe.  Hashim  thereupon  demanded  her  in
marriage ;  and  she  consented,  for  she  was  well  aware  of  his
renown  and  noble  birth.  She  accompanied  him  to  Mecca,
but  returned  to  Medina  where  she  give  birth  to  a  son,  who
remained  with  his  mother  at  Medina.

Hashim,  dying  a  few  years  after  on  a  mercantile  expedi-
tion to  Gaza,  left  his  dignities  to  his  brother  Al-Muttalib,
who,  when  Hashim's  son  had  grown  into  boyhood,  set  out
for  Medina  to  fetch  him  thence.^  On  his  return,  as  the
inhabitants  of  Mecca  saw  him  pass  with  a  lad  by  his  side,
they  concluded  that  he  had  purchased  a  slave,  and  exclaimed,
'Abd  al-Miittalibl—'\o,  the  servant  of  Al-Muttalib!'  'Out
upon  you  ! '  said  he ;  'it  is  my  nephew,  the  son  of  Hashim.'
And  as  each  scrutinised  the  features  of  the  boy,  they  swore
— *By  my  life,  it  is  the  very  same.'  In  this  incident  is  said
to  have  originated  the  name  of 'Abd  al-Muttalib,  by  which
the  son  of  Hashim  was  thereafter  called.

In  due  time  'Abd  al-Muttalib  was  installed  by  his  uncle
in  possession  of  his  father's  property  ;  but  Naufal,  another
uncle,  interposed,  and  violently  deprived  him  of  it.  'Abd
al-Muttalib,  on  reaching  years  of  discretion,  appealed  to  his
tribe  for  aid  to  resist  this  usurpation  of  his  rights ;  but  they
declined  to  interfere.  He  then  wrote  to  his  maternal
relatives  at  Medina,  who  no  sooner  received  the  intelligence
than  eighty  mounted  men  of  his  mother's  clan  started  for
Mecca.  'Abd  al-Muttalib  went  forth  to  meet  them,  and  invited
them  to  his  house  ;  but  their  chief  refused  to  alight  until  he
had  called  Naufal  to  account.  Proceeding  straightway  to  the
Holy  house,  he  found  him  seated  there  among  the  chiefs  of
Koreish,  Naufal  arose  to  offer  welcome ;  but  the  stranger
refused  his  welcome,  and  drawing  his  sword  declared  that  he
would  plunge  it  into  him  unless  he  forthwith  reinstated  the
orphan  in  his  rights.  The  oppressor  was  daunted,  and
agreed  to  the  concession,  which  was  then  ratified  by  oath
before  the  assembled  Koreish.

Some  years  after,  on  the  death  of  Al-Muttalib,  'Abd  al-
Muttalib  succeeded  to  the  office  of  entertaining  the  pilgrims.
But  for  a  long  time  he  was  destitute  of  power  and  influence ;

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  88  f f. ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1082  f  j  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  48  ff.

h


Al-Muttalib
fetches  his
nephew
'Abd  al-
Muttalib
from
Medina,


who  main-
tains pos-
session of
paternal
estate,


eventually
succeeds  to
the  office  of
entertaining
pilgrims,


FOREFATHERS  OF  MOHAMMAf)


[IN  TROD.


and  dis-
covers the
well  Zem-
zem


Claim  of
Korei=h
negatived
by  oracle


Zemzem
gives  forth
abundant
Ep'ing


and,  having  at  the  time  but  one  son  to  assist  him  in  the
assertion  of  his  claims,  he  found  it  difficult  to  cope  with  the
opposing  faction  of  Koreish.  It  was  during  this  period  that
he  discovered  the  ancient  well  Zemzem.  Finding  it  laborious
to  procure  water  for  the  pilgrims  from  the  scattered  wells  of
Mecca  and  store  it  in  cisterns  by  the  Ka'ba,  and  perhaps
aware  by  tradition  of  the  existence  of  a  well  in  the  vicinity,
he  made  diligent  search,  and  at  last  chanced  upon  the
venerable  masonry.  It  was  a  remnant  of  the  palmy  days
when  a  rich  and  incessant  stream  of  commerce  flowed
through  Mecca.  Centuries  had  elapsed  since  the  trade  had
ceased,  and  with  it  had  followed  the  decline  of  Mecca,  and
neglect  of  the  well.  In  course  of  time  choked  up,  the
remembrance  of  it  had  become  so  indistinct  that  even  the
site  was  now  unknown.

As  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  aided  by  his  son  Al-Harith,  continued
digging  deeper,  he  came  upon  the  two  golden  gazelles,  with
the  swords  and  suits  of  armour  buried  theie  by  the  Jurhumite
king  more  than  three  centuries  before.  Koreish,  envying
him  these  treasures,  demanded  a  share ;  and  they  even
asserted  their  right  to  the  well  itself,  as  the  possession  of
their  common  ancestor  Ishmael.  'Abd  al-Muttalib  was  not
powerful  enough  to  resist  the  claim  ;  but  he  agreed  to  refer  it
to  the  decision  of  the  arrows  of  Hubal,  the  god  whose  image
was  set  up  within  the  Ka'ba.  Lots  were  cast,  one  for  the
Ka'ba  and  two  for  the  respective  claimants.  The  gazelles  fell
to  the  share  of  the  Ka'ba,  and  the  swords  and  suits  of  armour
to  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  while  the  arrows  of  Koreish  were  blank.
Acquiescing  in  the  divine  decree,  they  relinquished  their  pre-
tensions to  the  well.  'Abd  al-Muttalib  beat  out  the  gazelles
into  plates  of  gold,  and  fixed  them  by  way  of  ornament  to
the  door  of  the  Ka'ba.  He  hung  up  the  swords  before  the
door  as  a  protection  to  the  treasures  within ;  but  at  the  same
time  added  a  more  effectual  guard  in  the  shape  of  a  golden
lock  and  key.  The  plentiful  flow  of  fresh  water,  soon  apparent
in  the  well  Zemzem,  was  a  great  triumph  to  'Abd  al-Muttalib.
All  other  wells  in  Mecca  were  deserted,  and  this  alone  resorted
to.  From  it  'Abd  al-Muttalib  supplied  the  pilgrims  ;  and  the
water  itself  soon  shared  the  sacredness  of  the  Ka'ba  and  its
rites.  The  fame  and  influence  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib  now
waxed  greater  and  greater ;  a  large  family  of  powerful  sons


Muttalib's
son,


CH.  IV.]  'ABD  AL-MUTFALIB  cxv

added  to  his  disunity  ;  he  became,  and  continued  to  his  death
the  virtual  chief  of  Mecca. ^

But  a  strange  calamity  now  threatened  to  embitter  'Abd  al- 'Abd  al
Muttalib's  prosperity.- During  his  early  troubles,  while  sup
ported  by  an  only  son,  he  had  felt  so  bitterly  his  weakness  in 'Ahdaiiah
contending with the large and influential families of  his Ransomed

°  '^ _  _  from  sacri-

opponents,  as  to  vow  that,  if  Providence  should  ever  grant fice  by  one

him  ten  sons,  he  would  devote  one  of  them  to  the  Deitv. """^[^'^
'  -' camels

Years  rolled  on,  and  the  rash  father  at  last  found  himseh
surrounded  by  the  longed-for  number,  the  sight  of  whom
daily  reminded  him  of  his  vow.  He  bade  his  sons  accompany
him  to  the  Ka'ba ;  each  was  made  to  write  his  name  upon  a
lot,  and  the  lots  were  made  over  to  the  intendant  of  the
temple,  who  cast  them  in  the  usual  mode.  The  fatal  arrow
fell  upon  'ABDALL.A.H,  the  youngest  and  the  best  beloved,
The  vow  devoting  him  to  the  Deity  must  needs  be  fulfilled,
but  how  else  than  by  the  sacrificial  knife?  His  daughters
wept  and  clung  around  him,  and  he  was  willingly  persuaded
to  cast  lots  between  'Abdallah  and  ten  camels,  the  current  fine
for  bloodshed.  If  the  Deity  should  accept  the  ransom,  the
father  need  not  scruple  to  spare  his  son.  But  the  lot  a  second
time  fell  upon  'Abdallah.  Again,  and  with  equal  fortune,  it
was  cast  between  him  and  twenty  camels.  At  each  successive
trial  the  anxious  father  added  ten  camels  to  the  stake,  but
the  Deity  appeared  inexorably  to  refuse  the  vicarious  offering,
and  to  require  the  blood  of  his  youngest  son.  It  was  now
the  tenth  throw,  and  the  ransom  had  reached  a  hundred
camels,  when  the  lot  at  last  fell  upon  them.  The  father
joyfully  released  'Abdallah  from  his  impending  fate,  and
slaughtered  the  hundred  camels  between  the  Safa  and  the
Merwa.  The  inhabitants  of  Mecca  feasted  upon  them,  and
*Abd  al-Muttalib's  family  refusing  to  partake,  the  residue  was
left  to  the  beasts  and  to  the  birds.  This  'Abdallah  was  the
father  of  Mohammad.

The  prosperity  and  fame  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib  excited  the 'Abd  al-
envy  of  the  house  of  Omeiva,  whose  son  Harb  challenged  his '^"U^^'b

•'  ' '  ■  o  challenged

rival  to  a  trial  of  their  respective  merits. The  Abyssinian by  Harb,
king  declined  to  be  the  umpire,  and  the  judgment  was  com- ^?"  °^

'^  ''Jo  Umeiya

mitted  to  a  Koreishite,  who  declared  that  'Abd  al-Muttalib

' Ibn  Hisham,  p.  91  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  10S8.

*  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  97  ;  At-Tabari,  i,  1074  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  53  f.


FOREFATHERS  OF  MOHAMMAD


[INTROD.


His  league
with  the
Beni
Khoza'a


was  in  every  respect  superior.  Harb  was  deeply  mortified,
and  abandoned  the  society  of  his  opponent,  whose  companion
he  had  previously  been.  Thus  the  ill-feeling  between  the
families  of  Hashim  and  Omeiya  was  perpetuated  and
increased.

'Abd  al-Muttalib  gained  an  important  accession  of  stability
to  his  party  by  concluding  a  defensive  league  with  the
Khoza'ite  tribe,  still  inhabitants  of  Mecca.  They  came  to
him  and  represented  that,  as  their  quarters  adjoined,  such  a
treaty  would  be  advantageous  for  both.  'Abd  al-Muttalib
was  not  slow  in  perceiving  this.  With  ten  of  his  adherents
he  met  the  Beni  Khoza'a  at
mutually  pledged  their  faith,
writing,  and  hung  up  in  the
the family of Omeiya was


The  viceroy
of  the
Yemen
invades
Mecca
A.D.  570,


the Ka'ba, and there they

The  league  was  reduced to

Holy  House. No  one from

present, or indeed knew of


the  transaction  until  thus  published.  The  compact  was
permanent,  and  in  after  times  proved  of  essential  service  to
Mohammad.

In  the  year  570  A.D.,  or  about  eight  years  before  the  death
of  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  occurred  the  memorable  invasion  of
Mecca  by  Abraha,  Abyssinian  viceroy  of  the  Yemen.^  This
potentate  had  built  at  San'a  a  magnificent  cathedral  whither
he  sought  to  attract  the  worship  of  Arabia ;  and,  thwarted  in
the  attempt,  vented  his  displeasure  in  an  attack  on  Mecca
and  its  temple.  Upon  this  enterprise  he  set  out  with  a  con-
siderable army.  In  its  train  was  an  elephant ; — a  circum-
stance for  Arabia  so  singular  that  the  commander,  his  host,
the  invasion,  and  the  year,  are  still  called  by  the  epithet  of
'the  Elephant'  Notwithstanding  opposition  from  various
Arab  tribes,  Abraha  victoriously  reached  At-Ta'if,  three
days  east  of  Mecca.  The  men  of  At-Ta'if,  ever  jealous  of
Mecca,  protested  that  they  had  no  concern  with  the  Ka'ba,
and  furnished  the  Abyssinians  with  a  guide,  who  died  on  the
way  to  Mecca.  Centuries  afterwards,  wayfarers  marked  their
abhorrence  of  the  traitor  by  casting  stones  at  his  tomb  as
they  passed.  Abraha  then  sent  forward  a  body  of  troops  to
scour  the  Tihama  and  carry  off  what  cattle  they  could  find.
They  were  successful  in  the  raid,  and  among  the  plunder
secured  two  hundred  camels  belonging  to  'Abd  al-Muttalib.
An  embassy  was  despatched  to  the  inhabitants  of  Mecca  :
^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  29  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  950  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  55  f.


CH.  IV.]  'ABD  AL-MUTTALIB  cxvii

'  Abraha,'  the  message  ran,  '  had  no  desire  to  do  them  hijury.  and
His  only  object  was  to  demolish  the  Ka'ba  ;  that  performed,  ^^"^'^".^
he  would  retire  without  shedding  the  blood  of  any  man."
The  citizens  had  already  resolved  that  it  would  be  vain
to  oppose  the  invader  by  force  of  arms ;  but  the  destruction
of  the  Ka'ba  they  refused  on  any  terms  to  allow.  At  last
the  embassy  prevailed  on  'Abd  al-Muttalib  and  the  other
chiefs  of  Mecca  to  repair  to  the  Viceroy's  camp,  and  there
plead  their  cause.  'Abd  al-Muttalib  was  treated  with
distinguished  honour.  To  gain  him  over,  Abraha  restored
his  plundered  camels  ;  but  he  could  obtain  no  satisfactory
answer  regarding  the  Ka'ba.  The  chiefs  offered  a  third  of
the  wealth  of  the  Tihama  if  he  would  desist  from  his  designs
against  their  temple,  but  he  refused.  The  negotiation  was
broken  off,  and  the  deputation  returned  to  Mecca.  The
people,  by  the  advice  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  made  preparations
for  retiring  in  a  body  to  the  hills  and  defiles  about  the  city  on
the  day  before  the  expected  attack.  As  'Abd  al-Muttalib
leaned  upon  the  ring  of  the  door  of  the  Ka'ba  (so  the
tradition  runs),  he  prayed  to  the  Deity  thus  aloud  :  *  Defend,
O  Lord,  thine  own  House,  and  suffer  not  the  Cross  to  triumph
over  the  Ka'ba  ! '  This  done,  he  relaxed  his  hold,  and,  be-
taking himself  with  the  rest  to  the  neighbouring  heights,
watched  what  the  end  might  be. Meanwhile  a  pestilential Isdiscom-

distemper  had  shown  itself  in  the  camp  of  the  Vicerov. It ^^^^J^y^^^
^  _  .  pestilence

broke  out  with  deadly  pustules  and  blains,  and  was  probably
an  aggravated  form  of  smallpox.  In  confusion  and  dismay
the  army  commenced  retreat.  Abandoned  by  their  guides,
they  perished  among  the  valleys,  and  a  flood  (such  is  the
pious  legend)  sent  by  the  wrath  of  Heaven  swept  multitudes
into  the  sea.  Scarcely  any  recovered  who  had  once  been
smitten  by  it;  and  Abraha  himself,  a  mass  of  malignant  and
putrid  sores,  died  miserably  on  his  return  to  San'a.^

^  Al-Wakidi,  after  describing  the  calamity  in  the  fanciful  style  of  the
Kor'an,  adds  :  ''Attd  that  was  the  first  beginning  of  the  smallpox.'  The
word  signifies  likewise  'small  stones,'  and  the  name  as  applied  to  the
smallpox  is  probably  derived  from  the  gravelly  appearance  and  feeling
of  the  pustules.  The  name,  coupled  with  its  derivation,  probably  gave
rise  to  the  poetical  description  of  the  event  in  the  Kor'an  :  Hast  thou  not
seen  how  thy  Lord  dealt  with  the  army  of  the  Elephant?  Did  he  not
cause  their  stratagem  to  miscarry  ?  And  he  sent  against  them  flocks  of
little  birds  which  cast  upon  them  small  clay  stones,  and  made  them  like


FOREFATHERS  OF  MOHAMMAD


[iNTROD.


Koreish
found  the
Horns


Strength
and  univer-
sality of
the  Ka'ba
worship


The  unexpected  and  seemingly  miraculous  disappointment
of  the  magnificent  preparations  of  Abraha  increased  the
reverence  with  which  throughout  Arabia  Koreish  were  looked
upon.  They  became  vainglorious,  and  sought  to  mark  their
superiority  by  the  assumption  of  special  immunities.  *  Let
us,'  they  said, '  release  ourselves  from  some  of  the  observances
imposed  upon  the  multitude  ;  and  forbid  ourselves  some  of
the  things  which  to  them  are  lawful.'  ^  Thus  they  gave  up
the  yearly  pilgrimage  to  'Arafat,  and  the  ceremonial  return
therefrom,  although  they  still  acknowledged  these  acts  to  be,
as  an  essential  part  of  the  '  religion  of  Abraham,'  binding
upon  others  ;  they  also  refused  the  use  of  cheese  and  butter
while  in  the  pilgrim  garb  ;  and,  abandoning  tents  of  camels'
hair,  restricted  themselves  to  tents  of  leather.  Upon  pilgrims
who  came  from  beyond  the  Sacred  limits,  they  imposed  new
rules  for  their  own  aggrandisement.  Such  visitors,  whether
for  the  Greater  or  the  Lesser  pilgrimage,  were  forbidden  to
eat  food  brought  from  without  the  holy  boundary  ;  and  were
compelled  to  make  the  circuit  of  the  Ka'ba  either  naked,  or
clothed  in  vestments  provided  only  by  the  citizens  who
formed  the  league.  This  association,  whose  members  were
called  collectively  The  Homs,  that  is,  the  strict  or  vigorous
people,  included  Koreish,  the  Beni  Kinana  a  collateral
branch,  and  the  Khoza'a.  To  them  the  privileges  of  the
league  were  restricted.  All  others  were  subjected  to  the
humiliation  of  soliciting  from  them  food  and  raiment.  There
is  some  doubt  whether  these  innovations  were  only  now
begun  or  existed  from  an  earlier  period.  But,  however  intro-
duced, they  give  proof  that  the  worship  of  the  Ka'ba  was
active  and  vigorous,  and  that  its  directors  exercised  a  wonder-
ful influence  over  the  whole  of  Arabia.  The  practices  then
enforced  were  superseded  only  by  Islam  ;  and  (assuming  the
latest  date  assigned  for  their  introduction)  they  were  main-
tained for  more  than  half  a  century.  The  reverence  for  the
Ka'ba,  which permitted the  imposition  of  customs  so  un-


unto  the  stubble  of  which  the  cattle  have  eaten. — Sura  cv.  Gibbon
says  of  this  passage  that  it  is  '  the  seed '  of  the  marvellous  details  of
Abraha's  defeat.  But  it  must  have  been  partially  at  least  the  other
way.

'  [Ibn  Hisham  (p.  126  f.)  says  he  does  not  know  whether  this  happened
before  the  year  of  the  Elephant  or  after  it. J


CH.  iv.J  HASHIMITES  AND  OMEIYaDS  Cxix

reasonable  and  oppressive,  must  necessarily  have  been  grossly
superstitious  as  well  as  widely  prevalent.

Before  proceeding  with  our  history,  let  us  for  a  moment Position  of
review  the  state  of  parties  in  Mecca  towards  the  latter  days P^'^'^^
of  'Abd al-Muttalib. There  arose, as  we  have  seen,  upon
the  death of Kosai,  two leading factions,  the descendants
respectively  of  his  sons,  'Abd  ed-Dar  and  'Abd  Menaf.

The  house  of 'Abd ed-Dar originally possessed all the Low  state
public  offices  ;  but  in  the  struggle  with Hashim  they were °^  '*|f  ^^'
stripped  of  several  important  dignities;  their  influence  had of 'Abd  ed-
departed,  and  they  were  now  fallen  into  a  subordinate  and ■"
insignificant position. The  offices retained by  them were
still undoubtedly valuable ; but, divided among separate
members  of  the  family,  the  benefit  of  combination  was  lost ;
and  there  was  no  steady  and  united  effort  to  improve  their
advantages  towards  the  acquisition of  social influence and
political  power. The  virtual  chiefship  of  Mecca,  on  the  other Prosperity
hand,  was  now  with  the  descendants  of  'Abd  Menaf. Among °ccnd\nis
these,  again,  two  parties  had  arisen — the  families,  namely,  of  of  Abd
his  sons Hashim  and 'Abd Shams. The grand  offices  of
giving  food  and  water  to  the  pilgrims  secured  to  the  house
of  Hashim a  commanding  and  permanent  influence under The  Ha-
the  able management  of  al-Muttalib,  and  now  of  'Abd al- ^^'"^"^8
Muttalib  who,  like  his  father  Hashim,  was  regarded  as  the
chief  of  the  Sheikhs  of  Mecca. But  the  branch  of  Omeiya,
son  of  'Abd  Shams,  with  its  numerous  and  influential  con-
nections, were  jealous  of  the  power  of  the  Hashimites,  and The  Omei-
repeatedly  endeavoured  to  humble  them,  and  bring  discredit ^''
on  their  high  position. One  office,  the  Leadership  in  war,
indeed,  was  secured  by  the  Omeiyad  family,  and  contributed
much  to  its  splendour. The  Omeiyads  were,  moreover,  rich
and  successful in  commerce,  and by  some are thought  to
have exceeded in influence  and power even the  stock  of
Hashim.

But  the  '  Year  of  the  Elephant,'  had  already  given  birth The  birth
to  a  personage  destined,  within  half  a  century,  to  eclipse  the ^^d '^
distinctions  both of  the  Hashimite  and  the  Omeiyad  race,
and  to  the  narration  of  this  momentous  event  we  shall  now
proceed.


THE

LIFE OF MOHAMMAD

PART  FIRST
MOHAMMAD TILL  THE HIJRA

CHAPTER I

THE BIRTH AND CHILDHOOD OF MOHAMMAD  ^
A.D. 570

Within  the  great  mountain  range  which  skirts  the  Red  Sea,  Description
and  midway  between  the  Yemen  and  the  Syrian  border,  lies  *^^  Mecca
Mecca  with  its  holy  Temple. The  traveller  from  the  seashore
approaches  the  sacred  valley  by  an  almost  imperceptible  rise
of  about  fifty  miles,  chiefly  through  sandy  plains  and  defiles
hemmed  in  by  low  hills  of  gneiss  and  quartz,  which  reach  in
some  places  the  height  of  four  or  five  hundred  feet. Passing
Mecca,  and  pursuing  still  an  eastward  course,  he  proceeds
with  the  same  gentle  rise  between  hills  of  granite  through
the  valley  of  Mina,  and  in  five  or  six  hours  arrives  at  the
Mount  of 'Arafat. Onwards  the  hills  ascend  to  a  great  height,
till  about  eighty  miles  from  the  sea  the  granite  peaks  of  Jebel
Kora crown  the  range,  and  At-Ta'if  comes  in  sight  thirty
miles farther  east. Between  Jebel Kora  and At-Ta'if  the
country  is  fertile  and  lovely. Rivulets  every  here  and  there
descend  from  the  hills  ;  the  plains  are  clothed  with  verdure,  and
adorned  by  large  shady  trees. At-Ta'if  is  famous  for  its  fruits. Fertility  of
The  grapes  are  large  and of  a  delicious  flavour;  and  there •'•^'
is  no  want  of  variety  to  tempt  the  appetite,  for  peaches  and
^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  102  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1073  fif. ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  58  ff.

A


2 THE  BIRTH  AND  CHILDHOOD  OF  MOHAMMAD [chap.

pomegranates,  apples  and  almonds,  figs,  apricots  and  quinces,
grow  in  abundance  and  perfection.  Far  ditierent  is  it  with
the  frowning  hills  and  barren  valleys  for  many  a  mile  round
Mecca. Stunted  brushwood  and  thorny  acacias  occasionally

Sterility  of relieve  the  eye,  and  furnish  a  scanty  repast  to  the camel ;

Mecca  j^yj-  ^]^g  general  features  are  rugged  rocks  without  a  trace  of

foliage,  and  sandy  stony  glens  from  which  the  peasant  looks
in  vain  for  the  grateful  returns  of  tillage.  Even  at  the
present  day,  after  the  riches  of  Asia  have  for  twelve  centuries
been  poured  into  the  city,  and  a  regular  supply  of  water  is
secured  by  a  conduit  from  the  springs  of 'Arafat,  Mecca  can
hardly  boast  a  garden  or  cultivated  field,  and  only  here  and
there  a  tree.

Valley  of  In  its  immediate  vicinity  the  hills  are  formed  of  quartz

^^^^^  and  gneiss ;  but  a  little  to  the  east,  grey  strata of  granite

appear,  and  within  one  or  two  miles  of  the  city,  lofty  and
rugged  peaks  shoot  upwards  in  grand  masses.  The  valley  is
about  two  miles  in  length.  The  general  direction  and  slope
are  from  north  to  south  ;  but  the  upper  or  northern  extremity
on  the  way  to  'Arafat  bends  eastward  ;  while  at  the  lower  end,
where  the  three  roads  from  the  Yemen,  Jidda,  and  Syria  meet,
there  is  a  still  more  decided  curve  to  the  west.  Here  the
valley  opens  out  to  the  breadth  of  half  a  mile  ;  and  in  this
spacious  amphitheatre,  shut  in  by  rugged  hills,  lies  the  city
with  the  Ka'ba  in  its  centre.  Rocks  rise  precipitously  all
around,  reaching  on  the  eastern  side  a  height  of  five  hundred
feet.  It  is  here  that  the  craggy  defiles  of  Abu  Kobeis,  the
most  lofty  of  the  hills  encircling  the  valley,  overhang  the
quarter  of  the  town  in  which  'Abd  al-Muttalib  and  his  family
lived.  Within  three  furlongs  to  the  north-east  of  the  Ka'ba,
there  is  still  pointed  out  to  the  pious  pilgrim  the  spot  of
Mohammad's  birth  ;  and  hard  by,  the  quarter  in  which  'Ah
resided  ;  both  built  upon  the  rocky  slope.

Climate  Though  within  the  tropics,  Mecca  has  not  the  advantage

of  tropical  showers.  The  rainy  season  begins  about  December,
but  the  clouds  do  not  at  any  time  discharge  their  precious
freight  continuously  or  with  regularity.  Sometimes  the  rain
descends  with  excessive  violence  and  inundates  the  little
valley  with  floods  from  'Arafat.  Even  in  summer,  rain  is
not  unfrequent.  The  seasons  being  thus  uncertain,  the
calamities  of  drought  occasionally  arise. The  heat,  especially


!•]


THE  VALLEY  OF  MECCA


in  autumn,  is  oppressive.  Surrounding  ridges  make  the
valley  close  and  sultry  ;  and  the  sun,  beating  with  violence
on  bare  gravelly  soil,  reflects  an  intense  and  distressing  glare.
The  native  of  Mecca,  acclimated  to  the  narrow  vale,  may
regard  with  complacency  its  inhospitable  atmosphere ;  but
the  traveller  even  in  winter  complains  of  stifling  warmth  and
suffocating  closeness.^

Such  is  the  spot,  barren  and  unpromising,  on  which  the Fond  vene-
Arabs look  with fondest reverence  as the  cradle of  their ''^^'.on  w'fh

which  It  IS

destiny  and  arena  of  the  remote  events  which  gave  birth  to  regarded  by
their  faith.  Here  Hagar  alighted  with  Ishmael,  and  in  search  Arabs
of  water  hurried  to  and  fro  between  the  little  hill  of  the  Safa,
a  spur  of  Abu  Kobeis,  and  the  eminence  of  the  Merwa,  an
offshoot  from  the  opposite  range.  Here  the  Beni  Jurhum
established  themselves  upon  the  failing  fortunes  of  the
ancestors  of  Koreish ;  and  from  hence  they  were  expelled
by  the  Khoza'ite  invaders  from  the  south.  It  was  in  this
pent-up  vale  that  Kosai  nourished  his  ambitious  plans,  and,
in  the  neighbouring  defiles  of  Mina,  asserted  them  in  a  mortal
struggle  with  his  rivals ;  and  here  he  established  Koreish  in
their  supremacy.  It  was  hard  by  the  Ka'ba  that  his  descend-
ants, the  children  of  Abd  ed-Dar  and  of  'Abd  Menaf,  were
drawn  up  in  battle  array  to  fight  for  the  sovereign  prerogative.
Here  it  was  that  Hashim  exhibited  his  princely  liberality;
and  on  this  spot  that  'Abd  al-Muttalib  toiled  with  his  solitary
son  till  he  discovered  the  ancient  well  of  Zemzem.  Thousands
of  such  associations  crowd  upon  the  mind  of  the  weary  pilgrim,
as  the  minarets  of  the  Ka'ba  rise  before  his  longing  eyes;
and,  in  the  long  vista  of  ages  reaching  even  to  Adam,  his
imagination  pictures  multitudes  of  pious  devotees  in  every
age  and  from  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  flocking  to  the  little
valley,  making  their  seven  circuits  of  the  holy  house,  kissing
the  mysterious  stone,  and  drinking  of  the  sacred  water.
Well  then  may  the  Arab  regard  the  fane,  and  its  surrounding
rocks,  with  awe  and  admiration.


At  the  period  of  Abraha's  retreat  from  Mecca  (as  narrated 'Abdallah
in  the Introduction),  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  now  above  70  years 5<c)"niar^'

1  Sprenger  thinks  the  population  may  have  been  at  this  time  12,000. "^'^^  Amina
The  number  seems  larg^e  ;  but  materials  for  even  the  loosest  estimate  are
wanting.


4 THE  BIRTH  AND  CHILDHOOD  OF  MOHAMMAD  [chap.


Death  of
'Abdallah


Amina  de-
livered of  a
son,  August,
A.D.  570


of  age,  enjoyed  rank  and  consideration  as  the  foremost
chief  of  Mecca.  Some  months  previous  to  that  event,  he
had  taken  his  youngest  son  'Abdallah,^  then  about  four-
and-twenty  years  of  age,  to  the  house  of  Uheib  [Wahb],  a
distant  kinsman  descended  from  Ziihra,  brother  of  the  famous
Kosai ;  and  there  affianced  him  to  Amina,  the  niece  of  Uheib,
under  whose  guardianship  she  lived.  At  the  same  time  'Abd
al-Muttalib,  notwithstanding  his  advanced  age,  bethought
him  of  a  matrimonial  alliance  on  his  own  account,  and
married  Halah,  the  cousin  of  Amina  and  daughter  of  Uheib;
of  this  late  marriage,  the  famous  Hamza  was  the  firstfruits.^

As  was  customary  in  a  marriage  at  the  home  of  the
bride,  'Abdallah  remained  there  with  her  for  three  days.
Not  long  after,  he  left  his  wife  with  child,  and  set  out  on  a
mercantile  expedition  to  Gaza  in  the  south  of  Syria.  On  his
way  back  he  sickened  at  Medina,  and  was  left  behind  by  the
caravan  with  his  father's  maternal  relatives.  'Abd  al-Muttalib,
on  learning  of  'Abdallah's  sickness,  despatched  his  son  Al-
Harith  to  take  care  of  him.  Reaching  Medina,  Al-Harith
found  that  his  brother  had  died  about  a  month  after  the
departure  of  the  caravan.  He  returned  with  these  tidings,
and  his  father  and  brethren  mourned  for  '_Abdallah.  He  was
but  five-and-twenty  years  of  age,  and  Amina  had  not  yet
been  delivered.  He  left  behind  him  five  camels  fed  on  wild
shrubs,^  a  flock  of  goats,  and  Um  Aiman,  a  slave-girl  (called
also  Barakd)^  who  tended  the  infant  borne  by  his  widow.
This  little  property,  and  the  house  in  which  he  dwelt,  were
all  the  inheritance  Mohammad  received  from  his  father ;  but,
little  as  it  was,  the  simple  habits  of  the  Arab  required  no
more  ;  and,  instead  of  being  evidence  of  poverty,  the  posses-
sion of  a  female  slave  was  rather  an  indication  of  prosperity
and  comfort.

Passing  over,  as  fabulous  and  ,  unworthy  of  credit,  the
marvellous  incidents  related  of  the  gestation  of  the  infant,
it  may  suffice  to  state  that  the  widowed  Amina  gave  birth  to


1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  100  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1078  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  58.
'Abdallah,  or  Servant  of  God  (corresponding  with  the  Hebrew  Abdiel),
was  a  name  common  among  the  ante-Mohammadan  Arabs.

2  At-Tabari,  i.  1081.

^  That  is  to  say,  not  reared  at  home,  and  therefore  of  an  inferior
kind.


I-]


BIRTH  AND  NAME  OF  MOHAMMAD


a  son  in  the  autumn  of  the  year  570  A.D.  The  materials  are
too  vague  and  discrepant  for  any  close  calculation.  But  we
are  told  that  the  event  occurred  about  fifty-five  days  after
the  attack  of  Abraha  ;  and  we  may  accept,  as  an  approxi-
mation, the  date  carefully  computed  by  Caussin  de  Perceval,
namely,  the  20th  of  August.

No  sooner  was  the  infant  born,  than  Amina  sent  to  tell
'Abd  al-Muttalib.  The  messenger  carrying  the  good  tidings
reached  the  chief  as  he  sat  in  the  sacred  enclosure  of  the
Ka'ba,  in  the  midst  of  his  sons  and  the  principal  men  of  his
tribe ;  and  he  was  glad  (so  the  simple  tradition  runs),  and
arose  and  those  that  were  with  him,  and  visited  Amina,  who
told  him  all  that  had  taken  place.  Then  he  took  the  young
child  in  his  arms,  and  went  to  the  Ka'ba  ;  and  as  he  stood
beside  the  Holy  house,  he  gave  thanks  to  God.  The  child
was  called  MoilAMMAD.

This  name  was  rare  among  the  Arabs,  but  not  unknown.
It  is  derived  from  the  root  hamada^  and  signifies  'The
Praised.'  Another  form  is  AHMED,  which  having  been
erroneously  employed  as  a  translation  of  '  The  Paraclete^  in
some  Arabic  version  of  the  New  Testament,  became  a
favourite  term  with  Muslims,  especially  in  addressing  Jews
and  Christians ;  for  it  was  (they  said)  the  title  under  which
the  Prophet  had  been  in  their  books  predicted.

It  was  not  the  custom  for  the  better  class  of  women  at
Mecca  to  suckle  their  children.  They  procured  nurses  for
them,  or  gave  them  out  to  nurse  among  the  neighbouring
Bedawi  tribes,  where  was  gained  the  double  advantage  of  a
robust  frame,  and  the  pure  speech  and  free  manners  of  the
desert.^  Thus  the  infant  Mohammad,  shortly  after  his  birth,
was  made  over  to  Thuweiba,  the  slave  of  his  uncle,  Abu  Lahab,
who  had  lately  suckled  Hamza.^ Though  nursed  by  her  for

^  The  practice  is  still  common  among  the  Sherlfs  of  Mecca.  At
eight  days  old  the  infant  is  sent  away  and,  excepting  a  visit  at  the  sixth
month,  does  not  return  to  his  parents  till  eight  or  ten  years  of  age.
Burckhardt  names  several  tribes  to  which  the  infants  are  thus  sent ;  and
among  them  the  Beni  Sa^d,  the  very  tribe  to  which  the  infant  Mohammad
was  made  over.  See  Journal  Asiatique  for  Jan.  1882,  p.  18  ;  where  there
is  notice  of  an  Arabic  inscription  in  Hauran,  five  centuries  before
Mohammad.

2  [Thuweiba  is  not  mentioned  by  Ibn  Hisham,  except  in  one  of  the
MSS.  (E)  used  by  WUstenfeld.]


Joy  of  'Abd
al-i\Iuttalib


The  child
is  called
Mohammad


Derivation
of  the  name


The  infant
was  not
nursed  by
his  mother,


but  for  a
few  days  by
Thuweiba


6 THE  BIRTH  AND  CHILDHOOD  OF  MOHAMMAD [chap.


Entrusted
to  Halima,
a  woman  of
the  Beni
Sa'd


Remains
among  the
Beni  Sa'd
till  five
years  old


Is  seized
with  a  fit


a  very  few  days,  the  Prophet  retained  in  after-life  a  lively
sense  of  the  connection  thus  formed.  Both  he  and  Khadija
were  wont  to  express  in  grateful  terms  their  respect  for  her.
Mohammad  used  to  send  her  periodically  clothes  and  other
presents  until  the  7th  year  of  the  Hijra,  when  tidings  were
brought  of  her  death.  Then  he  inquired  after  her  son,  his
foster-brother  ;  but  he,  too,  was  dead,  and  she  had  left  no
relatives.

When  Thuweiba  had  nursed  the  child  for  several  days,  a
party  of  the  Beni  Sa'd  (a  tribe  of  the  Hawazin)  arrived
at  Mecca  with  ten  women  who  offered  themselves  as  nurses.
They  were  soon  provided  with  children,  excepting  Halima
who  was  at  last  with  difficulty  persuaded  to  take  the  infant
Mohammad ;  for  it  was  to  the  father  that  the  nurses  chiefly
looked  for  reward,  and  the  charge  of  the  orphan  child  had
been  already  declined.  Tradition  encircles  Halima's  journey
home  with  a  halo  of  auspicious  fortune,  but  such  legend  it  is
not  here  our  province  to  relate.

The  infancy  and  part  of  the  childhood  of  Mohammad  were
spent  with  Halima  among  the  Beni  Sa'd.  At  two  years  of
age  she  weaned  and  took  him  to  his  home.  Amina  was
delighted  with  the  healthy  and  robust  appearance  of  her
infant,  who  looked  like  a  child  of  double  the  age,  and  said  :
'  Take  him  with  thee  back  again  to  the  desert ;  for  I  fear  the
unhealthy  air  of  Mecca.'  So  Halima  returned  with  him  to
her  tribe.  When  another  two  years  were  ended,  some
strange  event  occurred  which  greatly  alarmed  his  nurse.  It
was  probably  a  fit  of  epilepsy  ;  but  Muslim  legend  has  in-
vested it  with  so  many  marvellous  features  as  makes  it
difficult  to  discover  the  real  facts.  It  is  certain  that  the
apprehensions  of  Halima  and  her  husband  were  aroused  ;
for  Arab  superstition  is  wont  to  regard  the  subject  of  such
ailments  as  under  the  influence  of  an  evil  spirit.  They
resolved  to  rid  themselves  of  the  charge,  and  Halima  carried
the  child  back  to  its  mother.  With  some  difficulty,  Amina
obtained  from  her  an  account  of  what  had  happened,  calmed
her  fears,  and  entreated  her  to  resume  the  care  of  her  boy.
Halima  loved  her  foster-child,  and  was  not  unwillingly  per-
suaded to  take  him  back  once  more  to  her  encampment.
There  she  kept  him  for  about  a  year  longer,  and  with  such
care  that  she  would  not  suffer  him  to  move  out  of  her  sight.


1.1


WHO  IS  NURSED  BY  THE  BEDAWiN


But  uneasiness  was  again  excited  by  fresh  symptoms  of  a
suspicious  kind ;  and  she  set  out  finally  to  restore  the  boy  to
his  mother  when  he  was  about  five  years  of  age.  As  she
reached  the  outskirts  of  Mecca,  he  strayed  from  her,  and  she
could  not  find  him.  In  her  perplexity  she  repaired  to  *Abd
al-Muttalib,  and  he  sent  one  of  his  sons  to  aid  her  in  the
search ;  the  little  boy  was  discovered  wandering  in  Upper
Mecca,  and  restored  to  his  mother.

If  we  are  right  in  regarding  the  attacks  which  alarmed
Hallma  as  fits  of  a  nervous  nature,  they  exhibit  in  the  con-
stitution of  Mohammad  the  normal  marks  of  those  excited
states  and  ecstatic  swoons  which  perhaps  suggested  to  his
own  mind  the  idea  of  inspiration,  as  by  his  followers  they
were  undoubtedly  taken  to  be  evidence  of  it.  It  is  probable
that,  in  other  respects,  the  constitution  of  Mohammad  was
rendered  robust,  and  his  character  free  and  independent,  by
these  five  years  among  the  Beni  Sa'd.  At  any  rate,  his
speech  was  thus  formed  upon  one  of  the  purest  models  of
the  beautiful  language  of  the  Peninsula  ;  and  it  was  his
pride  in  after  days  to  say  :  *  Verily,  I  am  the  most  perfect
Arab  amongst  you  ;  my  descent  is  from  the  Koreish,  and
my  tongue  is  the  tongue  of  the  Beni  Sa'd.'  When  eloquence
began  to  form  an  important  element  of  success,  a  pure
language  and  standard  dialect  were  advantages  to  him  of
essential  moment.

Mohammad  ever  retained  a  grateful  impression  of  the
kindness  he  had  experienced  as  a  child  among  the  Beni
Sa'd.  Hallma  visited  him  at  Mecca  after  his  marriage  with
Khadlja.  '  It  was  (the  tradition  runs)  a  year  of  drought,  in
which  much  cattle  perished ;  and  Mohammad  spoke  to
Khadlja  and  she  gave  to  Hallma  a  camel  used  to  carry  a
litter,  and  forty  sheep ;  so  she  returned  to  her  people.'
Upon  another  occasion  he  spread  out  his  mantle  for  her  to
sit  upon — a  token  of  especial  respect — and  placed  his  hand
upon  her  bosom  in  an  affectionate  and  familiar  way.  Many
years  after,  when,  on  the  expedition  against  At-Ta'if,  he
attacked  the  Beni  Hawazin  and  took  a  multitude  of  them
captive,  they  found  ready  access  to  his  heart  by  reminding
him  of  the  days  when  he  was  nursed  among  them.  About
the  same  time  a  woman  called  Sheima  was  brought  in  with
some  other  prisoners  to  the  camp. When  they  threatened


Advan-
tages to
Mohammad
from  resi-
dence
among  the
Bedawin


Grateful
remem-
brance of
Halima's
nursing


8 THE  BIRTH  AND  CHILDHOOD  OF  MOHAMMAD [chap.


In  his  sixth
year  his
mother
takes  him
to  Medina,
A.D.  S7S-S76


Reminis-
cences of
the  visit


Death  of
Amina,  and
return  to
Mecca


Impression
produced
by  his
mother's

death


her  with  their  swords,  she  declared  that  she  was  the  Prophet's
foster-sister.  Mohammad  inquired  how  he  should  know  the
truth  of  this,  and  she  replied  :  '  Thou  gavest  me  this  bite
upon  my  back,  once  upon  a  time  when  I  carried  thee  on  my
hip.'  The  Prophet  recognised  the  mark,  spread  his  mantle
over  her,  and  made  her  to  sit  down  by  him.  He  gave  her
the  option  of  remaining  in  honour  and  comfort  with  him,  but
she  preferred  to  return  with  a  present  to  her  people.

The  sixth  year  of  his  life  Mohammad  spent  at  Mecca
under  the  care  of  his  mother.  She  then  planned  a  visit  to
Medina,  where  she  longed  to  show  her  boy  to  the  maternal
relatives  of  his  father.  So  she  departed  with  her  slave-girl
Um  Aiman,  who  tended  the  child  ;  and  they  rode  upon  two
camels.  Arrived  in  Medina,  she  alighted  at  the  house  where
her  husband  had  died  and  was  buried.  The  visit  was  of
sufficient  duration  to  imprint  the  scene  and  the  society,
notwithstanding  his  tender  age,  upon  the  memory  of
Mohammad.  He  used  in  later  days  to  call  to  recollection
things  that  happened  on  this  occasion.  Seven-and-forty
years  afterwards,  when  he  entered  Medina  as  a  refugee,  he
recognised  the  place,  and  said  :  '  In  this  house  I  sported  with
Uneisa,  a  little  girl  of  Medina ;  and  with  my  cousins,  I  used
to  put  to  flight  the  birds  that  alighted  upon  the  roof  As
he  gazed  upon  the  mansion,  he  added :  '  Here  it  was  my
mother  lodged  with  me ;  in  this  place  is  the  tomb  of  my
father ;  and  it  was  there,  in  that  very  pond,  that  I  learnt  to
swim.'  ^

After  sojourning  at  Medina  about  a  month,  Amina
bethought  her  of  returning  to  Mecca,  and  set  out  in  the
same  manner  as  she  had  come.  But  when  about  half  way
they  had  reached  a  spot  called  Al-Abwa,  she  fell  sick  and
died ;  and  she  was  buried  there.^  The  little  orphan  was
carried  back  to  Mecca  by  Um  Aiman,  who,  although  then
quite  a  girl,  was  a  faithful  nurse  to  the  child,  and  continued  to
be  his  constant  attendant.

The  early  loss  of  his  mother  no  doubt  imparted  to  the
youthful  Mohammad  something  of  that  pensive  and  meditative
character  by  which  he  was  afterwards  distinguished.  In  his
seventh  year  he  could  appreciate  the  bereavement  and  feel
the desolation of  his orphan  state. In  the  Kor'an  he  has

1  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  7^,.  ^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  107  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  72>-


I.]


'ABD  AL-MUTTALIB  TAKES  CHARGE  OF  HIM


alluded  touchingly  to  the  subject.  While  reassuring  his
heart  of  the  divine  favour,  he  recounts  the  mercies  of  the
Almighty ;  and  amongst  them  the  first  is  this :  '  Did  He  not
find  tJiec  an  orpJinn,  a)id  fnrnisJied  thee  with  a  refnge  ? '  ^  On
his  pilgrimage  from  Medina  to  Al-Hodeibiya  he  visited  by
the  way  his  mother's  tomb,  and  lifted  up  his  voice  and  wept,
and  his  followers  likewise  wept  around  him.  When  they
asked  him  concerning  it,  he  said:  'This  is  the  grave  of  my
mother :  the  Lord  hath  permitted  me  to  visit  it.  And  I
sought  leave  to  pray  for  her  salvation,  but  it  was  not
granted.  So  I  called  my  mother  to  remembrance,  and  the
tender  memory  of  her  overcame  me,  and  I  wept.'

The  charge  of  the  orphan  was  now  undertaken  by  'Abd
al-Muttalib,  who  had  by  this  time  reached  the  patriarchal  age
of  fourscore  years.  The  child  was  treated  by  him  with
singular  fondness.  A  rug  used  to  be  spread  under  the
Ka'ba,  and  on  it  the  aged  chief  reclined  in  shelter  from
the  heat  of  the  sun.  Around  the  carpet,  but  at  a  respectful
distance,  sat  his  sons.  The  little  Mohammad  was  wont  to
run  up  close  to  the  patriarch,  and  unceremoniously  take
possession  of  his  rug ;  his  sons  seeking  to  drive  him  off,
'Abd  al-Muttalib  would  interpose,  saying,  '  Let  my  little  son
alone,'  stroke  him  on  the  back,  and  delight  to  listen  to  his
childish  prattle.  The  boy  was  still  under  the  care  of  his
nurse ;  but  he  would  ever  and  anon  quit  her,  and  run  into
the  apartment  of  his  grandfather  even  when  he  was  alone  or
asleep.

The  guardianship  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib  lasted  but  two
years,  for  he  died  eight  years  after  the  attack  of  Abraha.^
The  orphan  child  felt  bitterly  the  loss  of  his  indulgent  grand-
father ;  as  he  followed  the  bier  he  was  seen  to  weep,  and
when  he  grew  up,  he  retained  a  distinct  remembrance  of  his
death.  The  heart  of  Mohammad  in  his  tender  years  was
thus  again  rudely  wounded,  and  the  fresh  bereavement  was
rendered  more  poignant  by  the  dependent  position  in  which
it  left  him.  The  nobility  of  his  grandfather's  descent,  the
deference  paid  to  him  throughout  the  vale  of  Mecca,  and  his
splendid  hospitality  towards  the  pilgrims,  in  furnishing  them
with food and drink,  were  witnessed with satisfaction by

^  Sura,  xciii.  6.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  loS  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1123  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  74.


Grief  on
visiting  her
tomb  in
after-life


'Abdal-Mutt-
alib  under-
takes charge
of  the
orphan,
A.D.  576


'Abd  al-
Muttalib
dies  A.D.
578


lo THE  BIRTH  AND  CHILDHOOD  OF  MOHAMMAD [chap.


Effect  of
death  of
'Abd  al-
Muttalib


The  sons  of
'Abd  al-
Muttalib


Abu  Talib
and  Al-

'Abbas


Abu  Talib
becomes
guardian  of
his  orphan
nephew


the  thoughtful  child.  These  things  no  doubt  left  behind
them  a  proud  remembrance,  and  formed  the  seed  perhaps
of  many  an  ambitious  thought  and  day-dream  of  power  and
domination.

The  death  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib  left  the  children  of  Hashim
without  any  powerful  head ;  while  it  enabled  the  other
branch,  descended  from  Omeiya,  to  gain  ascendancy.  Of
the  latter  family  the  chief  at  this  time  was  Harb,  who  held
the  Leadership  in  war,  and  was  followed  by  a  numerous  and
powerful  body  of  relations.

Of 'Abd  al-Muttalib's  sons,  Al-Harith,  the  eldest,  was  now
dead ;  the  chief  of  those  who  survived  were  Az-Zubeir  and
Abu  Talib  (both  by  the  same  mother  as  'Abdallah),  Abu
Lahab,  A1-' Abbas,  and  Hamza.  The  last  two  were  still  very
young.  Az-Zubeir  was  the  oldest,  and  to  him  'Abd  al-
Muttalib  bequeathed  his  dignity  and  offices.  Az-Zubeir,
again,  left  them  to  Abu  Talib,  who,  finding  himself  too  poor
to  discharge  the  expensive  and  onerous  task  of  providing
for  the  pilgrims,  waived  the  honour  in  favour  of  his  younger
brother  A1-' Abbas.  But  the  family  of  Hashim  had  fallen
from  its  high  estate,  and  A1-' Abbas  was  able  to  retain  only
the  giving  of  drink,  while  the  furnishing  of  food  passed  into
the  hands  of  another  branch.  A1-* Abbas  was  rich,  and  his
influential  post,  involving  charge  of  the  well  Zemzem,  was
retained  by  him  till  the  introduction  of  Islam,  and  then
confirmed  to  his  family  by  the  Prophet ;  but  he  was  not  a
man  of  strong  character,  and  never  attained  to  a  commanding
position  at  Mecca.  Abu  Talib,  on  the  other  hand,  possessed
many  noble  qualities,  and  won  greater  respect ;  but,  probably
from  poverty,  he  too  remained  in  the  background.  It  was
thus  that  in  the  oscillations  of  phylarchical  government,  the
prestige  of  the  house  of  Hashim  had  begun  to  wane,  and
nearly  disappear ;  while  the  rival  Omeiyad  branch  was  rising
to  importance.  This  phase  of  the  political  state  of  Mecca
began  with  the  death  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  and  continued
until  the  conquest  of  the  city  by  Mohammad  himself.

To  Abu  Talib,  the  dying  'Abd  al-Muttalib  consigned  the
guardianship  of  his  orphan  grandchild  ;  and  faithfully  and
kindly  he  discharged  the  trust.  His  fondness  for  the  lad
equalled  that  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib.  He  made  him  sleep  by
his  bed,  eat  by  his  side,  and  go  with  him  wherever  he  walked


I.]  JOURNEY  TO  SYRIA  Tl

abroad. And  this  tender  treatment  was  continued  until  his

nephew  emerged  from  the  helplessness  of  childhood.

It  was  during  this  period  that  Abu  Talib,  accompanied Moham-

by Mohammad, undertook a mercantile journey to Syria- ™^^  ^^
■' ^ •  '  _  J  J  J  twelve  years

He  intended  to  leave  the  lad  behind;  for  now  twelve  years ofageac-
of  age  he  was  able  to  take  care  of  himself. But  when  the AbTTTHb
caravan  was  ready  to  depart,  and  Abu  Talib  about  to  mount, to  Syria,
the  child,  overcome  by  the  prospect  of  so  long  a  separation, ^'^'  ^  "
clung  to  his  protector. Abu  Talib  was  moved,  and  carried
him  along  with the party.^ The expedition extended to
Bosra,  perhaps farther. It  lasted for  several  months,  and
afforded to the youthful Mohammad opportunities of
observation, which were not lost upon him. He passed
near to Petra, Jerash, 'Amman, and other remains of
former mercantile grandeur ; and the sight must have
deeply  imprinted  upon  his  reflective  mind  the  instability  ot
earthly  greatness. The  wild  story  of  the  valley  of  Al-Hijr, impression
with  its lonely  deserted habitations  hewn  out  of  the  rock. Probably

1 1  1 r T •  !•  excited  by

and  the  tale  oi  divine  vengeance  descending  on  the  cities  of  this  journey
the  plain  over  which  now  rolled  the  waves  of  the  Dead  Sea,
would  excite  apprehension  and  awe ;  while  such  strange
histories,  rendered  more  startling  and  tragical  by  Jewish
tradition  and  local  legend,  would  win  and  charm  the
childish  heart  ever  yearning  after  the  marvellous.  On  this
journey  too,  he  passed  through  several  Jewish  settle-
ments, and  came  in  contact  with  the  Christians  of  Syria.
Hitherto  he  had  witnessed,  if  at  all,  only  an  isolated  and
imperfect  exhibition  of  their  faith  :  now  he  saw  its  rites  in
full  and  regular  performance  by  a  whole  community.  The
national  and  social  customs  founded  upon  Christianity;  the
churches  with  their  crosses  and  images,  their  pictures  and
other  symbols  of  the  faith  ;  the  ringing  of  bells  ;  the  frequent
assemblages  for  worship,  were  all  forced  on  his  attention.
The  reports,  and  possibly  an  actual  glimpse,  of  the
continually  recurring  ceremonial,  effected  (we  may  suppose)
a  deep  impression  upon  him  ;  and  this  impression  would  be
rendered  all  the  more  practical  and  lasting  by  the  sight  of
whole  tribes,  Arabs  like  himself,  belonging  to  the  same  faith
and  practising  the  same  observances.  However  fallen  and
materialised,  the  Christianity  of  Syria  must  have  struck  the
^  Ibn  Hishani,  p.  115  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1124  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  75  f.


12  THE  BIRTH  AND  CHILDHOOD  OF  MOHAMMAD  [chap.  I.

thoughtful  observer  in  strange  contrast  with  the  gross
idolatry  of  Mecca.  Once  again,  in  mature  life,  Mohammad
visited  Syria,  and  whatever  reflections  of  this  nature  were  then
awakened  would,  no  doubt,  receive  an  augmented  force  and
deeper  colouring,  from  the  vivid  pictures  and  bright  imagery
which,  upon  the  same  ground,  had  been  impressed  on  the
imagination  of  his  childhood.

No further incident of  a special nature is related of
Mohammad,  until  he  had  advanced  from  childhood  to  youth.


CHAPTER  II

FROM THE YOUTH OF MOHAMMAD TO HIS
FORTIETH YEAR^

A.D. 570-609

The  next  passage  in  the life of  Mohammad bn'ng's us  to 'Sacrilegi-

events  of  a  wider  and  more  stirring  interest.  °o^  i^^^J:^

=>  580  to.  590

Between  the  years  580  and  590  A.D.  the  vale  of  Mecca  and a.d.
surrounding  country  were  disturbed  by  one  of  those  bloody
feuds  so  frequently  excited  by  the  fiery  pride,  and  prolonged
by  the  revengeful  temper,  of  the  nation.

In  Dhu'l-Ka'da,  the  sacred  month  preceding  the  annual A  fair  held
pilgrimage,  a  fair  was  held  at  'Okaz,  where,  within  three  days' ^q^I  ^  ^
journey  east  of  Mecca,  the  shady  palm  and  cool  fountain
offered  a  grateful  resting-place  to  the  merchant  and  traveller
after  their  toilsome  journey.

Goods  were  bartered,  vainglorious  contests  (those  char- Chivalrous
acteristic exhibitions of Bedawi chivalry) were held,  and ^^'j  ^^_  *'
verses  recited  by  bards  of  the  various  tribes. The  successful tests
poems  produced  at  this  national  gathering  were  treated  with
distinguished  honour. They  were  transcribed  in  illuminated
characters,  and  thus  styled Golden;  or  they  were  attached
to  the  Ka'ba  and  honoured  with  the  title  Suspended'} The
'  Seven  suspended  poems '  still  survive  from  a  period  anterior
to  Mohammad,  a  wondrous  specimen of  artless  eloquence.
The beauty of  their language and wild richness of their
imagery  are  acknowledged  by  the  European  reader ;  but  the
subject  is  limited,  and  the  beaten  track  seldom  deviated  from.
The  charms  of  his  mistress,  the  envied  spot  marked  by  the

1  Ibn  Hishfim,  p.  117  fif.  ; Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  80  ff.

^  [This  explanation  of  the  title  Mo'allakat  is of  late and doubtful
authority. The  meaning  of  the  term  is  quite  unknown.]


14 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.


Origin  of
'  Sacrilegi-
ous War '


Precautions
for  peace


Hostilities
precipi-
tated by  a
murder


still  fresh  traces  of  her  encampment,  the  solitude  of  her
deserted  haunts,  his  own  generosity  and  prowess,  the  un-
rivalled glory  of  his  tribe,  the  noble  qualities  of  his  camel ; —
these  are  the  themes  which,  with  little  variation  of  treatment,
and  with  no  contrivance  whatever  of  plot  or  story,  occupied
the  Arab  muse ; — and  some  of  them  only  added  fuel  to  the
besetting  vices  of  the  people,  vainglory,  envy,  vindictiveness,
and  pride.

At  the  fair  of  'Okaz,  a  rivalrous  spirit  had  been  about
this  period  engendered  between  Koreish  and  the  Beni
Hawazin,  a  numerous  tribe  of  kindred  descent,  which  dwelt
(and  still  dwells)  in  the  country  between  Mecca  and  At-Ta'if.
An  arrogant  poet,  vaunting  the  superiority  of  his  tribe,  was
struck  by  an  indignant  Hawazinite ;  a  maid  of  Hawazin
descent  rudely  treated  by  some  Koreishite  youths ;  an
importunate  creditor  insolently  repulsed.^  On  each  occasion
the  sword  was  unsheathed,  blood  flowed,  and  the  conflict
would  have  become  general  unless  the  leaders  had  interfered
to  calm  the  excited  people.  Such  was  the  origin  of  the
'  Sacrilegious  War,'  so  called  because  it  occurred  within  the
sacred  term,  and  was  eventually  carried  within  the  sacred
territory.

These  incidents  suggested  the  expediency  of  requiring  all
who  frequented  the  fair  to  surrender,  while  it  lasted,  their
arms,  and  to  deposit  them  with  'Abdallah  ibn  Jud'an,  a  chief
of  Mecca.  By  this  precaution  peace  was  preserved  for
several  years,  when  a  wanton  murder  supplied  more  serious
cause  of  offence.  The  prince  of  Al-Hira  had  despatched  to
the  fair  a  caravan  richly  laden  with  perfumes  and  musk.  It
proceeded  under  the  escort  of  an  Hawazin  chieftain.  Another
chief,  friend  of  Koreish,  jealous  at  being  supplanted  in  charge
of  the  convoy,  watched  his  opportunity,  and,  falling  upon  the
caravan,  slew  its  leader,  and  fled  with  the  booty. On  his

^  The  incident  affords  a  curious  illustration  of  Arab  manners.  The
dissatisfied  creditor  seated  himself  in  a  conspicuous  place  with  a  monkey
by  his  side,  and  said  :  '  W/io  zuill  give  me  another  such  ape,  and  1  will
give  him  itt  exchange  my  claim  on  such  a  one?' — naming  his  debtor
with  his  full  pedigree  from  Kinana,  an  ancestor  of  Koreish.  This  he
kept  vociferating  to  the  intense  annoyance  of  the  Kinana  tribe,  one  of
whom  drew  his  sword  and  cut  oflf  the  monkey's  head.  In  an  instant  the
Hawazin  and  Kinana  tribes  were  embroiled  in  bitter  strife. Ibn  Koteiba,

P-  293-


ir.]  THE  'SACRILEGIOUS  WAR'  15

flight  lie  met  a  man  of  the  Koreish  whom  he  charged  to
proceed  with  expedition  to  the  fair  then  being  held  at  'Okaz,
and  communicate  the  intelligence  to  his  confederate  Harb^
and  other  Koreishite  chiefs.  The  message  was  promptly  con-
veyed, and  Ibn  Jud'an,  thus  privately  informed  of  the  murder,
forthwith  gave  back  to  all  their  arms,  and,  feigning  urgent
business  at  Mecca,  departed  with  his  whole  tribe.  The  news
of  the  murder  began  rapidly  to  spread  at  'Okaz,  and  as  the
sun  went  down  it  reached  the  ears  of  the  Hawazin  chief,  who
at  once,  perceiving  the  cause  of  the  precipitate  departure  of
Koreish,  rallied  his  people  and  proceeded  in  hot  pursuit.
Koreish  had  already  entered  the  sacred  limits,  and  so  their
enemy  contented  themselves  with  challenging  them  to  a
rencounter  at  the  same  period  of  the  following  year.  The
challenge  was  accepted,  and  both  parties  prepared  for  the
struggle.  Several  battles  were  fought  with  various  success,
and  hostilities,  more  or  less  formal,  prolonged  for  four  years,
when  a  truce  was  called.  The  dead  were  numbered  up,  and  A  truce
as  twenty  had  been  killed  of  the  Hawazin  more  than  of  ^ears^°fiVt-
Koreish,  the  latter  consented  to  pay  the  price  of  their  blood,  ing
and  for  this  purpose  delivered  hostages.  One  of  these  was
Abu  Sufyan,  the  famous  antagonist  in  after  days  of  Moham-
mad, In  some  of  these  conflicts,  the  whole  of  Koreish  and  Omeiyad
their  allies  were  engaged. Each  tribe  was  comm.anded  by  a ?"^,  ^u^^Jr

° ^  _  _  ^  imites  both

chief  of  its  own ;  and  Ibn  Jud'an  guided  the  general  move- engaged  in
ments. The  descendants  of  'Abd Shams  were  headed  by ^^^  struggle
Harb,  son  of  Omeiya,  and  took  a  distinguished  part  in  the
warfare. The  children  of  Hashim  were  present  also,  under
command of Az-Zubeir,  eldest surviving son of  'Abd al-
Muttalib  ;  but  they  occupied  a  less  prominent  position. In
one  of  the  battles  Mohammad  attended  upon  his  uncles  ;  but. Part  taken
though  now  near  twenty  years  of  age,  he  had  not  acquired  the by  Moham-
love  of  arms. According  to  some,  his  efforts  were  confined
to  gathering  up  the  arrows  of  the  enemy  as  they  fell,  and
handing  them  to  his  uncles. Others  assign  him  a  somewhat
more  active  share  ;  but  the  sentence  in  which  even  this  is
preserved  does  not  imply  much  enthusiasm in  the  warfare ;
'  I remember,'  said the Prophet, '  being present with my

1  Harb  was  the  son  of  Omeiya  and  father  of  Mohammad's  opponent
Abu  Sufyan.  As  confederate  of  the  murderer  he  was  bound  to  take  up
his  cause.


l6 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.


Probable
influence
upon  Mo-
hammad of
the  fair  at
'Okaz


Lesson  in
poetry  and
rhetoric


Acquaint-
ance with
Christians
and  Jews


Possible
germ  of
great  cath-
olic system


uncles  in  the  Sacrilegious  War ;  I  discharged  arrows  at  the
enemy,  and  I  do  not  regret  it'  Physical  courage,  indeed,
and  martial  daring,  are  characteristics  which  did  not  distin-
guish the  Prophet  at  any  period  of  his  career.^

The  struggles  for  pre-eminence,  indeed,  and  the  contests
of  eloquence,  at  the  annual  fair,  must  have  possessed  for  the
youthful  Mohammad  a  more  engrossing  interest  than  the
combat  of  arms.  At  these  spectacles,  while  his  patriotism
was  no  doubt  aroused  and  desire  after  personal  distinction
stimulated  by  the  whole  atmosphere  of  rivalry,  he  had  rare
opportunities  of  cultivating  his  genius,  and  learning  from  the
greatest  masters  and  most  perfect  models  the  art  of  poetry
and  power  of  rhetoric.  But  another  and  a  nobler  lesson
might  also  be  learned  in  the  concourse  at  'Okaz.  The  Chris-
tianity, as  well  as  the  chivalry,  of  Arabia  had  representatives
there;  and,  if  we  may  believe  tradition,  Mohammad  while  a
boy  heard  Koss,  bishop  of  Ncjran,  preach  a  purer  creed  than
that  of  Mecca,  in  accents  which  agitated  and  aroused  his  soul.
And  many  at  that  fair,  besides  the  venerable  Koss,  though
influenced  it  may  be  by  a  less  catholic  spirit,  yet  professed  to
believe  in  the  same  revelation  from  above,  and  preach  the
same  good  tidings.  There  too  were  Jews,  serious  and  earnest
men,  surpassing  the  Christians  in  number,  and  equally  with
them  appealing  to  an  inspired  Book.  The  scene  thus  annu-
ally witnessed  by  Mohammad  as  he  advanced  into  mature
years,  had,  we  cannot  doubt,  a  deep  influence  upon  him.
May  there  not  have  been  here  too  the  germ  of  his  great
catholic  design ;  of  that  Faith  round  which  the  tribes  of
Arabia  were  all  to  rally  ?  At  the  fair,  religion  clashed
against  religion  in  hopeless  discord ;  and  yet  amid  it  all  he
might  discern  some  common  elements,  a  book,  a  name,  to
which  all  would  reverently  bow.  With  the  Jews  he  was  more
familiar  than  the  Christians,  for  as  a  child  he  had  seen  them
at  Medina,  heard  of  their  synagogue  and  worship,  and  learned
to  respect  them  as  men  that  feared  God.  Yet  these  glanced
bitterly  at  the  Christians,  and,  even  when  Koss  addressed
them in language which approved itself  to the heart of


^  Among  the  chieftains  in  command  of  tribes,  it  is  interesting  to
notice  Khuweilid,  father  of  Khadlja ;  Al-Khattab,  father  of  'Omar ;
'Othmanand  Zeid,  two  of  the  four  '' hiq Hirers'  who  will  be  noticed  below  ;
besides  other  well-known  names.


II.]  THINGS  WHICH  INFLUENCED  HIM  17

Mohammad,  they  scorned  his  words,  and  railed  at  the  meek
and  lowly  Jesus  of  whom  he  spoke.  Not  less  disdainfully  did
the  Christians  regard  the  Jews.  And  both  Jews  and  Chris-
tians spurned  the  Arab  tribes  as  heathens  devoted  to  the
wrath  of  an  offended  Deity.  Yet  if  the  inquirer  sought  to
fathom  the  causes  of  this  opposition,  he  would  find  that,  not-
withstanding the  mutual  enmity  of  Jews  and  Christians,  there
was  a  Revelation  equally  acknowledged  by  both  to  be  divine;
that  both  denounced  idolatry  as  an  unpardonable  sin,  and
professed  to  worship  One  only  true  God  ;  and  (what  would
stir  his  inmost  soul)  that  both  repeated  with  profound  venera-
tion a  common  name, — the  name  of  Abraham,  the  builder  of
the  Ka'ba  and  author  of  the  rites  observed  there  by  every
Arab  tribe.  What,  if  there  were  truth  in  all  these  systems ;
— divine  TRUTH,  dimly  glimmering  through  human  prejudice,
malevolence,  and  superstition  ?  Would  not  that  be  a  glorious
mission  to  act  the  part  of  the  Christian  bishop,  but  on  a  still
wider  and  more  catholic  stage ;  and,  by  removing  the  miser-
able partitions  which  hid  and  severed  each  sect  and  nation
from  its  neighbour,  to  make  way  for  the  illumination  of  truth
and  love  emanating  from  the  great  Father  of  all !  Visions
and  speculations  such  as  these  were  no  doubt  raised  in  the
mind  of  Mohammad  by  association  with  the  Jews  and  Chris-
tians frequenting  this  great  fair.  Certain  it  is  that,  late  in
life,  he  referred  with  satisfaction  to  the  memory  of  Koss,  the
son  of  Sa'ida,  and  spoke  of  him  as  having  preached  there  the
'true  catholic  faith.'

A  confederacy  formed  at  Mecca  shortly  after  the  restora- League
tion  of  peace,  for  the  suppression  of  violence  and  injustice, j^°"if^\
aroused  an  enthusiasm  in  the  mind  of  Mohammad  which  the proteciing
martial  exploits  of  the  Sacrilegious  War failed to kindle. Lgg^Jj'
The  offices  of  State,  and  with  them  the  powers  of  govern-
ment, had  (as  we  have seen) become divided among the
various Koreishite families. There was no one now to
exercise  an  authority  such as  had been  enjoyed by  Kosai
and  Hashim,  or  even  by  'Abd  al-Muttalib. When  any  of  the
separate  tribes  neglected  to  punish  its  members  for  oppres-
sion and  wrongdoing,  no  chief  at  Mecca  was  strong  enough
to  stand  up  as champion of  the injured. Right was not
enforced  :  wrong  remained  unpunished. Certain  glaring  acts
of  tyranny  suggested  to  the  principal  Koreishite  families  the

B


i8 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.

expedience  of  binding  themselves  by  an  oath  to  secure  justice
to  the  helpless.^  The  honour  of  originating  the  movement
is  ascribed  to  Az-Zubeir,  eldest  surviving  son  of  'Abd  al-
Muttalib.  The  descendants  of  Hashim  and  kindred  families
assembled  in  the  house  of  Ibn  Jud'an,  who  prepared  for  them
a  feast ;  and  they  swore  *  by  the  avenging  Deity,  that  they
would  take  the  part  of  the  oppressed,  and  see  his  claim  ful-
filled, so  long  as  a  drop  of  water  remained  in  the  ocean,  or
would  satisfy  it  from  their  own  resources.'  The  league  was
useful,  both  as  a  restraint  against  injustice,  and  on  some
occasions  as  a  means  of  enforcing  restitution.  '  I  would  not,'
Mohammad  used  in  after  years  to  say,  'exchange  for  the
choicest  camel  in  all  Arabia  the  remembrance  of  being  present
at  the  oath  which  we  took  in  the  house  of  'Abdallah,  when
the  Beni  Hashim,  Zuhra  ibn  Kilab  and  Teim  ibn  Murra
swore  that  they  would  stand  by  the  oppressed.'^


Moham-
mad's occu-
pation as  a
shepherd


The  youth  of  Mohammad  passed  away  without  any  other
incidents  of  interest.  At  one  period  he  was  employed,  like
other  lads,  in  tending  the  sheep  and  goats  of  Mecca  upon  the
neighbouring  hills  and  valleys.^  He  used  when  at  Medina  to
refer  to  this  employment  and  to  say  that  it  comported  with
his  prophetic  office,  even  as  it  did  with  that  of  Moses  and
David.  On  one  occasion,  as  some  people  passed  him  carry-
ing a  load  of  Ai'dk  berries,  the  Prophet  said  to  his
companions :  '  Pick  me  out  the  blackest  of  them,  for  they  are
sweet ; — even  such  was  I  wont  to  gather  when  I  fed  the  flocks
of  Mecca  at  Ajyad.  Verily  there  hath  been  no  prophet  raised
up,  who  performed  not  the  work  of  a  Shepherd.'  The  hire
received  for  this  duty  would  contribute  towards  the  support  of
his  needy  uncle,  Abu  Talib,  and  the  occupation  itself  was  con-

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  85  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  86.

^  Zuhra  was  brother,  and  Teim  the  uncle,  of  Kosai.  It  is  remarkable
that  only  these  three  tribes  joined  the  league.  To  the  Beni  Zuhra
belonged  Mohammad's  mother  ;  and  his  friend  Abu  Bekr  to  the  Beni
Teim.  That  the  league  was  only  a  partial  one  is  probable  from  its  name,
the  Oath  of  the  Fudul,  z>.,  '  that  which  is  unnecessary  or  supererogatory.'
It  seems  to  have  been  so  called  by  the  rest  of  Koreish  who  did  not  join
it.  An  instance  is  given  in  which  after  the  death  of  Mohammad  the
league  was  appealed  to  by  Al-Hosein,  son  of  'All,  against  Mu'awiya  or
his  nephew.

3  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  79  f.


II.]  HE  TURNS  SHEPHERD  19

genial  with  his  thoughtful  and  meditative  character.  While
he  watched  the  flocks,  his  attention  would  be  riveted  by  the  Tiobable
signs  of  an  unseen  Power  spread  all  around  him  :  the  twink-  shepherd
ling  stars  and  bright  constellations  gliding  through  the  dark  life
blue  sky  silently  along,  would  be  charged  to  him  with  a
special  message ;  the  loneliness  of  the  desert  would  arm  with
a  deeper  conviction  that  speech  which  day  everywhere  utters
unto  day ;  while  the  still  small  voice,  never  unheard  by  the
attentive  listener,  would  swell  into  grander  and  more
iinperious  tones  when  the  tempest  swept  with  its  forked
lightning  and  far-rolling  thunder  along  the  vast  solitudes  of
the  mountains  about  Mecca.  Thus,  we  may  presume,  was
cherished  a  deep  and  earnest  faith  in  the  Deity  as  an  ever-
present,  all-directing  Agent  ; — a  faith  which  in  after  days  the
Prophet  was  wont  to  enforce  from  the  memories,  no  doubt,  of
these  early  days,  by  eloquent  and  heart-stirring  appeals  to
the  sublime  operations  of  Nature  and  the  beneficent  adapta-
tions of  an  ever-present  Providence.

Our  authorities  all  agree  in  ascribing  to  the  youth  of  Reserved
Mohammad  a  modesty  of  deportment  and  purity  of  manners  a"e  vouth^"^'
rare  among  the  people  of  Mecca.  His  virtue  is  said  to  have  of  Moham-
been  miraculously  preserved.  '  I  was  engaged  one  night'  (so
he  himself  relates)  '  feeding  the  flocks  in  company  with  a  lad
of  Koreish.  And  I  said  to  him,  If  thou  wilt  look  after  my
flock,  I  will  go  into  Mecca  and  divert  myself  there,  even  as
youths  are  wont  by  night  to  divert  themselves.'  But  no
sooner  had  he  reached  the  precincts  of  the  city,  than  a
marriage  feast  engaged  his  attention,  and  he  fell  asleep.  On
another  night,  entering  the  town  with  the  same  intentions,  he
was  arrested  by  heavenly  strains  of  music,  and,  sitting  down,
slept  till  morning.  Thus  he  escaped  temptation.  '  And  after
this,'  said  Mohammad,  '  I  no  more  sought  after  vice ;  even
until  I  had  attained  unto  the  prophetic  office.'  Making
every  allowance  for  the  fond  reverence  which  favoured  the
currency  of  such  stories,  it  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the
character  of  Mohammad  that  he  should  have  shrunk  from
the  coarse  and  licentious  practices  of  his  youthful  friends.
Endowed  with  a  refined  mind  and  delicate  taste,  reserved
and  meditative,  he  lived  much  within  himself,  and  the
ponderings  of  his  heart  no  doubt  supplied  occupation  for
leisure  hours  spent  by  others  of  a  lower  stamp  in  rude  sports


mad


20 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.


Abu  Talib
suggests
mercantile
expedition.
yEtat.  25


Mohammad
accompan-
ies a  Syrian
caravan  in
charge  of
Khadija's
venture


and  profligacy.  The  fair  character  and  honourable  bearing
of  the  unobtrusive  youth  won  the  approbation  of  his  fellow-
citizens  ;  and  he  received  the  title,  by  common  consent,  of
Al-AmIn,  'the  Faithful.'

Thus  respected  and  honoured,  Mohammad  lived  a  quiet
and  retired  life  in  the  family  of  Abu  Talib,  who  (as  we  have
seen)  was  prevented  by  limited  means  from  occupying  any
prominent  position  in  the  society  of  Mecca.  At  last,  finding
his  family  increase  faster  than  the  ability  to  provide  for  them,
Abu  Talib  bethought  him  of  setting  his  nephew,  now  of
mature  age,  to  earn  a  livelihood  for  himself  Mohammad
was  never  covetous  of  wealth,  or  at  any  period  of  his  career
energetic  in  the  pursuit  of  riches  for  their  own  sake.  If  left
to  himself,  he  would  probably  have  preferred  the  quiet  and
repose  of  his  present  life  to  the  bustle  and  cares  of  a
mercantile  journey.  He  would  not  spontaneously  have
contemplated  such  an  expedition.  But  when  the  proposal
was  made,  his  generous  soul  at  once  felt  the  necessity  of
doing  all  that  was  possible  to  relieve  his  uncle,  and  he  cheer-
fully responded  to  the  call.  The  story  is  as  follows  :  ^ — When
his  nephew  was  now  five-and-twenty  years  of  age,  Abu  Talib
addressed  him  in  these  words :  '  I  am,  as  thou  knowest,  a
man  of  small  substance;  and  truly  the  times  deal  hardly  with
me.  Now  here  is  a  caravan  of  thine  own  tribe  about  to  start
for  Syria,  and  Khadija,  daughter  of  Khuweilid,  needeth  men
of  our  tribe  to  send  forth  with  her  merchandise.  If  thou
wert  to  offer  thyself,  she  would  readily  accept  thy  services.'
Mohammad  replied  :  '  Be  it  so  as  thou  hast  said.'  Then  Abu
Talib  went  to  Khadija,  and  inquired  whether  she  wished  to
hire  his  nephew,  but  he  added  :  '  We  hear  that  thou  hast
engaged  such  an  one  for  two  camels,  and  we  should  not  be
content  that  my  nephew's  hire  were  less  than  four.'  The
matron  discreetly  answered  :  '  Hadst  thou  asked  this  thing
for  one  of  a  distant  or  alien  tribe,  I  would  have  granted  it;
how  much  rather  now  that  thou  askest  it  for  a  near  relative
and  friend  ! '  So  the  matter  was  settled,  and  Mohammad
prepared  for  the  journey.  When  the  caravan  was  about  to
set  out,  his  uncle  commended  him  to  the  men  of  the  company.
Meisara,  servant  of  Khadija,  likewise  travelled  along  with
Mohammad in charge  of  her  property. The  caravan  took

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  119  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1127  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  82  f.


II.]


SECOND  JOURNEY  TO  SYRIA


21


the  usual  route  to  Syria,  the  same  which  Mohammad  had
traversed  with  his  uncle  thirteen  years  before.  In  due  time
they  reached  Bosra,  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  about  sixty
miles  to  the  east  of  the  Jordan.  The  transactions  of  that
busy  mart,  where  the  practised  merchants  of  Syria  sought  to
overreach  the  simple  Arabs,  were  ill  suited  to  the  tastes  and
habits  of  Mohammad  ;  yet  his  natural  sagacity  and  shrewd-
ness carried  him  prosperously  through  the  undertaking.  He
returned  from  the  barter  with  a  balance  more  than  usually  in
his  favour.

The  reflective  mind  of  Mohammad,  now  arrived  at  the
mature  but  still  inquisitive  period  of  early  manhood,  must
have  received  deep  and  abiding  impressions  from  all  that  he
saw  and  heard  upon  the  journey,  and  during  his  stay  at
Bosra.  Though  the  story  of  his  interview  with  Nestorius
(a  monk  who  they  say  embraced  him  as  'the  coming
prophet'^)  may  be  rejected  as  puerile,  yet  we  may  be  certain
that  Mohammad  lost  no  opportunity  of  inquiring  into  the
practices  and  tenets  of  the  Syrian  Christians  or  of  conversing
with  the  monks  and  clergy  who  fell  in  his  way.^  He
probably  experienced  kindness,  and  perhaps  hospitality,
from  them  ;  for  in  his  book  he  ever  speaks  of  them  with
respect,  and  sometimes  with  praise.^  But  for  their  doctrines
he  had  no  s}'mpathy.  The  picture  of  Christianity  in  the
Ivor'an  must  have  been,  in  some  considerable  degree,  painted
from  the  conceptions  now  formed.  Had  he  witnessed  a
purer  exhibition  of  its  rites  and  doctrines,  and  seen  more  of
its  reforming  and  regenerating  influences,  we  cannot  doubt
that,  in  the  sincerity  of  his  early  search  after  truth,  he  might
readily  have  embraced  and  faithfully  adhered  to  the  faith  of
Jesus. Lamentable,  indeed,  is  the  reflection  that  so  small  a


Reaches
Bosra,  and
barters  to
advantage


Impres-
sions re-
garding
Christian-
ity


Distorted
view  pre-
sented by
Syrian
worship


^  Thus  Nestor,  seeing  Mohammad  as  he  sat  under  a  tree  below
which  none  ever  sat  but  a  Prophet,  immediately  embraced  him  as  such  ;
he  recognised  him  also  by  the  redness  of  his  eyes,  &c.

2  Arabic  was  spoken  by  the  subjects  of  the  Ghassanid  dynasty,  and
Mohammad  would  find  little  difficulty  in  effecting  an  interchange  of
ideas  with  those  about  him.  Poets,  merchants,  and  travellers  from
Medina  used  to  be  guests  at  the  Ghassanid  court.

^  Thus  Sura  v.  85. —  Thou  shalt  surely  find  those  amongst  the  people  who
profess  Christianity  to  be  the  most  inclined  to  the  believers.  This  cometh
to  pass  because  there  are  priests  and  monks  among  thetn,  and  because  they
are  not  elated  with  pride.


22 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.


Mohammad
reports  to
Khadija
the  success-
ful result


portion  of  the  fair  form  of  Christianity  was  disclosed  by  the
ecclesiastics  and  monks  of  Syria  to  the  earnest  inquirer  ;  and
that  little,  how  altered  and  distorted !  Instead  of  the  simple
majesty  of  the  gospel, — as  a  revelation  of  God  reconciling
mankind  to  himself  through  his  Son, — the  sacred  dogma  of
the  Trinity  was  forced  upon  the  traveller  with  the  misleading
and  offensive  zeal  of  Eutychian  and  Jacobite  partisanship,
and  the  worship  of  Mary  exhibited  in  so  gross  a  form  as  to
leave  the  impression  upon  the  mind  of  Mohammad  that  she
was  held  to  be  a  goddess,  if  not  the  third  Person  and  consort
of  the  Deity.^  It  must  surely  have  been  b}'  such
blasphemous  extravagances  that  Mohammad  was  repelled
from  the  true  doctrine  of  Jesus  as  '  the  SoN  OF  GOD,'  and  led
to  regard  him  only  as  'Jesus,  son  of  Mary,'  the  sole  title  by
which  he  is  spoken  of  in  the  Kor'an.  We  may  well  mourn
that  the  misnamed  Catholicism  of  the  Empire  thus  grievously
misled  the  master  mind  of  the  age,  and  through  him  even-
tually so  great  a  part  of  the  eastern  world.

But  to  return.  When  Mohammad  had  disposed  of  the
merchandise  and,  according  to  her  command,  purchased  for
his  mistress  such  things  as  she  had  need  of,  he  retraced  his
steps  in  company  with  the  caravan  to  his  native  valley.^
The  mildness  of  his  manners  and  kind  attention  had  won
the  heart  of  Meisara,  and,  as  they  drew  near  to  Mecca,  the

^  Surav.  Ii6. — And  when  GoV)  shall  say  :  O  Jesus  son  of  Mary  !  Didst
thou  speak  imto  mankind^  sayings  '  Take  me  and  niy  mother  for  two  gods
besides  the  Lord?^  He  shall  answer,  '  Praise  be  to  thee  !  It  is  not  for  me
to  say  that  which  I  ought  not^  &c.

Mohammad's  knowledge  of  Christianity  was  unfortunately  derived
from  the  Orthodox  party,  who  styled  Mary  '  Mother  of  God.'  He  may
have  heard  of  the  Nestorians,  and  they  are  possibly  referred  to  among
the  '  Sects '  into  which  Jews  and  Christians  are  said  in  the  Kor'an  to  be
divided.  But,  had  he  ever  obtained  a  closer  acquaintance  with  the
Nestorian  doctrine,  at  least  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  career,  it  would
(according  to  the  analogy  of  his  practice  in  other  respects)  have  been
more  definitely  mentioned  in  his  revelation.  The  truth,  however  (as
will  be  shown  hereafter),  is  that  Mohainmad's  acquaintance  with
Christianity  was  at  the  best  singularly  dim  and  meagre.

2  Though  the  direct  route  from  Mecca  to  Bosra  would  run  a  great
way  east  of  the  Mediterranean,  it  seems  possible  that,  either  now  or  on
the  former  journey,  Mohammad  may  have  seen  the  Mediterranean  Sea.
Perhaps,  the  caravan  visited  Gaza,  the  favourite  entrepot  of  the  Meccan
merchants.  His  references  in  the  Kor'an  to  ships  gliding  majestically  on
the  waters,  like  mountains,  point  to  a  larger  class  of  vessels  than  he  was


II.]


KHADIJA


She  is
charmed


grateful  servant  persuaded  Mohammad  to  go  in  advance  of
the  rest,  and  bear  to  his  mistress  first  tidings  of  the  successful
traffic.  Khadlja,  surrounded  by  her  maidens,  was  sitting
upon  the  upper  storey  of  her  house/  on  the  watch  for  the
earliest  glimpse  of  the  caravan,  when  a  camel  was  seen
rapidly  to  advance  from  the  expected  quarter,  and  as  it
approached  she  perceived  that  Mohammad  was  the  rider.
He  entered,  recounted  the  prosperous  issue  of  the  adventure,
and  enumerated  the  various  goods  which  agreeably  to  her
commission  he  had  purchased  for  her.  She  was  delighted  at
all  she  heard ;  but  there  was  a  charm  in  the  dark  and
pensive  eye,  in  the  noble  features,  and  the  graceful  form  of
her  assiduous  agent  as  he  stood  before  her,  which  pleased
her  even  more  than  her  good  fortune.  The  comely  widow
was  now  forty  years  of  age,  she  had  been  twice  married,  and
had  borne  two  sons  and  a  daughter.^  Yet  she  cast  a  fond
eye  upon  the  thoughtful  youth  of  five-and-twenty  ;  nor,  when
he  departed,  could  she  dismiss  him  from  her  thoughts.

Khadlja  was  a  Koreishite  lady,  distinguished  by  fortune  Description
as  well  as  by  birth.  Her  father,  Khuweilid,  was  the  grandson  °^  Khadija,
of  Asad,  and  Asad  was  the  grandson  of  Kosai.  Khuweilid
commanded  in  the  Sacrilegious  War  a  considerable  section
of  Koreish,  and  so  did  his  nephew  'Othman.  Her  substance,
whether  inherited,  or  acquired  through  her  former  marriages,
was  very  considerable  ;  and  by  means  of  hired  agents  she
had  increased  it  largely  in  mercantile  speculation.  To  the
blessing  of  affluence,  she  added  the  more  important  endow-
ments of  discretion,  virtue,  and  an  affectionate  heart ;  and,
though now mellowed by a more than middle age, she


likely  to  see  on  the  Red  Sea.  The  vivid  pictures  of  sea-stonns  are
among  the  finest  sketches  in  the  Kor'an,  and  evidently  drawn  from
nature  :  the  waves  and  tempeits  may  have  been  witnessed  from  the
Arabian  shore,  but  the  'mountain  ships'  more  likely  from  the  Syrian.

1  Her  house  is  still  shown,  a  little  to  the  north-east  of  the  Ka'ba.  It
is  called  the  birthplace  of  Fatima.

-  There  is  no  mention  of  these,  as  we  should  have  expected  from
their  relation  to  Mohammad  :  they  had  probably  already  grown  out  of
childhood.  The  only  notice  I  find  is  that  one  of  them,  Hind,  son  of  Abu
Hala  al-Oseiyid,  was  killed  fighting  on  'All's  side,  in  the  battle  of  the
Camel ;  Ibft  al-Ath'ir^  vol.  iii.  p.  217.

Khadija's  age  is  probably  according  to  the  intercalary  year  ;  in  which
case  she  might  have  been  a  year  older  by  the  lunar  year.


24 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.


who  sends
to  nego-
tiate mar-
riage with
Mohammad


Mohammad
is  married
to  Khadija


retained  a  fair  and  attractive  countenance.  The  chief  men
of  Koreish  were  not  insensible  to  these  charms,  and  many
sought  her  in  marriage ;  but  choosing  rather  to  live  on  in
dignified  and  independent  widowhood,  she  had  rejected  all
their  offers.  The  tender  emotions,  however,  excited  by  the
visit  of  Mohammad  overpowered  her  resolution.  Meisara
continued  to  sound  in  her  not  unwilling  ears  the  praises  of
his  fellow-traveller.  At  last  her  love  became  irresistible,  and
she  resolved  in  a  discreet  and  cautious  way  to  make  known
her  passion  to  its  object.  A  sister  (according  to  other
accounts,  a  servant)  was  the  agent  deputed  to  sound  his
views.  '  What  is  it,  O  Mohammad,'  said  she,  adroitly
referring  to  the  unusual  circumstance  of  his  being  unmarried
at  so  mature  an  age, — '  what  is  it  that  hindereth  thee  from
marriage?'  'I  have  nothing,'  replied  he,  *in  my  hands
wherewithal  I  might  marry,'  '  But  if  haply  that  difficulty
were  removed,  and  thou  wert  invited  to  espouse  a  beautiful
and  wealthy  lady  of  noble  birth,  who  would  place  thee  in
affluence,  wouldest  thou  not  desire  to  have  her  ? '  '  And
who,'  said  Mohammad,  startled  at  the  novel  thought,  '  might
that  be?'  *  It  is  Khadija.'  'But  how  can  I  attain  unto
her  ? '  '  Let  that  be  my  care,'  returned  the  female.  The
mind  of  Mohammad  was  at  once  made  up,  and  he  answered,
'  I  am  ready.' The  female  departed  and  told  Khadija.

No  sooner  was  she  apprised  of  his  willingness  to  marry
her,  than  Khadija  despatched  a  messenger  to  Mohammad  or
his  uncle,  appointing  a  time  when  they  should  meet.  Mean-
while, as  she  dreaded  the  refusal  of  her  father,  she  provided
for  him  a  feast;  and  when  he  had  well  drunk  and  was  merry,
she  slaughtered  for  the  company  a  cow,  and  casting  over  her
father  perfume  of  saffron  or  ambergris,  dressed  him  in
marriage  raiment.  While  thus  under  the  effects  of  wine,  the
old  man  united  his  daughter  to  Mohammad  in  the  presence
of  his  uncle  Hamza.  But  having  recovered  his  senses,  he
began  to  look  around  with  wonder,  and  inquire  what  meant
these  symptoms  of  a  nuptial  feast,  the  slaughtered  cow,  the
perfumes  and  the  marriage  garment.  So  soon  as  he  was
made  aware  of  what  had  happened — for  they  told  him  '  The
nuptial  dress  was  put  upon  thee  by  Mohammad  thy  son-in-
law' — he  fell  into  a  violent  passion,  and  declared  that  he
would  never  consent  to  give  away  to  that  poor youth a


II.]


KHADIJA  MARRIES  MOHAMMAD


2;


daughter  courted  by  the  great  men  of  Koreish.  The  friends
of  Mohammad  repHed  indignantly  that  the  alliance  had  not
originated  in  their  wish,  but  was  the  act  of  no  other  than  his
own  daughter.  Weapons  were  drawn,  and  blood  might
have  been  shed,  when  the  old  man  became  pacified,  and  at
last  was  reconciled.

Notwithstanding  its  stormy  and  inauspicious  opening,
the  connubial  state  proved,  both  to  Mohammad  and  Khadija,
one  of  unusual  tranquillity  and  happiness.  Upon  him  the
marriage  conferred  a  faithful  and  affectionate  companion,
and,  in  spite  of  her  age,  a  not  unfruitful  wife.  Khadija,  on
her  part,  fully  appreciated  the  noble  genius  and  commanding
mind  of  Mohammad,  which  his  reserved  and  contemplative
habit,  while  it  veiled  from  others,  could  not  conceal  from  her.
She  conducted  as  before  the  duties  of  her  establishment,  and
left  him  to  enjoy  his  leisure  hours,  undisturbed  and  free  from
care.  Her  house  was  thenceforward  his  home,  and  her
bosom  the  safe  receptacle  of  those  doubts  and  longings  after
spiritual  light  which  now  began  to  agitate  his  soul.

Within  the  next  ten  or  twelve  years,  Khadija  bore  to
Mohammad  two  sons  and  four  daughters.  The  firstborn  was
named  Al-Kasim ;  and  after  him,  according  to  Arabian
custom,  Mohammad  received  the  title  of  Abu'L-Kasim,
'  Father  of  Al-Kasim.'  This  son  died  at  the  age  of  two
years.  Meanwhile,  his  eldest  daughter  Zeinab  was  born ;
and  after  her,  at  intervals  of  one  or  two  years,  three  other
daughters,  Rokeiya,  Fatima,  and  Um  Kulthum.  Last  of  all
was  born  his  second  son,  who  died  in  infancy.  Selma,  maid
of  Saflya  Mohammad's  aunt,  officiated  as  midwife  on  these
occasions.  Khadija  sacrificed  at  the  birth  of  each  boy  two
kids,  and  one  at  the  birth  of  every  girl.  Her  children  she
nursed  herself.  Many  years  after,  Mohammad  used  to  look
back  to  this  period  of  his  life  with  fond  remembrance.
Indeed  so  much  did  he  dwell  upon  the  mutual  love  of
Khadija  and  himself,  that  the  envious  'A'isha  declared
herself  more  jealous  of  this  rival  whom  she  had  never  seen,
than  of  all  the  other  wives  who  contested  with  her  the
affection  of  the  Prophet.

No description of  Mohammad  at  this period has been
attempted  by  traditionists.^ But  from  the  copious  accounts
^  C/.  Ihn  Hisham,  p.  266  f.


The  union
fortunate
and  happy


Children  of
Mohammad
by  Khadija


Mutual
love  of  Mo-
hammad
and  Khadija


Person  of

Mohammad

described


26 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.

of  his  person  in  later  life,  an  approximate  outline  may  be
traced  of  his  appearance  in  the  prime  of  manhood.  Slightly
above  the  middle  size,  his  figure  though  spare  was  handsome
and  commanding  ;  the  chest  broad  and  open  ;  the  bones  and
framework  large,  and  the  joints  well  knit  together.  His
neck  was  long  and  finely  moulded.  His  head,  unusually
large,  gave  space  for  a  broad  and  noble  brow.  The  hair,
thick,  jet  black,  and  slightly  curling,  fell  down  over  his  ears.
The  eyebrows  were  arched  and  joined.  The  countenance
thin,  but  ruddy.  His  large  eyes,  intensely  black  and
piercing,  received  additional  lustre  from  eyelashes  long  and
dark.  The  nose  was  high  and  slightly  acquiline,  but  fine,
and  at  the  end  attenuated.  The  teeth  were  far  apart.  A
long  black  bushy  beard,  reaching  to  the  breast,  added
manliness  and  presence.  His  expression  was  pensive  and
contemplative.  The  face  beamed  with  intelligence,  though
something  of  the  sensuous  might  also  be  discerned.  The
skin  was  clear  and  soft  ;  the  only  hair  that  met  the  eye  was
a  fine  thin  line  which  ran  down  from  the  neck  towards  the
navel.  His  broad  back  leaned  slightly  forward  as  he  walked  ;
and  his  step  was  hasty,  yet  sharp  and  decided,  like  that  of
one  rapidly  descending  a  declivity.^
His  manner  There was something unsettled in his bloodshot eye,

saiion°"^^'^"  "^^hicli  refused  to  rest  upon  its  object.  When  he  turned
towards  you,  it  was  never  partially,  but  with  the  whole  body.
Taciturn  and  reserved,^  he  was  yet  in  company  distinguished
by  a  graceful  urbanity.  His  words  were  pregnant  and
laconic  ;  but  when  it  pleased  him  to  unbend,  his  speech  was
often  humorous  and  sometimes  pungent.  At  such  seasons
he  entered  with  zest  into  the  diversion  of  the  moment,
and now and then would laugh immoderately.^ But in

^  This  at  Medina  degenerated  into  a  stoop.  Some  say  he  walked
like  a  man  ascoidiug  a  hill  ;  others  as  if  he  were  wrenching  his  foot  from
a  stone.  These  descriptions  imply  decision  of  step.  The  hollows  of  his
hands  and  feet  were  more  than  usually  filled  and  level:  a  feature  regarded
by  Orientals  with  interest.

2  '  Mohammad  was  sorrowful  in  temperament ;  continually  meditat-
ing ;  he  had  no  rest ;  he  never  spoke  except  from  necessity  ;  he  used  to
be  long  silent ;  he  expressed  himself  in  pregnant  sentences,  using  neither
too  few  nor  too  many  words.'

^  When  laughing  immoderately,  he  showed  his  teeth  and  gums,  and
was  at  times  so  convulsed  that  he  held  his  sides.


II.]


DESCRIPTION  OF  MOHAMMAD


27


His  emo-
tions under
control


Treatment
of  friends
and  enemies


general  he  listened  to  the  conversation  rather  than  joined
in  it.

He  was  the  subject  of  strong  passions,  but  they  were  so
controlled  by  reason  and  discretion,  that  they  rarely  appeared
upon  the  surface.  When  much  excited,  the  vein  between  his
eyebrows  would  mantle,  and  violently  swell  across  his  ample
forehead ;  yet  he  was  cautious  and  circumspect,  and  in  action
kept  ever  aloof  from  danger.  Generous  and  considerate
towards  his  friends,  he  knew,  by  well-timed  favour  and
attention,  how  to  gain  over  even  the  disaffected  and  rivet
them  to  his  service.  His  enemies,  so  long  as  they  continued
their  opposition,  were  regarded  by  him  with  a  vindictive  and
unrelenting  hatred  ;  yet  he  rarely  pursued  a  foe  after  he  had
tendered  timely  submission.  His  commanding  mien  inspired
the  stranger  with  an  undefined  and  indescribable  awe ;  but
on  closer  intimacy,  apprehension  and  fear  gave  place  to
confidence  and  love.

Behind  his  quiet  retiring  exterior  lay  hid  a  high  resolve,  Latent  force
a  singleness  of  purpose,  a  strength  and  fixedness  of  will,  a  °^  ^^''^
sublime  determination,  destined  to  achieve  the  marvellous
work  of  bowing  towards  himself  the  heart  of  all  Arabia  as  the
heart  of  one  man.  Khadija  was  the  first  to  perceive  the  noble
and  commanding  qualities  of  her  husband,  and  with  a  child-
like confidence  surrendered  to  him  her  soul,  her  will,  and
faith.


The  first  incident  which  interrupted  the  even  tenor  of  his Rebuilding
married  life  was  the  rebuilding  of  the  Ka'ba,  when  he  was °^t^^r  ^^'^^'

°  '  A.D.  605,

about  five-and-thirty  years  of  age.^  One  of  those  violent  ^/a^.  35
floods  which  at  times  sweep  down  the  valley,  had  shattered
the  Holy  House ;  its  walls  showed  ominous  rents,  and  they
feared  lest  it  should  fall.  The  treasury  was  also  insecure,
owing  to  the  absence  of  a  roof;  and  thieves  had  lately
clambered  over  and  stolen  some  of  the  precious  relics.
These  were  recovered,  but  it  was  resolved  that  similar  danger
should  for  the  future  be  avoided  by  raising  the  walls  and
covering  in  the  roof.  While  Koreish  deliberated  how  this
might  best  be  done,  a  Grecian  ship  was  driven  by  stress  of
weather  not  far  off  upon  the  Red  Sea  shore.  The  news
reaching  Mecca,  the  aged  chief  Al-WalTd,  accompanied  by  a
^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  122  fif.;  At-Tabari,  i.  1138  f.;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  93.


28 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.


The  Black
Stone


Rivalry  for
depositing
the  stone


body  of  Koreish,  proceeded  to  the  wreck,  purchased  the
timber  of  the  broken  ship,  and  engaged  her  captain,  a  Greek,
by  name  Bakijm,  skilled  in  architecture,  to  assist  in  the
reconstruction  of  the  Ka'ba.^  The  several  tribes  of  Koreish
were  divided  into  four  bodies,  and  to  each  was  assigned  the
charge  of  one  side.  With  such  mysterious  reverence  was  the
Ka'ba  regarded,  that  apprehensions  were  entertained  lest  the
apparent  sacrilege  of  dismantling  the  holy  walls  should
expose  even  the  pious  restorers  to  divine  wrath.  At  last
Al-Walld  seized  a  pickaxe,  and,  invoking  the  Deity  in  a
deprecatory  prayer,  detached  and  threw  down  a  portion  of
the  wall.  They  then  retired  and  waited  till  the  morning,
when,  finding  that  no  mischief  had  befallen  the  adventurous
chief,  all  joined  in  the  demolition.  They  continued  to  dig
till  they  reached  a  hard  foundation  of  green  stones  which
resisted  the  pickaxe  stroke.  From  thence  they  began  to
build  the  wall.  Stones  of  grey  granite  from  the  neighbouring
hills  were  carried  by  the  citizens  upon  their  heads  to  the
sacred  enclosure.  The  whole  body  of  Koreish  assisted  in
the  work,  and  all  proceeded  harmoniously  until  the  structure
rose  four  or  five  feet  above  the  surface.  At  that  stage  it
became  necessary  to  build  the  Black  Stone  into  the  eastern
corner,  with  its  surface  so  exposed  as  readily  to  be  kissed  by
pilgrims  upon  foot.  This  stone,  which  is  semicircular,
measures  some  six  inches  in  height  and  eight  in  breadth  ;  it
is  of  a  reddish-black  colour,  and  notwithstanding  the  polish
imparted  by  myriads  of  kisses,  bears  to  the  present  day  in  its
undulating  surface  marks  of  a  volcanic  origin.

The  virtue  of  the  edifice  depending  on  this  mysterious
stone,  each  family  of  Koreish  advanced  pretensions  to  the
exclusive  right  of  placing  it  in  its  future  receptacle.  The
contention  became  hot,  and  it  was  feared  that  bloodshed
would  ensue.  For  four  or  five  days  the  building  was
suspended.  At  last  Koreish  again  assembled  on  the  spot
amicably  to  decide  the  difficulty.  Then  the  oldest  citizen
arose  and  said:  'O  Koreish,  hearken  unto  me !  My  advice
is  that  the  man  who  chanceth  first  to  enter  the  court  of  the
Ka'ba  by  yonder  gate,  he  shall  be  chosen  either  to  decide  the
difference  amongst  you,  or  himself  to  place  the  stone.' The

^  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  93.  Ibn  Ishak  does  not  mention  the  captain,  and  says
a  Copt  carpenter  rebuilt  the  House. — At-Tabari,  i.  1135.


II.]


REBUILDING  OF  KA'BA


29


proposal  was  confirmed  by  acclamation,  and  they  awaited  the
issue.  Mohammad,  who  was  at  the  moment  observed
approaching,  was  the  first  to  enter.  Seeing  him  they  all
exclaimed: 'Here  comes the Faithful arbiter  i^Al-Anuii)',


we  are COiucnu lu a,uiuc by Ills uecision.' Calm and self- Mohammad
possessed,  Mohammad  received  the  commission,  and  at  once '^  chosen

11  "  !•  1-11  arbiter,

resolved  upon  an  expedient  which  should  conciliate  them  all. His  de-
Taking  off  his  mantle  and  spreading  it  upon  the  ground,  he "^'°"


30 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.

placed  the  stone  thereon,  and  said  :  '  Now  let  one  from  each
of  your  four  divisions  come  forward,  and  raise  a  corner  of
this  mantle.'  Four  chiefs  approached,  and  holding  each  a
corner  lifted  thus  the  stone.  When  it  had  reached  the
proper  height,  Mohammad,  with  his  own  hand,  guided  it  to
its  place.  The  decision  raised  the  character  of  Mohammad
for  wisdom  and  judgment ;  while  the  singular  and  appar-
ently providential  call  could  hardly  pass  unnoticed  by
Mohammad himself. His mind was given to auguries;


iiB!i;i('>.yiii:aij  -  L;;i'Mi,j|iiMLil»lliaiiBll  U'lli


cro,


I: :f:jill!llll


Tn^-rT^TX^i^


The  Ka'ba,  as  at  present,  showing  the  curtain  cut  and  adjusted  ;  a,  Black  Stone.


The  Ka'ba
finished


and  there  was  here  a  mysterious  singling  out  of  himself  to
De  judge  among  his  fellows  in  a  sacred  question,  which
might  well  have  wrought  upon  a  spirit  less  imaginative
and  enthusiastic  than  that  of  Mohammad,  and  prompted
the  idea  of  his  being  chosen  of  God  to  be  the  prophet  of  his
people.

The  stone  thus  deposited  in  its  proper  place,  Koreish
built  on  without  interruption  ;  and  when  the  walls  had  risen
to  a  considerable  height  they  roofed  them  over  with  fifteen
rafters  resting  upon  six  central  pillars.  A  covering  of  cloth,
thrown  across  the  temple  according  to  ancient  custom,  hung


II.]


REPLACING  THE  BLACK  STONE


31


like  a  curtain  round  on  every  side.^ The  Ka'ba  thus  rebuilt
was  surrounded  by  a  small  enclosure,  probably  of  not  more


I


inxuxu


ixn


The  Ka'ba,  as  it  now  stands,  showing  tlic  curtain  festooned  at  pilgrimage,  a,  The
Black  Stone  ;  6,  Emblazoned  curiaia  of  the  door  hung  for  display  from  the  roof;
c,  Door  ;  ti,  Spout.

than  fifty  yards  in  diameter. To  the  west  stood  the  Hall  of
Council,  with  its  door  towards  the  Ka'ba. On  the  east  was

^  The  custom  of  veiling  the  Ka'ba  is  of  extremely  remote  date.
Originally  the  cloth  covered  the  whole  building,  including  the  top.
Before  a  roof  was  built  by  Koreish  it  must  have  constituted  the  only
protection  from  the  weather.  The  curtain  is  now  attached  only  to  the
walls.

The  covering  in  those  days  was  of  Yemen  cloth.  'Omar  renewed  it
yearly  of  Egyptian  linen.  Various  materials,  as  striped  Yemen  stuff,  red
brocade,  or  black  silk,  have  been  at  different  times  used  ;  and  it  has  been
changed  as  often  as  six  times  a  year.  To  supply  the  curtain  came  to  be
regarded  as  a  sign  of  sovereignty.

It  is  now  worked  at  Cairo,  and  renewed  yearly  at  the  season  of
pilgrimage.  It  '  is  a  coarse  tissue  of  silk  and  cotton  mixed.'  A  band  of
two  feet,  embroidered  with  texts,  is  inserted  about  a  third  from  the  top.
'  It  was  of  a  brilliant  black  (says  Burton),  and  the  Hizam — the  zone  or
golden  band  running  round  the  upper  portion  of  the  building — as  well  as
the  Burka  (face  veil)  were  of  dazzling  brightness.'  The  Burka  '  is  the
gold  embroidered  curtain  covering  the  Ka'ba  door.' — Vol.  iii.  p.  295.


^-i YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.


Absence  of
any  para-
mount au-
thority


the  gateway  of  the  Beni  Sheiba,  close  by  the  sacred  well
Zemzem.  At  a  respectful  distance  were  built  all  round  the
houses  of  Koreish,  The  great  idol  Hubal  was  placed  in  the
centre  of  the  Holy  House ;  and  outside  were  ranged  various
other  images.  The  door  for  entering  the  Ka'ba  was  then,  as
now,  near  the  Black  Stone  on  the  eastern  side,  and  several
feet  above  the  ground, — a  fact  attributed  by  Mohammad  to
the  pride  of  Koreish,  and  desire  to  retain  in  their  own  hands
the  power  of  admission.  The  building,  though  now  sub-
stantial and  secure,  occupied  somewhat  less  space  than  its
dilapidated  and  roofless  predecessor.  The  excluded  area  lay
to  the  north-west,  and  is  still  without  the  sacred  walls. ^

The  circumstances  which  gave  occasion  for  the  decision
of  Mohammad  strikingly  illustrate  the  absence  of  any
paramount  authority  in  Mecca,  and  the  number  of  persons
among  whom  the  power  of  government  was  at  this  time
divided.  Each  main  branch  of  the  Koreishite  stock  was
independent of  the other ; and the offices of state and


1  The  sill  of  the  door  is  now  about  seven  feet  above  the  level  of  the
ground,  and  a  movable  wooden  staircase  is  used  for  ascending.  It  is
distant  six  feet  from  the  corner  of  the  Black  Stone.  After  the  conquest
of  Mecca,  Mohammad  is  related  to  have  said  :  '  Verily  they  have  drawn
back  the  foundations  of  the  Ka'ba  from  their  original  limit  ;  and  if  it
were  not  that  the  inhabitants  are  fresh  from  idolatry,  I  would  have
restored  to  the  building  that  which  was  excluded  from  the  area  thereof.
But  in  case  the  people  may  again  after  my  time  need  to  renew  the
structure,  come,  and  I  will  show  thee  what  was  left  out.'  So  he  showed
a  space  in  the  /n'/'r  (or  excluded  area)  of  about  seven  yards.

This  space  at  present  lies  to  the  north-west  of  the  Ka'ba,  about  the
distance  pointed  out  by  Mohammad  as  the  limit  of  the  old  building.  It
is  now  marked  by  a  semicircular  parapet  of  white  marble,  five  feet  high,
facing  the  Ka'ba,  and  is  still  regarded  as  equally  holy  with  the  temple
itself.

'Othman  A.H.  26,  and  Ibn  az-Zubeir,  A.H.  64,  enlarged  the  square  by
purchasing  and  removing  the  adjoining  houses  of  Koreish,  and  enclosed
it  by  a  wall.  Various  similar  changes  and  improvements  were  made  by
successive  Caliphs  till,  in  the  third  century  of  the  Hijra,  the  quadrangle
with  its  imposing  colonnade  assumed  its  present  dimensions.

The  Ka'ba,  as  it  now  stands,  is  an  irregular  cube,  the  sides  of  which
vary  from  forty  to  fifty  feet  in  length.  The  quadrangle,  or  court,
corresponds  loosely  with  the  direction  of  its  walls.  'Ka'ba'  is  probably
the  ancient  idolatrous  name  ;  while  '  Beit-ullah,'  T/ie  house  of  God  (used
indifferently  with  the  other  in  the  time  of  Mohammad),  is  the  more
modern  title  harmonising  with  Jewish  phraseology.


II.]


NO  GOVERNMENT  AT  MECCA


33


religion  created  by  Kosai  with  the  view  of  securing  undis-
puted command  had,  from  their  distribution  among  several
independent  families,  lost  their  potency.  It  was  a  period  in
which  the  genius  of  a  Kosai  might  have  again  dispensed
with  the  prestige  of  place  and  birth,  and  asserted  dominion
by  strength  of  will  and  inflexibility  of  purpose.  But  no  such
leader  appeared,  and  the  divided  aristocracy  moved  on  with
feeble  and  distracted  step.  A  curious  story  is  related  of  an
attempt  made  about  this  period  to  gain  the  rule  at  Mecca.
The  aspirant  was  'Othman,  nephew  of  Khadlja's  father.  He
was  dissatisfied  with  the  idolatrous  system  of  Mecca,  and
travelled  to  the  court  of  the  Roman  emperor,  where  he  was
honourably  entertained,  and  admitted  to  Christian  baptism.^
Returning  to  Mecca,  he  laid  claim,  on  the  strength  of  an
imperial  grant,  to  the  government  of  the  city.  But  his
claim  was  rejected,  and  he  fled  to  Syria,  where  he  found  a
refuge  with  the  Ghassanid  prince.  He  there  revenged
himself  by  using  his  influence  for  the  imprisonment  of  the
Koreishite  merchants  who  chanced  to  be  at  the  Syrian  court.
But  emissaries  from  Mecca,  by  offering  gifts,  counteracted
his  authority  with  the  prince,  and  at  last  procured  his
death.

Notwithstanding  the  absence  of  a  strong  government,
Mecca  continued  to  flourish  under  the  generally  harmonious
combination  of  the  several  independent  phylarchies.  Com-
merce was  prosecuted  towards  Syria  and  Al-'Irak  with  greater
vigour  than  ever.  About  the  year  606  A.D.  we  read  of  a
mercantile  expedition  under  Abu  Suf)an,  which  for  the  first
time  penetrated  to  the  capital  of  Persia,  and  reached  even
the  presence  of  the  Chosroes.


'Othman
ibn  Al-ITu-
weirith  at-
tempts to
seize  the
govern-
ment


Commerce

flourishes
at  Mecca


I  proceed  to  notice  some  particulars  of  the  domestic  life Domestic


of  Mohammad.  The  sister  of  Khadija  was  married  to  Ar-
Rabr,  a  descendant  of  'Abd  Shams,  and  had  borne  him  a  son
called  Abu'l-As,  who  in  course  of  time  had  grown  up,  and
was  respected  for  his  uprightness  and  mercantile  success.
Khadija  loved  her  nephew,  and  looked  upon  him  as  her  own
son.  She  prevailed  upon  Mohammad  to  join  him  in
marriage  with  their  eldest  daughter  Zeinab,  who  had  but  just
reached  the  age  of  womanhood.  The  union  proved  to  be
^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  143  f.


life  of  Mo-
hammad.
Marriage
of  three
eldest
daughters


34 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.


Adopts  his
cousin  'Ali


Zeid,  son  o
Haritha,  a
Christian
slave


one  of  real  affection,  though  during  the  troubled  rise  of  Islam
it  was  chequered,  as  we  shall  see,  by  temporary  severance,
and  by  several  romantic  incidents.  Somewhat  later  the  two
younger  daughters,  Rokeiya  and  Um  Kulthum,  were  given
in  marriage  to  'Otba  and  'Oteiba,  sons  of  Abu  Lahab,  uncle
of  Mohammad. Fatima,  the  youngest,  was  yet  a  child.

Shortly  after  the  rebuilding  of  the  Ka'ba,  Mohammad
comforted  himself  for  the  loss  of  his  infant  son  Al-Kasim  by
adopting  'All,  the  child  of  his  friend  and  former  guardian
Abu  Talib.^  It  fell  out  thus :  a  season  of  severe  scarcity
visited  Mecca ;  and  Abu  Talib,  still  poor,  was  put  to  shifts
for  the  support  of  his  numerous  family.  His  difficulties
were  perceived  by  Mohammad,  who,  prompted  by  his  usual
kindness  and  consideration,  repaired  to  his  rich  uncle  Al-
'Abbas,  and  said  :  '  O  'Abbas  !  thy  brother  Abu  Talib  hath  a
burdensome  family,  and  thou  seest  what  straits  men  are
brought  to.  Let  us  go  to  him,  and  relieve  him  somewhat  of
the  care  of  his  children.  I  will  take  one  son,  if  thou  wilt
take  another.  And  we  shall  support  them.'  Al-'Abbas
consenting,  they  proposed  the  thing  to  Abu  Talib ;  and  he
replied  :  '  Leave  me  'Akil  and  Talib ;  and  do  ye  with  the
others  as  it  pleaseth  you.'  So  Mohammad  took  'All,  and
Al-'Abbas  took  Ja'far.  All,  at  this  time  not  above  five  or  six
years  of  age,  remained  ever  after  with  Mohammad,  and  they
exhibited  towards  each  other  the  mutual  attachment  of
parent  and  child.

The  heart  of  Mohammad  was  inclined  to  ardent  and
lasting  friendships.  About  the  period  of  'All's  adoption  he
admitted  to  his  closest  intimacy  another  person  unconnected
with  him  by  family  ties,  but  of  more  equal  age.  This  was
Zeid,  son  of  Haritha.^  As  he  will  be  frequently  alluded  to,
and  his  society  must  have  had  an  important  influence  on  the
Prophet  himself,  it  is  important  to  trace  his  previous  life.
His  father  and  mother  belonged  to  Christian  tribes  in  the
south  of  Syria.  Zeid  was  still  a  child  when,  journeying  with
his  mother,  the  company  was  waylaid  by  a  band  of  Arab
marauders,  who  carried  him  away  captive,  and  sold  him  into
slavery.  While  yet  a  youth  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  Hakim,
grandson  of  Khuweilid,  who  presented  him  to  his  aunt
Khadija  shortly  after  her  marriage  with  Mohammad.  He
1  At-Tabari,  i.  1163  f.  ^  Ibn  Koteiba,  p.  71.


II.]  ZEID  IBN  HARITHA  35

was  then  about  twent}^  years  of  as^e  ;  and  is  described  as
small  of  stature,  and  dark  in  complexion,  with  a  short  and
depressed  nose.  He  was  an  active  and  useful  servant;  and
Mohammad  soon  conceiving  a  strong  affection  for  him,
Khadija,  to  gratify  her  husband,  made  him  a  present  of  the
slave.  His  father  searched  long  in  vain  for  Zeid  ;  and  his  Is  also
grief  found  vent  in  touching  verses,  some  of  which  have  been  ^lohammad
preserved  to  us  by  tradition.  At  last  a  party  of  the  tribe
when  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca  recognised  the  youth,  and
communicated  tidings  of  him  to  the  disconsolate  father,  who
immediately  set  out  to  fetch  him  home.  Arrived  at  Mecca,
Haritha  offered  a  large  payment  for  his  ransom.  Mohammad
summoned  Zeid,  and  left  it  in  his  option  to  go  or  stay.  He
chose  to  stay,  '  I  will  not  leave  thee,'  he  said ;  '  thou  art  in
the  place  to  me  of  father  and  of  mother.'  Delighted  by  his
faithfulness,  Mohammad  took  him  straightway  to  the  Black
Stone  of  the  Ka'ba  and  said  :  '  Bear  testimony,  all  ye  that
are  present.  Zeid  is  my  son ;  I  will  be  his  heir,  and  he  shall
be  mine.'  His  father,  contented  with  the  declaration,
returned  home  glad  at  heart ;  and  his  son,  now  a  freed-man,
was  thenceforward  called  '  Zeid  ibn  Mohammad,'  Zeid  the
son  of  Mohammad.  By  Mohammad's  desire  he  married  his
old  attendant,  Um  Aiman.  Though  nearly  double  his  age,
she  bore  him  a  son  called  Osama,  who  was  the  leader  in  the
expedition  to  Syria  at  the  time  of  Mohammad's  fatal
illness.

Christianity  prevailed  in  the  tribes  from  whicli,  both  on  Christian
the  father's  and  mother's  side,  Zeid  sprang;^  and  though  '"""e^^ce  of
severed  from  his  home  at  too  early  an  age  to  have  acquired
any  extensive  or  thorough  knowledge  of  its  doctrines,  he  yet
no  doubt  carried  with  him  some  impression  of  the  teaching,
and  some  fragments  of  the  facts  or  legends,  of  the  faith.
These  would  form  subjects  of  conversation  between  the
youth  and  his  adoptive  father,  whose  mind  was  now  feeling
in  all  directions  after  religious  truth.  Among  the  relatives
of  Khadija,  too,  there  were  persons  who  possessed  a  know-
ledge of  Christianity,  and  observed  perhaps  something  of  its

^  Zeid  was  probably  about  six  years  younger  than  Mohammad.  The
difference  of  age  between  him  and  his  bride  was  so  great,  that  tiadition
tells  us  Mohammad  promised  \i\m.  paradise  for  marrying  her.

^  The  Beni  'Odhra  and  Beni  Tai'.


36 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  HIS  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.


'Othman
ibn  Al-Hu-
weirith  ;
and  Waraka


The  Four
Inquirers


'Obeidallah
ibn  lahsli


Zeid  ibn
'Amr


practice.  Her  cousin  'Othman  has  been  already  noticed  as
having  embraced  Christianity  at  Constantinople,  and  made
an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  gain  the  rule  at  Mecca.  Waraka,
another  cousin,  is  said  also  to  have  become  a  convert  to
Christianity,  to  have  been  acquainted  with  the  religious
tenets  and  sacred  Scriptures  both  of  Jews  and  Christians,
and  to  have  even  copied  or  translated  some  portion  of  the
Gospels  into  Hebrew  or  Arabic.^  In  the  following  chapter
it  will  be  seen  that  this  person  had  an  acknowledged  share
in  satisfying  the  mind  of  Mohammad  that  his  mission  was
divine.

It  is  a  fancy  of  tradition  that,  shortly  before  the  appear-
ance of  Mohammad,  several  inquirers  were  not  only  seeking
after  the  true  faith  (or,  as  they  style  it,  the  Religion  of
Abraham),  but,  warned  by  prophecy  and  by  the  unguarded
admissions  of  Jews  and  Christians,  were  in  immediate
expectation  of  the  coming  prophet.-  Of  such  inquirers
among  Koreish,  Muslim  biographies  specify  four.  Two  of
these  were  'Othman  and  Waraka,  already  mentioned.  The
third,  'ObeidallaJi  (by  his  mother  a  grandson  of  'Abd  al-
Muttalib)  embraced  Islam,  emigrated  with  his  brethren  in
the  faith  to  Abyssinia,  and  there  went  over  to  Christianity.^
The  fourth  was  Zeid,  cousin  of  'Omar.  Of  him  tradition
sa)'s  that  he  condemned  the  idolatrous  sacrifices  of  the
Ka'ba,  reprobated  the  burying  alive  of  infant  daughters,  and
'followed  the  religion  of  Abraham.'  But  not  content  with
such  assertions,  the  traditionists  add  that  Zeid  possessed
distinct  knowledge  of  the  coming  prophet  and  left  his
salutation  to  be  delivered  to  him  when  he  should  appear.
Nay,  he  described  his  person,  stated  that  he  would  be  of  the
family  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  and  foretold  that  he  would
emigrate  to  Medina  !  He  died  while  the  Ka'ba  was  rebuild-
ing, and  was  buried  at  the  foot  of  mount  Hira.  Although
such  expectations  of  the  coming  Prophet  must  be  rejected
as  mere  fond  imaginations,  and  the  manifest  tendency  to
invent  anticipatory  legends  of  this  description  makes  it
difficult  to  sever  the  real  from  the  fictitious  in  the  matter  of
these four Inquirers, yet it may be admitted as highly

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  143  f.  2  ji^j-j  Koteiba,  p.  28  f.

3  At-Tabari,  i.  1772. He  died  in  Abyssinia,  and  Mohammad  when
in  Medina  married  his  widow,  Um  Hablba,  daughter  of  Abu  Sufyan.


II.]  THE  FOUR  INQUIRERS  SJr

probable  that  a  spirit  of  religious  inquiry,  the  disposition  to A  spirit  of
reject  idolatry,  and  a  perception  of  the  superiority  of  Judaism probably
and  Christianity,  did  in  some  quarters  about  this  time  exist, abroad
With such inquirers Mohammad would no doubt  deeply
sympathise,  and  hold  converse  on  the  gross  idolatry  of  the
Arabs, and need of a true and spiritual faith for their
regeneration.

Mohammad  was  now  approaching  his  fortieth  year.  Mohammad
Always  pensive,  he  had  of  late  become  even  more  thoughtful  ^^^^^  ^°  '"
and  retiring.  Contemplation  and  reflection  engaged  his
mind.  The  debasement  of  his  people  pressed  heavily  on
him  ;  the  dim  and  imperfect  shadows  of  Judaism  and
Christianity  excited  doubts  without  satisfying  them  ;  and  his
soul  was  perplexed  with  uncertainty  as  to  what  was  the  true
religion.  Thus  burdened,  he  frequently  retired  to  seek  relief
in  meditation  amongst  the  solitary  valleys  and  rocks  near
Mecca.  His  favourite  spot  was  a  cave  in  the  declivities  at
the  foot  of  mount  Hira,^  a  lofty  conical  hill  two  or  three  miles
north  of  Mecca.  Thither  he  would  retire  for  days  at  a  time ;
and  his  faithful  wife  sometimes  accompanied  him.  The
continued  solitude,  instead  of  stilling  his  anxiety,  magnified
into  sterner  and  more  impressive  shapes  the  solemn  realities
which  agitated  his  soul.  Close  by  was  the  grave  of  the  aged
Zeid,  who,  after  spending  a  lifetime  in  the  same  inquiries,  had
now  passed  into  the  state  of  certainty ; — might  he  himself  not
reach  the  same  assurance  without  crossing  the  gate  of  death  ?

All around was bleak and rugged. To the east  and Spiritual
south,  the  vision  from  the  cave  of  Hira  is  bounded  by  lofty ^Jlj^^^^p.
mountain ranges, but to the north and west the weary ing  after
prospect  is thus  described  by  Burckhardt : — 'The  country ^^  ^
before  us  had  a  dreary  aspect,  not  a  single  green  spot  being

'  Or  Hara,  since  called  Jebel  Nur,  or  Mountain  of  Light,  because
Mohammad  is  said  to  have  received  his  first  revelation  there.  The  hill
is  so  lofty  as  to  be  seen  a  long  distance  off.  Burckhardt  says  :  'Passing
the  Sherlfs  garden  house  on  the  road  to  Arafat,  a  little  further  on,  we
enter  a  valley,  which  extends  in  a  direction  N.E.  by  N.,  and  is  terminated
by  the  mountain,  which  is  conical.  ...  In  the  rocky  tioor  of  a  small
building  ruined  by  the  Wahabees,  a  cleft  is  shown  about  the  size  of  a
man  in  length  and  breadth.  ...  A  little  below  this  place  is  a  sm.all
cavern  in  the  red  granite  rock,  which  forms  the  upper  stratum  of  this
mountain.'  This  valley  was  often  trodden  by  Mohammad  on  his  way  to
and  from  the  cleft  and  the  cavern.


38 YOUTH  OF  MOHAMMAD  TO  FORTIETH  YEAR  [chap.  ii.

visible ; barren, black, and grey hills, and white sandy-
valleys,  were  the  only  objects  in  sight.' There  was  harmony
here  between  external  nature,  and  the  troubled  world  within.
•  By  degrees  the  impulsive  and  susceptible  mind  of  Mohammad
was  wrought  up  to  the  highest  pitch  of  excitement;  and  he
would  give  vent  to  his  agitation  in  wild  rhapsodical  language.
Poetical enforced often with incoherent oaths, the  counterpart of
oTfws^"^^ inward struggling after truth. The following fragments
period.  belong  probably  to  this  period  : —

Sura  ciii  J3y  the  declining  day  I  swear  !

Verily,  man  is  in  the  way  of  ruin  ;

Excepting  such  as  possess  faith,

And  do  the  things  which  are  right,

And  stir  up  one  another  unto  truth  and  steadfastness.

And  again —

Sura  c  By  the  rushing  panting  steeds  !

Striking  fire  with  flashing  hoof.
That  scour  the  land  at  early  morn  !
And,  darkening  it  with  dust,
Cleave  thereby  the  Enemy  !
Verily  Man  is  to  his  Lord  ungrateful,
And  he  himself  is  witness  of  it.
Verily  he  is  keen  after  this  world's  good.
Ah  !  witteth  he  not  that  when  what  is  in  the  graves  shall  be  brought  forth,
And  that  which  is  in  men's  breasts  laid  bare  ; —

Verily  in  that  day  shall  the  Lord  be  well  informed  of  them.

Prayer  for  Nor  was  he  wanting  in  prayer  for  guidance  to  the  great

guidance  Being  who,  he  felt,  alone  could  give  it.  The  following  petitions
(though  probably  adapted  subsequently  to  public  worship)  con-
tain perhaps  the  germ  of  frequent  prayer  at  this  early  period.

Siira  i  Praise  be  to  God,  the  Lord  of  creation,

The  most  merciful,  the  most  compassionate  I

Ruler  of  the  day  of  Reckoning  !

Thee  we  worship,  and  invoke  far  help.

Lead  us  in  the  straight  path  ; —
The  path  of  those  towards  whom  Thou  hast  been  gracious  ;
Not  of  those  against  whom  Thy  wrath  is  kindled,  or  that  walk  in  error.'

How  such  aspirations  developed  into  the  belief  that  the
subject  of  them  was  divinely  inspired,  is  a  theme  obscure  and
difficult,  which  I  reserve  for  another  chapter.

'  The Fatiha, or opening Sura  of  the  Kor'an,  so  often  recited  in
public  and  private  worship.


J


[  To  face  p.  38.


CHAPTER III

FIRST DREAMS OF INSPIRATION  : ENDING IN THE CON-
VICTION THAT HE WAS THE PROPHET OF HIS PEOPLE


j^TAT. 40-43. A.D. 609-612

Light  struggled  with  the  darkness  in  the  soul  of  Mohammad.
Gradually  certain  grand  verities  took  clear  and  definite  shape
before  him  : — God,  the  sole  Creator,  Ruler  and  Judge  of  men
and  angels ;  the  hopeless  wretchedness  of  his  people  sunk  in
heathenism  and  idolatry ;  heaven  and  hell ;  the  resurrection,
judgment,  and  recompense  of  good  and  evil  in  the
world  to  come.  The  conflict  waging  within  found  vent  in
fragments  of  wild,  impassioned  poetry.  These  sometimes
assume  the  character  of  soliloquies,  full  of  melancholy  reflec-
tion upon  the  state  and  prospects  of  mankind ;  sometimes
fraught  with  burning  words  and  imagery  of  terror,  they  seem
intended  for  the  warning  or  admonition  of  his  fellow-citizens  ;
sometimes  they  exhibit  a  mind  intent  upon  itself,  oppressed
by  perplexity  and  distress,  and  seeking  for  comfort  and
assurance  by  fleeing  to  its  Maker.  To  aid  in  tracing  the
development  of  spiritual  thought  and  religious  belief  in  the
mind  of  Mohammad,  extracts  from  these  will  now  be  laid
before  the  reader.^  Of  the  soliloquies,  the  following  is  a
specimen : —

That  which  striketh  ! What  is  it  which  striketh?
And  what  shall  certify  thee  what  the  striking  is  ?

^  The  earlier  chapters  of  the  Kor'an  are  mostly  composed  each  of  a
short  piece  delivered  all  at  once  ;  and  the  period  of  their  appearance  is
thus  more  easily  assigned  than  that  of  the  later  Suras  made  up  of  frag-
ments delivered  on  various  occasions.  The  later  Suras  also  are  much
longer  than  the  earlier  ;  but  in  the  Kor'an,  as  finally  arranged,  the
chapters  are  placed  in  an  order  precisely  the  opposite,  the  longest  being
first  and  the  shortest  last.  The  chronological  sequence,  in  short,  is
reversed.  Hence  the  casual  reader  of  the  Kor'an  forms  no  correct
conception  of  the  origin  and  development  of  Mohammad's  system.


Poetical
fragments
and  rhap-
sodies


Specimens
of  these
fragments


Sura  ci


40 BELIEF  OF  MOHAMMAD  IN  HIS  INSPIRATION [chap.


Suia  xcv


Warning
and  expos-
tulation

Sura  civ


Arab  nnd

Jewish

legend


Sura
Ixxxix


The  day  on  which  mankind  shall  be  like  moths  scattered  abroad,
And  the  mountains  like  wool  of  divers  colours  carded.
Then  as  for  him  whose  balances  are  heavy,  he  shall  enter  into  Bliss  ;
And  as  for  him  whose  balances  are  light,  the  Pit  shall  be  his  dwelling
place.
And  what  shall  certify  thee  what  is  the  pit? A  raging  fire  !

These  wild  and  incoherent  rhapsodies  are  couched  in
words  of  rare  force  and  beauty,  with  such  flow  and  rhythm  as
the  Arab  loves,  and  which  his  noble  tongue  gives  freest  scope
to.  The  Oracle  sometimes  begins  now  to  come  direct  from
the  Deity,  speaking  as  *  We,'  and  to  Mohammad  as  '  Thou.'
The  conviction,  however,  of  being  inspired,  was  not  reached,
as  we  shall  see,  till  after  a  protracted  time  of  mental  throes.
This  fragment,  for  example,  purports  to  come  direct  from
heaven : —

I  swear  by  the  Fig  tree  and  the  Olive,

By  mount  Sinai,  and  by  this  land  inviolate  !
Verily  We  made  Man  of  the  choicest  creation,

Then  We  rendered  him  the  lowest  of  the  low  ; —
Excepting  such  as  believe  and  work  righteousness  ;

Unto  them  shall  be  given  a  reward  that  fadeth  not  away.
Then,  after  this,  what  shall  make  thee  deny  the  Day  of  reckoning  ?

What  1  is  not  God  the  justest  of  all  Judges  ?

The  voice  of  expostulation  and  alarm  was  raised  in
accents  such  as  these : —

Woe  unto  the  backbiter  and  the  slanderer  ; —
Who  heapeth  up  riches,  and  counteth  them  over !
He  thinketh  that  his  wealth  shall  remain  with  him  for  ever.
Nay  !  verily  he  shall  be  cast  into  the  crushing  fire  ;
And  what  shall  cause  thee  to  know  what  is  the  CRUSHING  fire  ?

The  fire  of  God  kindled,
Which  shall  mount  above  the  hearts  ;
Verily  it  shall  rise  above  them  as  a  curtain.

Stretched  over  lofty  columns.

Allusion  is  sometimes  made,  though  in  a  form  as  yet
brief  and  vague,  both  to  Arab  and  Jewish  legend.  Thus  in
the  89th  Sura  : —

What !  hast  thou  not  seen  how  thy  Lord  dealt  with  the  children  of
'Ad,—
The  Iremites  possessed  of  pillars,
The  like  whereof  have  not  been  builded  in  any  city  ? —
And  with  the  TiiamOdites  which  hewed  out  the  rock  in  the  Valley  ;


III.]  EARLIEST  SURAS  41

And  with  PHARAOH  that  used  the  stakes  ? '

These  all  behaved  insolently  in  the  earth,

And  multiplied  wickedness  therein  ;
Wherefore  thy  Lord  poured  upon  them  the  mingled  cup  of  His  wrath,

Verily  thy  Lord  is  upon  His  watch-tower,  &c.

Nor  was  there  wanting  special  appeal  to  national  mercies, Suracv
The  105th  Sura,  which  recounts  God's  goodness  in  the  over-
throw of  Abraha,  '  Lord  of  the  Elephant,'  and  preservation  of
the  Holy  City,  belongs  probably  to  this  period." And  also
the  following : —

For  the  stirring  up  of  Koreish  ; —  Sura  cvi

The  stirring  of  them up  unto the Winter  and Summer caravans of

merchandise  ;
Let  them  worship  the  Lord  of  this  House,
Who  hath  provided  them  food  against  Hunger,
And  granted  them  immunity  from  Danger.^

In  elucidation  of  Mohammad's  honest  striving  after  Truth 'The two
another  passage  may  be  quoted,  in  which  are  set  forth  the ^^^^^'
two  paths  of  Virtue  and Vice,  and  the  difficulties  of  the
Straight  way : —

Verily  I  swear  by  this  Territory,  Siira  xc

(And  thou  art  a  resident  thereof;)

1  '  The  stakes '  to  which  the  tyrant  bound  his  victims. The  Thamu-
dites  are  also  mentioned  in  the  91st  Sura,  which  is  quoted  below  as  an
early  example  of  the  rhyming  style  so  frequent  in  the  Kor'an. Each  verse
ends  with  the  syllable  Aa  (pronoun,  third  person),  as  indicated  by  italics.
By  the  Sun  and  /iis  rising  splendour  !

By  the  Moon  when  she  foUoweth  /n'm  !
By  the  Day  when  it  showeth  forth  his  glory  !
By  the  Night  when  it  covereth  him  in  darkness  !
By  the  Heavens  and  Him  that  made  them  !
By  the  Earth  and  Him  that  spread  it  forth  !
By  the  Soul  and  Him  that  framed  it.
Inspiring  in  it  wickedness  and  piety  !
Verily  he  that  purifieth  //;;"  same  is  blessed  ;
And  he  is  wretched  that  corrupteth  it.
The  Thamudites  in  their  impiety,  accused  their  prophet  (Salih)  of  imposture

When  the  most  abandoned  among  them  arose  (to  slay  the  camel).
(Now  the  prophet  of  God  had  said  unto  them,  '  It  is  the  she-camel  of  the  Lord;
Give  ye  her  to  drink  ;)
But  they  rejected  him,  and  slaughtered  her;
Wherefore  the  Lord  overthrew  them  for  their  crime  and  rendered  unto  them  a
recompense  equal  with  their  Sin  ;
And  he  feareth  not  the  issue  thereof.

^  See  Introduction,  p.  c.  ^  I.e.  inviolability  of  the  sacred  territory.


42 BELIEF  OF  MOHAMMAD  IN  HIS  INSPIRATION [chap

By  the  begetter,  and  by  that  which  is  begotten  !

Surely  We  have  created  man  in  trouble.
Ah  !  doth  he  think  indeed  that  no  one  shall  prevail  over  him  ?

He  saith, — '  I  have  wasted  much  wealth.'
Ah  !  doth  he  think  that  no  one  seeth  him?

Have  We  not  made  him  two  eyes,  a  tongue,  and  two  lips  ;
And  shown  unto  him  the  TWO  highways.*
Yet  he  applieth  himself  not  unto  the  ascent ; —
And  what  shall  teach  thee  what  the  ASCENT  is  ? —
Freeing  the  captive,
Giving  food  in  the  day  of  want
To  the  orphan  that  is  near  of  kin.
Or  to  the  poor  that  lieth  in  the  dust; — •
Further,  the  Righteous  are  of  those  that  believe,  and  stir  up  one  another
unto  steadfastness  and  mercy.

These  shall  be  the  Companions  of  the  Right  hand  ;
But  they  that  deny  OUR  signs,  shall  be  Companions  of  the  Left ;
Around  them  the  Fire  shall  close.


Moham-
mad's early
religious
poetry


His  early
followers


Makes  no
impression
oa  his  fellow
citizens


It  seems  probable  that  Mohammad  gave  vent  to  his
reveries  in  poetry  of  this  kind  for  several  years  before  he
assumed  the  office  of  a  divine  teacher.  The  early  Siaras,  and
no  doubt  other  reflective  and  didactic  pieces  not  preserved
because  not  purporting  to  be  inspired,  would  be  recorded  (as
Mohammad  did  not  himself  write)  by  the  aged  Waraka,  by
'All,  who  was  still  a  boy,  possibly  by  Khadija  herself  or  by
some  of  her  relatives,  who  were  inquirers  more  or  less
acquainted  with  Judaism  and  Christianity.  The  friends
of  Mohammad  no  doubt  listened  with  reverence  to  his
admonitions,  and  sought  to  follow  his  injunctions  as  those
of  a  faithful  teacher  guided  haply  by  the  spirit  of  God.
Amongst  these  were  certainly  Khadija  herself,  Zeid  and
All,  his  adopted  sons,  and  perhaps  Abu  Bekr,  his  bosom
friend,  with  Waraka,  who  saw  in  his  teaching  the  counter-
part of  his  own  ideas.  But  without  this  little  circle,  super-
stition and  the  world  held  undisputed  sway.  Warning
and  expostulation  were  met  by  gross  ignorance  and  repel-
lant  darkness.  The  kind  and  generous  Abu  Talib  smiled
at  the  enthusiasm  of  his  nephew.  Abu  Lahab,  another
uncle,  mocked  and  insulted  him.  Abu  Jahl  and  his  party
sneered.  The  great  body  of  Koreish  were  careless  and
indifferent.  As  Mohammad  passed  by  the  knots  that
clustered  about  the  Ka'ba  discussing  the  events  of  the
*  I.e.  Good  and  Evil.


III.]  DIVINE  COAIMISSION  43

day,  they  would  point  disdainfully  at  him  as  at  a  half-witted
creature.

The  more  susceptible  amongst  the  citizens  listened,  Necessity
perhaps  with  attention  at  the  first.  But  when  pressed  to  hood  of^a
throw  in  their  lot  with  the  Inquirers,  they  would  answer:  '  It  divine  com-
is  well  enough  for  Jews  and  Christians  to  follow  the  purer
faith  thou  speakest  of  They,  we  know,  had  prophets  with  a
message  from  heaven.  If  to  us  also,  a  prophet  had  been
sent,  we  should  doubtless  have  followed  his  directions,  and
been  as  devout  and  spiritual  in  our  worship  as  the  Jews  and
Christians.  Let  us  therefore  be  content  with  the  light  given
us,  and  remain  as  we  are.'  ^  Mohammad  felt  the  force  of  the
reply,  for  it  was  in  unison  with  thoughts  hidden  and
undeveloped  yet  ever  present  in  his  heart.  Would  the
Almighty  be  unmindful  of  the  appeal  thus  made  to  Him  for
guidance?  The  appeal  might  itself  be  a  divine  intimation  to
furnish  the  direction  so  urgently  needed  and  desired.  And,
again,  whence  the  rush  of  inspiration  regarding  the  unity  of
God,  His  power  and  providence,  and  a  future  recompense  in
heaven  and  hell?  Whence  the  ecstatic  moments,  the  flow  of
burning  thoughts,  the  spontaneous  burst  of  eloquence  and
heavenly  speech,  which  gave  form  and  substance  to  the  long
conceived  yearnings  of  his  heart,  and  transformed  them  as  it
were  into  the  words  of  God  himself?  Could  the  prophets  of
old  have  had  a  more  convincing  test  of  inspiration  ?  What
if  all  this  formed  a  supernatural  call,  a  divine  Mission?  Why
should  he  hesitate  to  take  the  name  of  God  upon  his  lips,  go
forth  boldly  as  his Legate,  and  trust  that  the  same  spirit

^  There  are  many  such  passages  in  the  Kor'an,  and  the  pretext  thus
explicitly  put  in  the  Sijra  xxxv.  40  f.,  was  probably  the  earliest  of  the
kind  he  had  to  answer.  It  is  as  follows  : — 'The  men  of  Mecca  swore  by
the  Lord  with  the  most  solemn  oath  that  if  a  Prophet  had  come  to  them
they  would  have  followed  his  directions  better  than  any  of  the  other
peoples  ;  but  now  that  a  preacher  {i.e.  Mohammad)  is  come  unto  them,
it  hath  only  increased  their  aversion  from  the  truth,  their  arrogance  in
the  earth,  and  their  pursuit  of  evil.'  See  also  Sura  vi.  156-158:  'And
this  book  We  have  sent  down, — blessed  ;  wherefore  follow  it  and  fear
God  that  ye  may  find  mercy.  Lest  ye  should  say  :  "Verily  the  Scripture
hath  been  revealed  to  two  Peoples  before  us,  but  we  are  unable  to  read  in
their  language."  Or  lest  ye  should  say  :  "  If  the  Scripture  had  been
revealed  to  us,  we  surely  would  have  followed  the  direction  better  than
they."  And  now  verily  hath  a  clear  exposition  come  unto  you  from  your
Lord, — a  direction  and  mercy,'  &c.


44 BELIEF  OF  MOHAMMAD  IN  HIS  INSPIRATION [chap.


Mental
depression
and

grounds  of
reassurance


Siira  xciii


Sura  xciv


Seeks  to

commit

suicide


which  had  guided  Jewish  and  Christian  prophets  would  put
words  into  his  mouth?

While  absorbed  by  such  reflections,  sometimes  doubting,
sometimes  believing,  Mohammad  at  seasons  suffered  grievous
mental  distraction.  To  this  period  may  be  attributed  such
passages  as  the  following,  in  which,  after  deep  depression,  he
seeks  to  reassure  his  soul  by  remembering  the  past  favours  of
the  Almighty : —

By  the  rising  sunshine  !

By  the  night  when  it  darkeneth  !
Thy  Lord  hath  not  forsaken  thee,  neither  hath  He  been  displeased

The  Future  shall  surely  be  better  unto  thee  than  the  Past.
Thy  Lord  shall  shortly dispense  unto  thee  a  gift  ;  and  thou  shalt  be
satisfied.

What !  Did  He  not  find  thee  an  Orphan,  and  give  thee  a  home?

Found  thee  astray,  and  guided  thee  aright  ?
Now,  therefore,  as  touching  the  Orphan,  oppress  him  not  1
And  as  touching  him  that  asketh  of  thee,  repulse  him  not  ;
And  as  touching  the  Favours  of  thy  Lord,  rehearse  them.

And  again  : —

What !  Have  We  not  opened  for  thee  thy  breast  ?
And  eased  thee  of  the  burden, —
Which  galled  thy  back  ;
And  exalted  the  mention  of  thee  ?
Then  truly  with  the  difficulty,  there  shall  be  ease.

Verily  with  the  difficulty  there  shall  be  ease.
And  when  thou  hast  finished,^  then  labour,
And  towards  thy  Lord  raise  thy  desire.

Notwithstanding  such  consolations,  his  distress  was  some-
times insupportable ;  over  and  again  he  meditated  suicide.^
What  if  all  this  were  but  the  simulation  of  divine  impulse,
the  stirrings  of  the  Evil  one  and  his  emissaries?  Indeed,
throughout  the  Kor'an,  no  crime  against  the  high  majesty  of
Heaven  is  more  fearful  than  to  speak  falsely  in  the  name  of

'  I.e.  finished  preaching  or  praying  (Beidavvi).  Another  early  SOra,
of  only  three  verses  (cviii.),  refers  probably  to  the  taunts  of  those  who
reproached  him  with  the  death  of  his  sons  as  a  mark  of  God's
displeasure  : —

Surely  We  have  given  unto  thee  an  abundance  ;
Wherefore  pray  unlo  thy  Lord,  and  offer  sacrifice.
Verily,  he  that  hateih  thee  shall  be  childless.

^  \Cf.  Sura  xviii.  5  ;  xxvi.  2.]


III.]  MENTAL  DISTRACTION  45

God.  Rather  than  expose  himself  to  a  risk  so  terrible,  he
would  anticipate  the  possibility  by  casting  himself  headlong
from  one  of  these  wild  cliffs.  An  invisible  influence  appeared
to  hold  him  back.  Was  it  an  influence  divine  ;  or  might  not
this  too  be  diabolical  ?

At  such  seasons  he  found  solace  in  the  bosom  of  Khadija, Belief  in
who,  as  tradition  tells  us,  tried  the  Spirits,  and  assured  him  that si'on"re-"^'^'
his  Visitants were  not  wicked,  but innocent and  virtuous, vives,  min-
When  thus  comforted  and  re-established,  the  old  hopes  and fmbiUon
aspirations  would  again  revive in  his  heart stronger than
ever. Bright visions of a united people abjuring their
idolatry,  would  rise  before  him. Faith  and  piety  should  yet
reign  throughout  Arabia  :  —

When  the  help  of  the  Lord  shall  come  and  victory,  Sura  ex

And  thou  shalt  see  men  entering  into  the  faith  of  God  in  multitudes,
Then  celebrate  His  praise,  and  ask  pardon  of  Him,  for  He  is  forgiving.

'  Moses  led  forth  his  people  (he  would  say  to  himself),  and  so
did  other  Jewish  chieftains,  to  do  battle  for  the  Lord  against
the  heathen.  And  why  should  not  I,  as  the  vicegerent  of
God,  bring  all  Arabia  in  godly  submission  prostrate  at  His
feet?  Then,  what  vain  superstition  have  I  not  seen  in
Syria ;  they  have  set  up  the  Queen  of  Heaven,  and  burned
incense  to  her !  They  have  a  Revelation,  and  profess  to
obey  it.  I  will  show  to  them  from  their  own  Book  that
they  have  corrupted  and  obscured  the  Truth.  And  Egypt,
Persia,  Abyssinia,  Al-Hira, — all  around,  why  should  I  not
dash  to  the  ground  the  idols,  and  every  thing  that  exalts
itself  against  the  true  God  ; — if  only  my  people  will  be
convinced  and  rally  around  me  to  fight  the  battles  of  the
Lord.  The  whole  world,  Jew  and  Christian,  weary  of
strife  and  discord,  yearns  for  a  Prophet  who  shall  restore
unity  and  peace.  Will  not  all,  then,  flock  to  my  standard
when  I  proclaim  myself  that  which  I  surely  feel  myself
to  be, — the  Prophet  of  the  Lord  ? '  Such  conceptions  were
at  this  time,  it  may  be,  vague  and  undeveloped,  but  look-
ing to  the  earliest  fragments  of  his  Revelation,  there  is
little  doubt  that  the  germ  of  them  existed  in  the  mind  of
Mohammad.

At this crisis,  the future  of  Mohammad  and of Islam Mohammad
trembled  in  the  balance. On  the  one  hand,  he  was  surrounded '"  expecta-


46 BELIEF  OF  MOHAMMAD  IN  HIS  INSPIRATION [chap.


tion  of  a
divine  com-
mission


Vision  of
Gabriel
with  com-
mission to
'  Recite  in
the  name
of  God '


by  a  little  knot  of  faithful  and  believing  followers.  Truth
seemed  to  shine,  clear  and  radiant  as  a  sunbeam,  into  his
heart ;  ecstatic  trances  impressed  a  seal,  apparently  divine,
upon  his  convictions ;  he  was  conscious  of  a  sincere  desire,
and  fancied  that  he  perceived  a  mission,  to  call  forth  his
people  from  darkness  into  light.  On  the  other  hand,  the
ungodly  laughed  him  to  scorn;  while  solemn  expostulation
and  warning  were  treated,  even  by  the  wise  and  sober,  as  the
effusion  of  a  fond  enthusiast.  Before  the  Divine  Commission
all  difficulties  would  vanish.  He  would  wait,  then,  for  the
inspiring  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  lead  him  as  it  had
ofttimes  led  the  prophets  before  him,  in  the  right  way.
Gabriel,^  perhaps,  would  visit  him,  as  he  visited  Zacharias
and  Mary,  to  announce  to  him  the  advent  of  a  new  Dispen-
sation.

He  was  seated  or  wandering  amidst  the  peaks  of  Hira
buried  no  doubt  in  reveries  such  as  these,  when  suddenly
an  apparition  rose  before  him.  The  heavenly  Visitant  stood
clear  and  close  beside  him  in  a  vision.  It  was  no  other  than
Gabriel,  the  Messenger  of  God,  who  now  appeared  in  the
sky,  and,  approaching  within  '  two  bows'  length,'  brought
from  his  Master  this  memorable  behest : — -


Siira  xcvi  RECITE  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  who  created, —

Created  Man  from  nought  but  congealed  blood  ;—
Recite  ! For  thy  Lord  is  beneficent.
It  is  He  who  hath  taught  (to  write)  with  the  pen  ;  —
Hath  taught  man  that  which  he  knoweth  not.  .  .  .
Hast  thou  not  seen  him  that  holdeth  back
The  Servant  of  God  when  he  prayeth  ?
What  thinkest  thou?  had  he  listened  to  right  direction,
And  commanded  unto  piety  ?
Dost  thou  not  see  that  he  hath  rejected  the  Truth  and  turned  his  back  ?

What ! Doth  he  not  know  that  God  seeth  ?
Nay,  verily,  if  he  forbear  not,  We  shall  drag  him  by  the  forelock, —

The  lying,  sinful  forelock  !
Then  let  him  call  his  company  of  friends,  and  We  shall  call  the  guards

of  Hell  ;
Nay  !  submit  not  unto  him  ;  but  worship,  and  draw  nigh  unto  the  Lord.


Mohammad

assumes

authority


Thus  was  Mohammad  led, — by  such  process  as  we  can  only
conjecture,  but  seemingly  after  a  protracted  period  of  doubt

1  It is  clear  that  at  a  later period at  least, if  not  from the  first,
Mohammad  confounded  Gabriel  with  the  Holy  Ghost.


III.]


HIS  CALL


47


and  hesitancy, — to  give  forth  his  message  as  proceeding  direct  of  God  for
from  the  Almighty.  Henceforth  he  spoke  literally  in  the  ^^^^^^^^^^'
name  of  the  Lord.  And  so  scrupulous  was  he  lest,  in  his
words,  there  should  be  even  the  appearance  of  human  influ-
ence, that  every  sentence  of  the  Kor'an  is  prefaced  by  the
divine  command,  *  Speak  '  or  '  Say  ' ;  which,  if  not  expressed
is  always  to  be  understood.^

This commission  pervaded now his  whole career,  and and

mingled with his every action. He  was  the servant,  the u"^°!!^^^
t>  •'  '  nis  com-

prophet,  the  vicegerent  of  God ;  and  however  much  the  missioned
sphere  of  his  mission  might  expand  in  ever  widening  circles,  P''°l' ^^
the  principle  on  which  it  rested  was  the  same.  How
far  the  two  ideas,  on  the  one  hand  of  a  resolution  in  his  own
mind  involving  spontaneous  action,  and  on  the  other  a
supernatural  inspiration  objective  and  independent  of  his
will,  were  at  first  consciously  and  simultaneously  present,
and  in  what  respective  degrees,  it  is  difficult  to  conjecture.
But  it  is  certain  that  the  conception  of  the  Almighty  as  the
immediate  source  of  his  inspiration  and  Author  of  his  com-
mission, soon  took  entire  and  undivided  possession  of  his
soul ;  and,  however  coloured  by  the  events  and  induce-
ments of  the  day,  or  mingled  with  apparently  incongruous
motives  and  desires,  retained  a  paramount  influence  until
the  hour  of  his  death.  The  above  Sura  was,  in  fact,  the
starting  point  of  Islam.  Theologians  and  biographers  gene-
rally hold  it  to  be  the  first  revealed  Sura ;  and  Mohammad
himself  used  to  refer  to  it  as  the  commencement  of  his
inspiration.^

*  Thus  Sura  cxii.  : —

Say  : — He  is  GOD  alone  :  GOD  the  Eternal !
He  begetteth  not,  and  He  is  not  begotten  ;
And  there  is  not  any  like  unto  Him.


^  Several  years  after  he  thus  describes  the  same  vision  : —

By  the  Star  when  it  riseth  !

Your  fellow  erreth  not,  neither  hath  he  gone  astraj\

Nor  doth  he  speak  of  his  own  fancy.

Verily  it  is  no  other  than  a  Revelation  that  hath  been  inspired

One  mighty  and  strong  taught  it  him, —

One  endued  with  wisdom. He  stood

In  the  highest  part  of  the  horizon.

Then  he  drew  near  and  approached,


48 BELIEF  OF  MOHAMMAD  IN  HIS INSPIRATION [chap.


The  com-
mission
slighted  by
the  people
of  Mecca


The  vision
and  com-
mand to
preach

Sura  Ixxiv


But  the  divine  commission  was  unheeded  at  Mecca,
Scorn  and  abuse  gathered  thicker  than  ever  around  him.
He  was  taunted  as  a  poet  carried  away  by  wild  fancy ;  as  a
sorcerer  given  to  magic,  oaths  and  rhapsodies ;  or  as  one  pos-
sessed by  the  Genii  and  demons.  Grieved  and  dispirited,  he
fell  back  upon  his  commission.  Was  it  a  command  to  preach
and  call  his  stiff-necked  and  rebellious  people  to  repentance ;
or  not  rather  a  simple  message  of  the  truth,  for  himself  and
his  disciples  ?  Wearied  and  perplexed,  the  Prophet  stretched
himself  on  his  carpet,  and  wrapping  his  garments  about  him
fell  into  a  trance.  The  Angel  was  at  hand,  and  Mohammad
was  aroused  from  despondency  to  energy  and  action  by  this
reanimating  message : —

Oh  thou  that  art  covered  !  Arise  and  preach  !  ^ And  magnify  thy

Lord.
Purify  thy  garments,  and  depart  from  all  uncleanness.

******

Leave  Me  and  him  whom  I  have  created  alone  ;

On  whom  I  have  bestowed  abundant  riches,

And  sons  dwelling  before  him  ;

And  disposed  his  affairs  prosperously  ; —

Yet  he  desireth  that  I  should  add  thereto.

Nay  !  Because  he  is  to  OUR  Signs  an  adversary,

I  will  afflict  him  with  fierce  calamity  ;
For  he  imagined  and  devised  mischief  in  his  heart,

May  he  be  damned  !  how  he  devised  !

Again  may  he  be  damned  !  how  he  devised  !
Then  he  looked,  and  frowned  and  scowled  ;
Then  he  turned  his  back  and  looked  contemptuously  : —
And  he  said,  '  Verily,  this  is  nought  but  Magic  to  be  wrotigJitj  ^
Verily,  this  is  nothing  but  the  speech  of  a  mere  mortal?

Now,  will  I  cast  him  into  Hell-fire.
And  what  shall  cause  thee  to  know  what  hell-fire  is?
It  leaveth  not,  neither  doth  it  suffer  to  escape,

Candescent  on  the  skin.  .  .  .

Until  he  was  at  the  distance  of  two  bows'  length,  or  yet  nearer  :
And  he  revealed  unto  his  servant  that  which  he  revealed.
The  heart  did  not  belie  that  which  he  saw.

What ! Will ye then dispute with him concerning that which he
saw  ? ' — Sura  liii.

Then  he  alludes  to  a  second  \\%\Q)X[  of  Gabriel,  which  will  be  referred
to  hereafter.

1  Preach  in  the  sense  of  warn,  or  call  to  repentance.

2  Alluding  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection  ;  the  revivification  of
dry  bones  and  dust  being  laughed  to  scorn  as  mere  magic.


III.]


COMMAND  TO  PREACH


49


Then,  after  an  appeal  to  the  former  Scriptures  :^

Nay,  by  the  Moon  !

By  the  night  when  it  retireth  !

By  the  morn  when  it  reddeneth  !

Verily  this  is  one  of  the  most  weighty  matters, —

A  warning  to  mankind  .  .  ,

.  .  .  The  Companions  of  the  Right  hand,  dwelling

In  Gardens,  shall  inquire  of  the  wicked  ; —

'  M^/ia/  hath  cast  you  into  Hell? And  they  shall  reply, —

'  We  were  not  of  those  that  prayed;  neither  did  we  feed  the  poor;

And  we  babbled  vainly  with  the  vain  babblers;

And  we  were  rejecters  of  the  Day  of  Reckoning;

U7ttil  the  conviction  thereof  overtook  us.'  .  .  .
Then  what  aileth  them  that  they  turn  aside  from  this  admonition  ; —

As  though  they  were  affrighted  asses  fleeing  from  a  lion  ?
Every  man  among  them  desireth  that  expanded  Scrolls  be  given  unto
him.^

Nay  !  they  dread  not  the  Life  to  come.

Nay  !  this  is  a  sufficient  Warning  ;

Whoso  chooseth  he  shall  be  warned  thereby.

But  none  shall  be  warned  excepting  as  the  Lord  pleaseth.

He  is  to  be  feared,  and  He  is  the  Forgiven

The  steps  by  which  Mohammad  was  led  to  assume  the  office
not  only  of  an  inspired  Prophet,  but  also  of  a  Leader  com-
missioned to  preach  and  summon  his  people  to  the  faith  of
Islam,  have  now  been  traced  from  the  various  intimations
gathered  from  the  Kor'an  itself.  To  complete  the  view,  I  will
farther  give  the  corresponding  narrative  from  the  pen  of  the
Biographers,  premising  only  that  on  so  mysterious  a  subject
the  imagination  must,  in  the  process  of  oral  transmission,  have
had  the  fullest  play.^ The  following  is  from  Al-Wakidi : —

The  first  beginnings  of  Mohammad's  inspiration  were  real  visions.
Every  vision  that  he  saw  was  clear  as  the  morning  dawn.  These  again
provoked  the  love  of  solitude.  He  would  repair  to  a  cave  on  mount
Hira,  and  there  pass  whole  days  and  nights. Then,  drawn  by  affection

^  I.e.  that  the  divine  message  recorded  upon  pages  should  be
miraculously  brought  from  heaven  and  placed  in  the  objector's  hands,  in
proof  of  Mohammad's  mission.

-  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  157  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1142  ff.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  112  ff.
It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Mohammad  at  this  period  could  not  have
been  the  object  of  much  observation  from  without.  Khadija  was  almost
the  only  witness  of  his  earliest  mental  throes.  'All  was  but  a  boy  ;  and
it  is  doubtful  how  far  Zeid  and  Abu  Bekr  were  yet  on  sufficiently  close
and  intimate  terms  with  him  to  be  made  the  confidants  of  his  most
secret  thoughts.

D


Traditional
account


'  First  be-
ginnings of
inspiration,'
as  handed
down  by
tradition


5© BELIEF  OF  MOHAMMAD  IN  HIS  INSPIRATION [chap.


Mohammad

meditates

suicide


Gabriel
again  ap-
pears and
comforts
him


for  Khadlja,  he  would  return  to  his  home.  This  went  on  till  the  truth
burst  upon  him  in  the  cave.  It  happened  on  this  wise.  Wandering  in
the  hills  around,  an  angel  from  the  sky  cried  to  him,  '  O  Mohammad,  1
am  Gabf-iel J'  He  was  terrified,  for  as  often  as  he  raised  his  head,  there
was  the  apparition  of  the  angel.  He  hurried  home  to  tell  his  wife.  'Oh,
Khadlja,' he  said,  'I  have  never  abhorred  anything  as  I  do  these  idols
and  soothsayers  ;  and  now  verily  I  fear  lest  I  should  become  a  soothsayer
myself.'  'Never,'  replied  his  faithful  wife  ;  'the  Lord  will  never  suffer  it
thus  to  be,' — and  she  went  on  to  speak  of  his  many  virtues,  upon  which
she  founded  the  assurance.  Then  she  repaired  to  her  cousin  Waraka,
and  told  him  all.  'By  the  Lord,'  cried  the  aged  man,  'he  speaketh
truth  !  Doubtless  it  is  the  beginning  of  prophecy,  and  there  shall  come
upon  him  the  Great  Ndinils,  like  as  it  came  upon  Moses.  Wherefore
charge  him  that  he  think  not  aught  but  hopeful  thoughts  within  his
breast.  If  he  be  raised  up  a  prophet  while  I  am  yet  alive,  surely  I  will
stand  by  him.'

Now  the  first  Sura  revealed  to  Mohammad  was  the  96th,  verses  1-5,
Recite  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  &c.  ;  and  that  descended  on  him  in  the
cave  of  Hira.  After  this  he  waited  some  time  without  seeing  Gabriel.
And  he  became  greatly  downcast,  so  that  he  went  out  now  to  one
mountain,  and  then  to  another,  seeking  to  cast  himself  headlong  thence.
While  thus  intent  on  self-destruction,  he  was  suddenly  arrested  by  a
voice  from  heaven.  He  looked  up,  and  behold  it  was  Gabriel  upon
a  throne  between  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  who  said  :  '  O  Mohammad!
thou  art  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord,  in  truth,  and  I  am  Gabriel}  Then
Mohammad  turned  to  go  to  his  own  house  ;  and  the  Lord  comforted  him,
and  strengthened  his  heart.  And  thereafter  revelations  began  to  follow
one  upon  another  with  frequency.'


1  Al-Wakidi  is  here  more  succinct  and  natural  than  Ibn  Hisham.
At-Tabari  again  surpasses  Ibn  Hisham  in  miraculous  statements,  the
number  and  variety  of  which  illustrate  the  rapid  fabrication  and  indis-
criminate reception  of  such  stories  in  the  third  century.  Omitting  such,
the  following  is  a  brief  outline  from  Ibn  Hisham  and  At-Tabari  of  the
first  stirrings  of  inspiration  : —

On  the  night  whereon  the  Lord  was  minded  to  deal  graciously  with
him,  Gabriel  came  to  Mohammad  as  he  slept  with  his  family  in  the  cave
of  Hira.  He  held  in  his  hand  a  piece  of  silk  with  writing  thereon,  and
he  said  Read!  Mohammad  replied,  /  can?tot  read.  Whereupon  the
angel  did  so  tightly  gripe  him  that  he  thought  death  had  come  upon
him.  Then  said  Gabriel  a  second  time  Read!  And  Mohammad,  but
only  to  escape  the  agony,  replied,  What  shall  I  read?  Gabriel  pro-
ceeded : — Read  (Yecxit)  in  the  natne  of  tJiy  Lord,  &c.  ;  repeating  the  96th
Sura  to  the  end  of  v.  5.  When  he  had  ended,  the  angel  departed  ;  and
'the  words,'  said  Mohammad,  'were  as  though  they  had  been  graven  on
my  heart.'  [This  narrative  seems  to  be  a  reminiscence  of  Isaiah  xl.  6.
The  verb  'to  read'  means  in  Hebrew  'to  cry.']  Suddenly  the  thought
occurred  to  him  that  he  was  possessed  of  evil  spirits,  and  he  meditated
suicide  ; but  as  he  rushed  forth  with  the  intention  of  casting  himself


III.]


THE  FETRA


^l


The  period  succeeding  the  revelation  of  the  96th  Sura,
during  which  inspiration  was  suspended,  and  Mohammad  in
despondency  contemplated  suicide,  is  generally  represented
as  of  longer  duration  than  in  the  above  statement.  The
interval  [which  is  called  the  fetrd\  is  variously  held  to  have
lasted  from  six  months  to  three  years.  At  its  close,  the  74th
and  93rd  Suras,  containing  assurance  of  mercy  and  command
to  preach,  were  delivered.  The  accounts,  however,  are
throughout  confused,  and  sometimes  contradictory;  and  we
can  only  gather  with  certainty  that  there  was  a  time  (corre-
sponding with  the  deductions  already  drawn  from  the  Kor'an
itself)  during  which  the  mind  of  Mohammad  hung  in
suspense,  and  doubted  the  reality  of  a  heavenly  mission.

It  is  not  easy  to  say  what  was  the  outward  manifestation
of  Mohammad's  ecstatic  periods, — whether  simply  reveries
of  profound  meditation,  or  swoons  connected  with  a  morbid
excitability  of  mental  or  physical  constitution,  no  doubt
varied  at  different  periods  and  under  different  circumstances.
On  a  subject  so  closely  allied  to  the  supernatural,  we  must  be
on  our  guard  against  the  tendency  of  a  credulous  and
excited  imagination  to  conjure  up  marvellous  tales  which
would  find  ready  currency  and  be  eagerly  handed  by  tradi-

down  a  precipice,  he  was  arrested  by  the  appearance  again  of  Gabriel,
and  stood  for  a  long  time  transfixed  by  the  sight.  At  last,  the  vision
disappearing,  he  returned  to  Khadija  who,  alarmed  at  his  absence,  had
sent  messengers  to  Mecca  in  quest  of  him.  In  consternation  he  threw
himself  into  her  lap,  and  told  her  what  had  occurred.  She  reassured
him,  saying  that  he  would  surely  be  a  prophet,  and  Waraka  confirmed
her  in  the  belief. Ibn  Hisham,  p.  152  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1147.

Another  story  is  that  Khadija  tested  the  character  of  the  spirit  by
making  Mohammad  sit  first  on  her  right  knee,  then  on  her  left,  in  both
of  which  positions  the  apparition  continued  before  him.  Then  she  took
him  in  her  lap,  and  removed  her  veil,  or  uncovered  her  garments,  when
the  spirit  disappeared, — thus  proving  that  it  was  at  any  rate  a  modest
and  virtuous  being.  Whereupon  Khadija  exclaimed  :  Rejoice  my  cousin^
for  by  the  Lord  !  it  is  an  angel ^  and  no  devil.

On  another  occasion,  being  terrified,  he  entreated  Khadija  to  cover
him  up,  on  which  was  revealed  the  74th  Sura  beginning.  Oh  thou
covered !  Again,  the  Prophet  receiving  no  visit  from  Gabriel  for  some
time,  Khadija  said  to  him  :  Verily  I  fear  that  God  is  displeased  with
thee;  whereupon  was  revealed  Sura  xciii.  ; — Thy  Lord  hath  not  re7noved
from  thee,  neither  is  He  displeased,  &c.  But  such  traditions  appear
simply  to  be  attempts  to  explain  or  illustrate  the  several  passages  to
which  they  relate.


Various
accounts  ol
stoppage
of  inspira.-
tioQ


Character
of  Moham-
mad's
ecstatic
periods


52 BELIEF  OF  MOHAMMAD  IN  HIS  INSPIRATION [chap.


Traditional
account


Moham-
mad's own
account


Mohamma-
dan  notions
regarding
devils  and
Genii


tion. With this caution the  following  particulars  may  be
read  :  i — •

At  the  moment  of  inspiration,  anxiety  pressed  upon  the  Prophet,  and
his  countenance  was  troubled.  He  fell  to  the  ground  like  an  inebriate,
or  one  overcome  by  sleep  ;  and  in  the  coldest  day  his  forehead  would  be
bedewed  with  large  drops  of  perspiration.  Even  his  she-camel,  if  he
chanced  to  become  inspired  while  mounted  on  her,  would  be  affected  by
a  wild  excitement,  sitting  down  and  rising  up,  now  planting  her  legs
rigidly,  then  throwing  them  about  as  if  they  would  be  parted  from  her.
To  outward  appearance  inspiration  descended  unexpectedly,  and  without
any  previous  warning  to  the  Prophet.^  When  questioned  on  the  subject
he  replied  :  *  Inspiration  cometh  in  one  of  two  ways  ;  sometimes  Gabriel
communicateth  the  Revelation  to  me,  as  one  man  to  another,  and  this  is
easy;  at  other  times,  it  is  like  the  ringing  of  a  bell,  penetrating  my  very
heart,  and  rending  me  ;  and  this  it  is  which  afflicteth  me  the  most.'  In
the  later  period  of  life  Mohammad  referred  his  grey  hairs  to  the  wither-
ing effect  produced  upon  him  by  the  ''  terHJic  Siiras.'^

Before  quitting  the  subject,  it  may  be  interesting  to  note
what  tradition  says  of  the  class  of  spirits  called  Jinn  or
Genii.  Prior  to  the  mission  of  the  Prophet,  the  Genii,  and
devils  or  other  spirits  of  the  air,  had  access  to  the  outskirts
of  heaven,  and  by  assiduous  eavesdropping  secured  some  of


*  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  131  f.

2  'Abd  ar-Rahmfm  relates  that  on  the  return  from  Al-Hodeibiya
(A.H.  6),  he  suddenly  saw  the  people  urging  on  their  camels  ;  and  every
one  was  inquiring  of  his  neighbour  the  cause.  They  replied.  Inspiration
hath  descetided  on  the  Prophet.  So  he  too  urged  on  his  camel,  and
reached  Mohammad  who,  seeing  that  a  sufficient  number  of  people  had
gathered  around  him,  began  to  recite  the  40th  Sura.  I  remember  no
tradition  which  represents  Mohammad  as  beforehand  aware  that  inspira-
tion was  about  to  come  upon  him.

^  The  'terrific'  Suras,  as  specified  in  the  numerous  traditions  on  this
subject,  are,  'Sura  Hud,  and  its  Sisters'; — the  ''Sisters'  are  variously
given  as  Siiras  xi.,  xxi.,  Ivi.,  Ixix.,  Ixxvii.,  l.xxviii.,  Ixxxi.,  or  ci.  ; — all
revealed  at  Mecca,  and  some  of  them  very  early.  We  are  told  that
while  Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar  sat  in  the  Mosque  at  Medina,  Mohammad
suddenly  came  upon  them  from  the  door  of  one  of  his  wives'  houses
(which  opened  into  the  mosque),  stroking  and  lifting  up  his  beard,  and
looking  at  it.  Now  his  beard  had  in  it  many  more  white  hairs  than  his
head.  And  Abu  Bekr  said:  'Ah,  thou,  for  whom  I  would  sacrifice
father  and  mother,  white  hairs  are  hastening  upon  thee  !'  The  Prophet,
raising  his  beard  with  his  hand,  gazed  at  it ;  and  Abu  Bekr's  eyes  filled
with  tears.  'Yes,'  said  Mohammad,  'Hud' (Siira  xi.)  'and  its  Sisters
have  hastened  my  white  hairs.' — 'And  what,'  asked  Abu  Bekr,  'are  its
Sisters?' 'The  Inevitable  (Sura  Ivi.),  and  the  Striking  (Sura  ci.).'


III.]


THE  JINN


53


the  secrets  of  the  upper  world,  which  they  communicated  to
soothsayers  and  diviners  upon  the  earth.  But  on  the  advent
of  Mohammad  they  were  driven  from  the  skies,  and,  when-
ever they  dared  to  approach,  flaming  bolts  were  hurled  at
them,  appearing  to  mankind  like  falling  stars.  Hence  at
this  epoch  the  show  of  falling  stars  is  said  to  have  been
brilliant  and  uninterrupted ;  and  the  Arabs  were  much
alarmed  at  the  portentous  phenomenon.^  Such  a  belief  in
the  existence  and  history  of  the  Genii,  strange  as  it  may
appear,  is  clearly  developed  in  the  Kor'an,  and  throws  a
mysterious  light  upon  the  inner  recesses  of  the  Prophet's
mind.^

The considerations bearing on the  first  conception  by Conclusion
Mohammad of  a revelation from heaven,  have  now  been ^  ^° ?,'

'  _ hammad  s

given  at  length,  both  from  tradition  and  from  the  Kor'an  belief  in  his
itself;  and,  reaching  us  with  such  mysterious  and  strange  'aspiration
surroundings,  they  leave  on  the  mind  no  doubt  of  his  sincere
and  earnest  searching  after  truth  at  this  period  of  his  life.
Revelations  of  the  same  nature,  all  shaped  as  messages  or
commands  direct  from  God,  continued  to  'descend'  upon  the
Prophet  throughout  his  life,  and  as  such  are  termed  the
Kor'an,  or  Word  of  God.^  As  years  advanced  these  began
to  lose  the  glow  and  fervour  of  the  earlier  rhapsodies.  Ever
and  anon,  indeed,  even  to  the  end,  we  meet  with  passages —
those  especially  on  the  Being  and  Providence  of  God —
grand,  impassioned,  and  kindling  with  the  early  fire;  but  the
ordinary  style  becomes  tame  and  vapid.  Moreover,  when
Mohammad  attained  to  temporal  power,  the  Revelation  was

^  It  is  possible  that  at  this  period  there  may  really  have  been  an
unusual  display  of  falling  stars,  which  at  certain  points  of  the  earth's
course  are  known  to  be  specially  abun.dant.

^  In  the  Kor'an  the  Genii  are  represented  as  conversing  thus  one
with  another  : — '  Verily  we  used  to  pry  into  the  heavens,  but  we  found
them  to  be  filled  with  a  strong  guard  and  with  flaming  darts.  And  we
used  to  sit  in  some  of  the  seats  thereof  to  listen  ;  but  whoever  listeneth
now,  findeth  a  flaming  bolt  in  ambush.  And  we  know  not  whether  evil
be  hereby  intended  against  those  upon  earth,  or  whether  the  Lord  be
minded  to  guide  them  into  the  right  way.' — Sura  Ixxii.  8-10.  As  we
shall  see  below,  many  of  the  Genii,  when  they  heard  Mohammad  reciting
his  Revelation,  are  said  to  have  been  converted.  The  Kor'an  professes
to  have  been  revealed  for  the  benefit  and  salvation  both  of  Men  and  Genii.
Cf.  Sura  XV,  18  ;  Ixvii.  5  ;  xxxvii.  6-10  ;  xxvi.  210  ;  Ixxxi.  24.

^  /kor'an;  that  is,  '  Scripture '  or  what  is  read  or  recited.


54 BELIEF  OF  MOHAMMAD  IN  HIS  INSPIRATION  [chap.  hi.

used  as  the  means  of  reaching  secular  ends,  and  even,  as  we
shall  see,  of  ministering  to  lower  objects.  What  could  the
source  have  been  of  '  Inspiration  '  ending  thus  ?  The  answer
can,  at  the  best,  be  but  conjecture.  It  will  be  for  the  reader,
as  he  proceeds,  himself  to  judge  when  and  to  what  extent,
consciously  or  unconsciously,  material  objects  obscured  for
Mohammad  the  spiritual  vista ; — whether,  in  fact,  the  eye
being  no  longer  single,  the  light  that  was  in  him,  from  what-
ever source,  lost  its  ethereal  virtue,  and  became  dimmed  by
the  turbid  atmosphere  of  the  world.


CHAPTER  IV

FROM THE ASSUMPTION BY MOHAMMAD OF THE PRO-
PHETICAL OFFICE TO THE FIRST EMIGRATION TO

ABYSSINIA

.K/'vir.  44-45. A.D.  613-614

The  weary  region  of  uncertainty  and  speculation  may  now  Mohammad
be  left  behind.  Towards  the  forty-fourth  year  of  his  age  we  'fgu/th  yea^r
find  Mohammad,  now  emerged  from  doubt  and  obscurity,
clearly  and  unequivocally  asserting  that  he  was  ordained  a
prophet  with  a  commission  to  the  people  of  Arabia ;  reciting
his  warnings  and  exhortations  as  messages  that  emanated
direct  from  God ;  and  himself  implicitly  believing  (to  all
outward  appearance)  his  call  and  mission  to  be  divine.  We
see  him  already  surrounded  by  a  little  band  of  followers,  all
animated  by  ardent  devotion  to  his  person,  and  the  belief
that  his  guide  and  inspirer  was  God  himself.

It is strongly corroborative of Mohammad's sincerity Earliest

*  •  converts

that  the  earliest  converts  to  Islam  were  not  only  of  upright
character,  but  his  own  bosom  friends  and  people  of  his
household  ;  who,  intimately  acquainted  with  his  private  life,
could  not  fail  otherwise  to  have  detected  those  discrepancies
which  ever  mere  or  less  exist  between  the  professions  of  the
hypocritical  deceiver  abroad  and  his  actions  at  home.  The
faithful  Khadija  is  already  known  to  the  reader,  as  sharer  Khadija
in  her  husband's  searchings  of  heart,  and  probably  the  first
convert  to  his  creed.  '  So  Khadija  believed  '  (runs  the  simple
tradition),  '  and  attested  the  truth  of  that  which  came  to  him
from  God.  Thus  was  the  Lord  minded  to  lighten  the
burden  of  his  Prophet ;  for  he  heard  nothing  that  grieved
him  touching  his  rejection  by  the  people,  but  he  had  recourse
unto  her,  and  she  comforted,  reassured,  and  supported  him.'
Zeid,  the  adopted  son  and  intimate  friend  of  Mohammad, 2eid


56 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.

who  lived  no  doubt  in  close  connection  with  the  family,  if  not
actually a member of it, was also one of the earliest
believers.^
'All  *Ali,  the  Prophet's  cousin,  now  thirteen  or  fourteen  years

of  age,  already  gave  tokens  of  the  wisdom  and  judgment
which  distinguished  him  in  after  life.^  Though  possessed  of
indomitable  courage,  he  was  meditative  and  reserved,  and
lacked  the  stirring  energy  which  would  have  rendered  him  an
effective  propagator  of  Islam.  He  grew  up  from  a  child  in
the  faith  of  Mohammad,  and  his  earliest  associations
strengthened  the  convictions  of  maturer  years.  It  is  said
that  as  Mohammad  was  once  engaged  with  him  in  prayer,  in
a  glen  near  Mecca  whither  they  had  retired  to  avoid  the
jeers  of  their  neighbours,  Abu  Talib,  his  father,  chanced  to
pass  by,  and  said  to  Mohammad,  '  My  nephew  !  what  is  this
new  faith  I  see  thee  following?'  'O  my  Uncle!'  he  replied,
'  this  is  the  religion  of  God,  and  of  his  angels,  and  of  his
prophets  ;  the  religion  of  Abraham.  The  Lord  hath  sent  me
an  Apostle  unto  his  servants ;  and  thou,  my  Uncle,  art  the
most  worthy  of  all  that  I  should  address  my  invitation  unto,
and  the  most  worthy  to  assist  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord.'  Abu
Talib  answered  :  '  I  am  not  able,  my  nephew,  to  separate  from
the  religion  and  the  customs  of  my  forefathers,  but  I  swear
that  so  long  as  I  live  no  one  shall  dare  to  trouble  thee.'  Then,
turning  to  his  son,  who  professed  a  similar  faith  and  the
resolution  to  follow  Mohammad,  he  said  :  '  Well,  my  son,  he
will  not  call  thee  to  aught  but  that  which  is  good  ;  wherefore
thou  art  free  to  cleave  unto  him.' To  the  family  group  it  is

Waraka  hardly  necessary  to  add  Waraka,  the  aged  cousin  of
Khadija,  whose  profession  of  Christianity  and  support  of
Mohammad  have  been  already  mentioned,  because  he  had
already  died  before  Mohammad  had  entered  upon  his  public
ministry.

Abu  Bekr  In  the  little  circle  there  was  one  belonging  to  another

branch  of  Koreish,  who,  after  Khadija,  may  claim  precedence
in  the  profession  of  Islam.  Abu  Bekr  had  long  been  the
familiar  friend  of  Mohammad,  and  with  him  no  doubt  had
lamented  the  gross  darkness  of  Mecca,  and sought  after  a

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  i6of.;  At-Tabari,  i.  1167  f.

2  [Ibn  Hisham (p. 158  f.)  makes  'All  the  first  male  convert; At-
Tabari,  i.  1 1 59  f.]


IV.]  FIRST  CONVERTS  57

better  faith.^  He  lived  in  the  same  quarter  of  the  city  as
Khadlja.  When  Mohammad  removed  thither  the  intimacy
became  closer,  and  the  attachment  of  Abu  Bekr  was  soon
riveted  by  implicit  faith  in  his  friend  as  the  apostle  of  God.
'A'isha,  his  daughter  (born  about  this  period,  and  destined
while  yet  a  girl  to  be  the  Prophet's  bride),  'could  not
remember  the  time  when  both  her  parents  were  not  true
believers,  and  when  Mohammad  did  not  daily  visit  her
father's  house  morning  and  evening.'  Of  her  father,  the
Prophet  said  :  '  I  never  invited  any  one  to  the  faith  who
displayed  not  hesitation  and  perplexity,  excepting  only  Abu
Bekr ;  who,  when  I  had  propounded  unto  him  Islam,  tarried
not,  neither  was  perplexed.'  Abu  Bekr  was  about  two  years  Hisappear-
younger  than the Prophet ; short  in  stature,  and of  small ^"'^^  ^^^

cn3.ra.ctGr

spare  frame  ;  the  eyes  deeply  seated  under  a  high  projecting
forehead.  His  complexion  was  fair,  and  face  comely,  but
thin,  so  that  you  could  see  the  veins  upon  it.  Shrewd  and
intelligent,  he  yet  wanted  the  originality  of  genius ;  his
nature  was  mild  and  sympathetic,  but  not  incapable  of  firm
purpose  when  important  interests  required.  Impulse  and
passion  rarely  prompted  his  actions  ;  he  was  guided  by  reason
and  calm  conviction.  Faithful  and  unvarying  in  his  attach-
ment to  the  Prophet,  he  was  known  (and  is  to  the  present
day  familiar  in  the  Muslim  world)  as  AS-SlDDlK,  '  t/ie  True.'^
He  was  also  styled  '  the  Sighing,'  from  his  tender  and  com-  His  gene-
passionate  heart. Abu  Bekr  was  a  diligent  and  successful '^^^"^  ^^"^

'■  °  popularity

merchant,  and,  being  frugal  and  simple  in  his  habits,
possessed  at  his  conversion  about  40,000  silver  pieces.  His
generosity  was  rare  and  his  charity  unwearying.  The  greater
part  of  his  fortune  was  now  devoted  to  the  purchase  of  such
unfortunate  slaves  as  were  persecuted  for  their  attachment  to
the  new  faith  ;  so  that  but  5,000  pieces  were  left  when,  ten  or
twelve  years  after,  he  emigrated  with  the  Prophet  to  Medina.
Abu  Bekr  was  unusually  familiar  with  the  history  of  Koreish,
who  often  referred  to  him  for  genealogical  information.  His
judgment  was  sound  and  impartial,  his  conversation  agree-
able, and  his  demeanour  affable  and  engaging. His  society

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  161  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1165,  1168.

^  His  proper  name  was  'Abdallah,  son  of  '  Othman  Abu  Kohafa.  It  is
not  clear  when  he  obtained  the  name  of  Adu  Bekr,  which  means  Father
of  the  young  Camel. See  The  Caliphate,  p.  21.


58 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.


Abu  Bekr
gains  five
converts ;


Sa'd

Az-Zubeir
ibn  al-
'Auwam

Talha

'Othman,
son  ot
'Affan,  and


'Abd  ar-
Rahman


Four  con-
verts

accompany
'Abd  ar-
Rahnnan


and  advice  were  therefore  much  sought  after  by  Koreish,  and
he  was  popular  throughout  the  city.^

To  have  such  a  man  a  staunch  adherent  of  his  claims  was
for  Mohammad  a  most  important  step.  Abu  Bekr's  influence
was  freely  surrendered  to  the  cause  of  Islam,  and  five  of  the
earliest  converts  are  attributed  to  his  exertions  and  example.
Three  were  but  striplings.  Sa'd,  the  son  of  Abu  Wakkas,
converted  in  his  sixteenth  or  seventeenth  year,  was  the
nephew  of  Amina,  mother  of  the  Prophet.^  Az-Zubeir,
probably  still  younger,  was  at  once  the  nephew  of  Khadija,
and  the  son  of  Mohammad's  aunt  Safiya.^  About  the  same
acre  was  Talha,  a  relative  of  Abu  Bekr  and  a  renowned
warrior  in  after  days.  The  fourth  was  'Othnidn,  son  of  'Affan
(successor  of  'Omar  in  the  Caliphate),  who,  though  of  the
Omeiyad  stock,  was  also,  on  his  mother's  side,  grandson  of
'Abd  al-Muttalib.  Mohammad's  daughter  Rokeiya,  being
now,  or  shortly  after,  free  from  her  connection  with  'Otba
(son  of  the  hostile  Abu  Lahab),  the  Prophet  gave  her  in
marriage  to  'Othman,  whose  wife  she  continued  until  her
death  some  ten  or  twelve  years  afterwards.  'Othman  was  at
this  period  between  thirty  and  forty  years  of  age.  The  fifth
was  'Abd  ar-RaJniidn,  ten  years  younger  than  the  Prophet,  a
man  of  wealth  and  character.  'Abd  ar-Rahman,  'Othman,
and  Talha  were,  like  Abu  Bekr,  merchants.

'Abd  ar-Rahman  was  accompanied  on  his  first  visit  to  the
house  of  Mohammad  by  four  companions,  who  at  the  same
time  embraced  Islam  :  'Obeida,  son  of  Mohammad's  uncle  Al-
Harith ;  Abu  Selauia  ;^  Abu  'Obeida,  subsequently  a  warrior

^  I  agree  with  Sprenger  in  considering  'the  faith  of  Abu  Bekr  the
greatest  guarantee  of  the  sincerity  of  Mohammad  in  the  beginning  of  his
career' — and,  indeed,  in  a  modified  sense,  throughout  his  Hfe.

^  Sa'd  pursued  the  trade  of  manufacturing  arrows,  and  is  renowned
as  'the  first  who  shot  an  arrow'  on  the  side  of  Islam.

2  Az-Zubeir  was  the  grandson  of  Khuweilid,  Khadija's  father ;  and
also  the  grandson  of  'Abd  al-Muttahb  by  his  daughter  Saflya.  He  was  a
butcher  ;  and  his  father  a  grain  merchant,  or,  as  others  have  it,  a  tailor.
He  became  a  distinguished  warrior,  and  bore  a  prominent  part  in  the
subsequent  history.  [For  the  trades  followed  by  the  first  Muslims,  cf.
Ibn  Koteiba,  Kilab  al-Ma'drif,  p.  283  f.]

*  Abu  Selama  was  ten  years  older  than  Mohammad,  and  was  present
at  Bedr.  He  emigrated  twice  to  Abyssinia  with  his  wife  Um  Selama.
He  died  of  wounds  received  at  Ohud,  when  Mohammad  married  his
widow.


IV.]  EARLY  CONVERTS  59

of  note  ;  and  'Ofhvidn,  son  of  Maz'un,  The  latter  had  already
abandoned  wine  before  his  conversion,  and  was  with  difficulty
persuaded  by  Mohammad  to  renounce  the  asperities  of  an
ascetic  life.  His  family  appears  to  have  been  well  inclined  to
Islam,  for  we  find  two  brothers,  a  son,  and  other  relatives,  in
the  list  of  early  believers.^

Of  the  slaves  ransomed  by  Abu  Bekr  from  persecution, Converted
the  foremost  is  BiLAL,  son  of  an  Abyssinian  slave-girl. He Bulund
was  tall,  dark,  and  gaunt,  with  negro  features  and  bushy  hair, others
Mohammad distinguished him as  '  the  first  fruits  of  A bys-
suiia ;'  and  to  this  day  he  is  known  throughout  the  Muslim
world  as  the  Prophet's Muezzin,  or' crier  to  prayer. 'Amir
ibn  FuJicira,  after  being  released  from  severe  trial,  was  em-
ployed by  Abu  Bekr  in  tending  his  flocks.- 'Abdallah  ibn
Mas' fid,  '  small  in  body,  but  weighty  in  faith,'  the  constant
attendant  who  waited  upon Mohammad  at  Medina;^  and
Khabbdb,  a  blacksmith,  were  also  converted  at  this period.
The  slaves  of  Mecca  were  peculiarly  accessible  to  the  soHcita- Meccan
tions  of  the Prophet. As foreigners they  were generally ^gp^^^Wf
familiar  either  with  Judaism  or  Christianity. Isolated  from religious
ihe  influences  of  hostile  partisanship,  persecution  had  alien- "^P^'^ssion
ated  them  from  Koreish,  and  misfortune  made  their  hearts
susceptible  of  spiritual  impressions.

In  addition  to  the  twenty  persons  now  noticed  as  among Thirteen

the  first  confessors  of  the  faith,  tradition  enumerates  at  least ?^y ^^^^

'  behevers

thirteen  others  as  having  believed  'before  the  entry  of  tJie
PropJiet  into  the  house  of  Al-Arkam  ;  ' — by  which  expression
(explained  hereafter)  the  biographers  mark  the  few  earliest
years  of  Islam.  Among  these  thirteen  we  observe  the
youthful  son  Sa'Id  and  several  relatives  of  the  aged  inquirer

^  He  wished  to  renounce  the  privileges  of  conjugal  life  ;  but  Mo-
hammad forbade  this,  and  recommended  him  to  imitate  his  own  practice
in  this  respect,  saying  that  the  Lord  had  not  sent  his  prophet  with  a
monkish  faith.  The  expressions  attributed  to  Mohammad  on  this  occasion
are  strongly  illustrative  of  his  character ;  but  the  passage  does  not
admit  of  further  detail.  [For  the  list  of  the  first  converts,  cf.  Ibn  Hisham,
p.  162  fif.]

-  'Amir  ibn  Fuheira  was  a  son  (by  a  former  owner)  of  Um  Rumfm,
Abu  Bekr's  wife,  and  mother  of  'A'isha.

^  'Abdallah  at  Medina  was  climbing  up  a  date  tree,  and  his  com-
panions were  indulging  in  pleasantry  at  the  expense  of  his  spare  legs,
when  Mohammad  used  the  expression  here  quoted.


6o EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.


Several

female

converts


Converts  in
first  four
years  about
forty


Zeid,  already  some  time  dead,  whose  remarkable  life  has
been  already  alluded  to  as  possibly  paving  the  way  for
Mohammad.  Sa'id's  wife,  of  the  same  family,  and  her  brother,
were  likewise  among  the  early  converts.  There  were  also
among  the  number  'Obeidallah,  himself  one  of  the  '  Four
inquirers,'  and  two  of  his  brothers.  On  the  persecution
becoming  hot,  'Obeidallah  emigrated  with  his  wife  and  others
of  his  family,  to  Abyssinia,  where  he  was  converted  to  Chris-
tianity, and  died  in  that  faith.^  It  is  interesting  to  note
among  the  converts  Abu  HodJieifa^  son  of  *Otba  (father-in-
law  of  Abu  Sufyan),  a  family  inveterately  opposed  to  Moham-
mad. We  find  also  the  name  of  Al-Arkam,  whose  house  will
shortly  be  mentioned  as  memorable  in  the  annals  of  Islam.

Beside  this  little  group  of  three-and-thirty  individuals,  the
wives  and  daughters  of  some  of  the  converts  are  mentioned
as  also  faithful  and  earnest  professors  of  Islam.  Religious
movements  in  every  age  have  found  women  to  take  a  forward
part,  if  not  in  direct  and  public  assistance,  yet  in  the
encouragement  and  exhortation  which  are  of  even  greater
value;  and  Islam  was  no  exception.  On  the  other  hand,  as
priority  in  the  faith  became  in  after  years  a  ground  of  social
distinction,  we  must  not  forget  that,  in  estimating  the  number
of  early  converts,  their  ranks  have  been  unduly  swelled  by
the  traditions  of  those  whose  piety  or  ambition  have  ima-
gined or  invented  such  priority  for  their  own  ancestors  or
patrons.  Weighing  both  considerations,  we  shall  not  greatly
err  if  we  conclude  that,  in  the  first  three  or  four  years  after
the  assumption  by  Mohammad  of  his  prophetic  office,  the
converts  to  his  faith  amounted  to  nearly  forty  souls.

^  Mohammad  (as  we  shall  see)  married  his  widow.  'Obeidallah  was
Mohammad's  cousin  by  his  mother,  a  daughter  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib.  He
was  also  brother  of  the  famous  Zeinab,  who  was  married  to  Zeid
(Mohammad's  freedman)  and  was  afterwards  divorced  by  him  that  the
prophet  might  take  her  to  wife.  The  whole  of  his  tribe,  the  Beni  Dudan,
resident  at  Mecca,  were  very  favourable  to  Islam  ;  at  the  Hijra  they  all
emigrated  to  Medina,  men,  women,  and  children,  locking  up  their  houses.
It  is  remarkable  that  this  tribe  were  confederates  of  Harb  and  Abu
Sufyan,  leading  opponents  of  Mohammad  ; — the  influence  of  Islam  thus
frequently  overleaping  and  baffling  the  political  combinations  of  Mecca.

^  He  challenged  his  father  at  the  battle  of  Bedr  to  single  combat.
His  sister  Hind  (wife  of  Abu  Sufyan)  retorted  in  satirical  verses,  taunting
him  with  being  squint-eyed,  and  with  the  barbarity  of  offering  to  fight  his
father.  .  He  was  an  ill-favoured  man,  with  projecting  teeth.


which  this
succes?  was


IV.]  WOMEN  CONVERTS  6i

By  what  degrees,  under  the  influence  of  what  motives  or  Steps  by
arguments,  and  at  what  precise  periods,  these  individuals,  one
by  one,  gave  in  their  adhesion  to  Mohammad,  we  can  scarcely  attained
determine  further  than  in  the  general  outline  already  before
the  reader.  It  is  usual  in  tradition  to  assign  to  the  Prophet
three  years  of  secret  preaching  and  private  solicitation,  after
which  an  open  call  was  made  to  Koreish  at  large.  But
we  hardly  find  grounds  for  this  theory  in  the  Kor'an.  It  is
probable  that  the  preliminary  term  of  doubt  and  hesitancy
(which  we  sought  to  trace  in  the  preceding  chapter)  has  been
confounded  by  tradition  with  the  actual  assumption  of  the
prophetic  office.  The  facts  we  may  conjecture  to  have  been
as  follows  :  An  interval  of  pious  musing,  and  probably  of
expostulation  with  near  relatives  and  friends,  preceded  the
fortieth  year  of  Mohammad's  life.  About  that  time  the
resolution  to  '  recite  in  the  name  of  the  Lord '  (in  other  words
the  co7iviction  of  mspiratiori)  was  fully  formed.  For  some
succeeding  period  his  efforts  would  be  naturally  directed  to
individual  persuasion  and  entreaty ;  but  there  is  nothing  to
warrant  the  belief  that  the  prophetic  claim,  once  assumed,
was  ever  confined  as  an  esoteric  creed  within  the  limits  of  a
narrow  circle.  It  was  after  this  that  the  Prophet  received  (as
he  imagined)  the  command  to  '  arise  and  preach  ; '  ^  and  forth-
with his  appeal  was  made  to  the  whole  community  of  Mecca.
Gradually his followers increased, and the faith of each

'  That  is  Sura  Ixxiv.  i  ff.  The  biographers  ordinarily  quote  another
passage  as  the  first  command  to  preach  : —

'And  preach  to  (or  warn)  thy  nearer  kinsfolk.
And  lower  thy  wing  to  the  believers  that  follow  thee.
And  if  they  rebel  against  thee,'  &c. — Sura  xxvi.  214  ff.

Rut  the  tradition  that  this  passage  was  the  first  call  to  preach,
appears  erroneous.  It  is  not  only  contained  in  a  much  later  Sura,  but
itself  bears  evidence  of  persecution,  and  of  considerable  progress.  It
was  probably  revealed  while  the  Prophet  with  his  relatives  was  shut  up
in  the  Quarter  of  Abu  Talib,  as  will  be  related  in  the  next  chapter,  and
while  his  preaching  was  necessarily  confined  to  them.  The  stories  also
of  the  Prophet  taking  his  stand  upon  mount  As-Safa,  summoning  his
relatives,  family  by  family,  and  addressing  to  them  the  divine  message  ;
of  the  contemptuous  reply  of  Abu  Lahab  (see  p.  107)  ;  of  the  miraculous
dinner  at  which  Mohammad  propounded  his  claim  to  his  relatives,  'All
alone  standing  forth  as  his  champion  and  '  Vizier,'  &c.,  are  all  apocryphal.
At  this  dinner,  food  was  prepared  hardly  sufficient  for  one  person,  but
was  so  multiplied  as  to  suffice  for  forty  ;  and  so  forth.


62 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.


Persecution
caused  by
attachment
to  national
idolatry


Advan-
tages of
opposition
to  Moham-
mad


Period  at
which  it
com-
menced


(though  only  the  reflection  of  his  own  convictions)  was
accepted  by  Mohammad  as  new  and  independent  evidence  of
his  mission,  emanating  from  Him  who  alone  can  turn  the
heart  of  man.  Success  made  the  sphere  of  Islam  to  expand
before  him  ;  and  that  which  was  primarily  intended  for  Mecca
only,  embraced  at  last  in  the  ever-widening  circle  of  its  call,
the  whole  Peninsula,

An  important  change  now  occurred  in  the  relations  of
Mohammad  with  the  citizens  of  Mecca.  Hitherto  they  had
treated  his  teaching  as  that  of  a  harmless  enthusiast.  But
now  their  hostility  was  aroused,  and  believers  were  subjected
to  indignity  and  molestation.  The  main  ground  of  oppo-
sition was  the  deep-seated  attachment  of  Koreish  to  the
worship  of  the  Ka'ba.  The  same  spirit  was  aroused  in  them
as  caused  the  multitude  of  old  to  shout  *  Great  is  Diana  of  the
Ephesians.'  Their  shrine,  the  glory  of  Mecca  and  the  centre
of  pilgrimage  from  all  Arabia,  was  in  danger  to  be  set
at  nought.  The  new  doctrine  must  be  crushed,  and  its
followers  forced  to  abandon  it.  By  degrees  the  persecution
grew  hot.  Those  who  were  citizens  for  the  most  part  escaped
serious  injury,  being  protected  as  a  point  of  honour  by  their
families ;  but  the  slaves,  who  had  no  such  support,  were
exposed  to  much  suffering.

Persecution,  though  it  may  sometimes  have  deterred  the
timid  from  joining  his  ranks,  was  eventually  of  unquestion-
able service  to  Mohammad.  It  furnished  in  after  years  a
plausible  excuse  for  casting  aside  the  garb  of  toleration  ;  for
opposing  force  to  force  against  those  who  *  obstructed  the
ways  of  the  Lord  ; '  and  last  of  all  for  the  compulsory  con-
version of  the  unbelievers.  Even  before  the  Hijra  it  drove
the  adherents  of  the  Prophet  in  self-defence  into  a  closer
union,  and  made  them  stand  forth  with  a  more  resolute  aim
and  bolder  front.  The  severity  and  injustice  of  Koreish,  over-
shooting the  mark,  aroused  at  once  personal  and  family
sympathies ;  unbelievers  sought  to  avert  or  to  mitigate  the
sufferings  of  the  followers  of  the  Prophet ;  and  in  so  doing
they  were  themselves  sometimes  gained  over  to  his  side.

It  was  not,  however,  till  three  or  four  years  of  his  minis-
try had  elapsed,  that  any  general  opposition  to  Mohammad
was  organised.  Even  after  he  had  begun  publicly  to
summon  his  fellow-citizens  to  the  faith,  and  his  followers  had


IV.]


PERSECUTION


63


formed,
it  grew
rapidly


multiplied,  the  people  did  not  gainsay  his  doctrine.  They
would  only  point  at  him  slightingly  as  he  passed,  and  say :
There  goetJi  tJie  Fellow  from  among  the  children  of  ^Abd  al-
Mnttalib^  to  speak  tinto  the  people  about  the  Heavens.  But
(adds  tradition)  when  the  Prophet  began  to  abuse  their  idols,
and  to  assert  the  perdition  of  their  ancestors  who  died  in  un-
belief, then  they  became  displeased  and  began  to  treat  him
with  contumely.  Hostility,  once  excited,  soon  showed  itself  Once
in  acts  of  violence.  Sa'd,  it  is  related,  having  retired  for
prayer  with  a  group  of  believers  to  a  valley  near  Mecca,  some
of  his  neighbours  passed  unexpectedly  by.  A  sharp  con-
tention arose  between  them,  followed  by  blows.  Sa'd  struck
one  of  his  opponents  with  a  camel  goad ;  and  this  was  '  the
first  blood  shed  in  Islam.'

It  was  probably  about  this  time  that,  in  order  to  prosecute
his  mission  peaceably  and  without  interruption,  Mohammad
took  possession  of  the  house  of  Al-Arkam  (a  convert  already
noticed),  situated  a  short  distance  from  his  own  dwelling,
upon  the  gentle  rise  of  the  Safa.^  Fronting  the  Ka'ba  to  the
east,  it  was  in  a  frequented  position  ;  and  pilgrims,  in  the
prescribed  course,  must  needs  pass  often  by  it.  Thither
were  conducted  any  who  showed  a  leaning  towards  Islam,
and  there  Mohammad  expounded  to  them  his  way  more
perfectly.  Thus  of  one  and  another  of  the  believers,  it  is
recorded  that '  he  was  converted  after  the  entry  into  the  house
of  Al-Arkam,  and  the  preaching  there;' — or,  that  *he  was
brought  to  Mohammad  in  the  house  of  Al-Arkam,  and  the
Prophet  recited  the  Kor'an  unto  him,  and  explained  the
doctrines  of  Islam,  and  he  was  converted  and  embraced  the
faith.'  So  famous  was  it  as  the  birthplace  of  believers,
that  it  was  in  after  times  styled  the  House  of  Islam?- Four

'  [This  house  is  said  to  be  still  standing  and  is  visited  by  pilgrims.
It  is  not  mentioned  in  At-Tabari  apparently  until  the  Caliphate  of
'Othman  (35,  a.h.  i.  3055),  nor  in  Ibn  Hisham.]

^  There  is  nothing  to  show  on  what  footing  Mohammad  occupied  this
building  ;  whether  with  his  family,  or  only  as  a  meeting-house  and  place
of  safe  retreat.  From  several  incidental  notices  of  converts  remaining
there  concealed  during  the  day,  and  slipping  away  in  the  evening,  the
latter  appears  to  be  the  more  probable  view.  'Omar,  converted  at  the
close  of  the  sixth  year  of  the  mission,  was  the  last  brought  to  this
house  ;  for  his  influence  enabled  Mohammad  then  to  dispense  with
secrecy.


The  house
of  Al-Arkam,
A.D.  613.
^Etai.  44.


Conver-
sions there


Mus'ab


64 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.

Converts brothers, confederates of Al-Khattab, were the first to
connscted believe  and  ^ sivear  allegiance  to  Mohammad'  ^  in  this  house.

with (Jmar  <^

Hence  we  may  conclude  that,  although  'Omar,  Al-Khattab's
son,  was  not  yet  converted,  the  leaven  of  the  new  doctrine
was  already  spreading  rapidly  among  his  connections.
Story  of  The story of Mus'ab ibn 'Omeir, will illustrate the

obstacles  at  this  time  opposed  to  the  progress  of  Islam.  His
wife  was  sister  of  'Obeidallah  (the  Inquirer),  and  it  was
probably  through  the  influence  of  her  family  that  he  visited
the  house  of  Al-Arkam,  listened  to  the  exhortations  of
Mohammad,  and  embraced  his  doctrine.  But  he  feared
publicly  to  confess  the  change ;  for  his  mother  (who  doted
upon  him  and  through  whose  fond  attention  he  was  known  as
the  most  handsomely  dressed  youth  in  Mecca),  and  the  whole
family,  were  inveterately  opposed  to  Mohammad.  The
conversion  being  at  last  noised  abroad,  his  relatives  seized
and  kept  him  in  durance ;  but  he  escaped,  and  fled  to
Abyssinia  with  the  first  Muslim  emigrants.  When  he
returned,  he  looked  so  altered  and  wretched  that  his  mother
had  not  the  heart  to  abuse  him.  At  a  later  period,  having
been  deputed  by  Mohammad  to  teach  the  converts  at  Medina,
he  revisited  Mecca  in  company  with  them.  His  mother,
apprised  of  it,  sent  to  him  saying :  '  Ah,  disobedient  son  !
wilt  thou  enter  a  city  in  which  thy  mother  dwelleth,  and
not  first  visit  her  ? '  '  Nay,  verily,'  he  replied,  '  I  shall  never
visit  the  house  of  any  one  before  the  Prophet  of  God.'  So,
after  he  had  greeted  Mohammad,  he  went  to  his  mother,  who
thus  accosted  him  :  '  Well !  I  suppose  thou  art  still  a  rene-
gade?' He  answered:  'I  follow  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord,
and  the  true  faith  of  Islam.'  *  Art  thou  then  well  satisfied
with  the  miserable  way  thou  hast  fared  in  the  land  of
Abyssinia,  and  now  again  at  Medina?'  Perceiving  a  design
to  seize  him,  he  exclaimed  :  '  What !  wilt  thou  force  a  man
from  his  religion?  If  ye  seek  to  confine  me,  I  will  assuredly
slay  the  first  person  that  layeth  hands  upon  me.'  His  mother
said : '  Then  depart from  my  presence,'  and  she  began  to

1  This  remarkable  expression  is  the  same  as  that  used  for  doing
homage,  or  swearing  feaUy,  to  a  leader  or  chief.  The  'swearing
allegiance  to  Mohammad'  was  probably  at  this  time  only  a  general
declaration  of  faith  and  submission  to  his  teaching.  Possibly  it  may  be
simply  the  loose  anticipation  of  a  phrase  used  at  a  later  period.


IV.]


FAMILY  TIES


65


weep.  Mus'ab  was  moved,  and  said  :  '  Oh,  my  mother !  I
give  thee  affectionate  counsel.  Testify  that  there  is  no  God
but  the  Lord,  and  that  Mohammad  is  his  servant  and
messenger.'  She  replied  :  '  By  the  sparkling  stars  !  I  shall
never  make  of  myself  a  fool  by  entering  into  thy  religion.
Begone!  I  wash  my  hands  of  thee  and  thy  concerns,  and
cleave  steadfastly  unto  mine  own  faith.^

There  were  social  causes,  on  the  other  hand,  to  aid  the
spread  of  the  new  doctrine.  These  may  be  exemplified  by
the  conversion  of  Toleib,  a  cousin  of  Mohammad.^  This
young  man,  having  been  gained  over  in  the  house  of  Al-
Arkam,  went  to  his  mother,  Arwa,  a  daughter  of  'Abd  al-
Muttalib,  and  told  her  that  he  now  believed  in  the  true  God,
and  followed  his  Prophet  She  replied  that  he  did  very  right
in  assisting  his  cousin ;  '  And,  by  the  Lord  ! '  she  added,  '  if  I
had  strength  to  do  that  which  men  do,  I  would  myself  defend
and  protect  him.'  'But,  my  mother!  what  hindereth  thee
from  believing  and  following  him  ?  And  truly  thy  brother
Hamza  hath  believed.'  She  replied  :  '  I  wait  to  see  what  my
sisters  do,  and  will  follow  them.'  '  But,  I  beseech  thee,
mother ;  wilt  thou  not  go  unto  him  and  salute  him,  and
testify  thy  faith  ? '  And  she  did  so  ;  and  thenceforward  she
assisted  the  cause  of  Mohammad  by  word  of  mouth,  and  by
stirring  up  her  sons  to  aid  him  and  fulfil  his  commands.

The  following  tradition  will  illustrate  at  once  the  anxiety
of  Mohammad  to  gain  over  the  principal  men  of  the  Koreish,
and  the  readiness  with  which  he  turned  to  the  poor  and
uninfluential  citizens  of  Mecca.  The  Prophet  was  engaged  in
deep  converse  with  the  chief,  Al-Walld  ;  for  he  greatly  coveted
his  conversion.  Just  then  the  blind  man  'Abdallah  [or  'Amr]
ibn  Um  Mektum  chanced  to  pass  that  way,  and  asked  to
hear  the  Kor'an.  Mohammad,  displeased  at  the  interruption,
spoke  roughly  to  him.  Others  coming  up  still  further
occupied  his  attention  ;  so  he  turned  from  the  blind  man
frowningly  and  left  him.  But  the  heart  of  Mohammad  smote
him,  because  he  had  thus  slighted  one  whom  God  haply  had
chosen,  and  paid  court  to  those  whom  God  had  reprobated.
As  usual,  the  vivid  conception  of  the  moment  was  framed
into a divine revelation, which at once afforded relief

1  Mus'ab  distinguished  himself  at  Bedr,  and  was  killed  at  Ohod.

2  Ibn  Sa'd,  vol.  iii.  p.  87.


Story  of
Toleib


Story  of
the  blind
'Abdallah
Ibn  Um
Mektiim


66 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.


to his own mind, and ample amends to the neglected

inquirer.

Sura  IxTx  The  Prophet  frowned  and  turned  aside,

Because  the  blind  man  came  to  him.
And  what  shall  cause  thee to know whether  haply  he may  not be

purified  ?
Or  whether  he  might  not  be  admonished,  and  the  admonition  profit  him  ?
As  for  the  Man  that  is  rich.
Him  thou  receivest  graciously  ;
And  it  is  not  thy  concern  that  he  is  not  purified.
But  he  that  cometh  unto  thee  earnestly  inquiring,
And  trembling  anxiously,
Him  dost  thou  neglect.

This  incident  shows  the  tender  and  ready  perception  by
Mohammad  of  the  slight  he  had  offered,  and  the  magnanimity
with  which  he  could  confess  his  fault.  'Abdallah,  though
related  to  Khadija,  was  at  present  but  of  little  consideration.
Yet  he  was  not  an  ordinary  man.  He  became  remarkable
for  his  knowledge  of  the  Kor'an,  and  at  Medina  was
repeatedly  placed  in  positions  of  command.^

Shortly  after  Mohammad  entered  the  house  of  Al- Arkam,
a  further  number  of  slaves  professed  themselves  his  converts.
Of  these,  Yesd?-  and  /edr  are  mentioned  as  among  the  persons
accused  by  Koreish  of  giving  instruction  to  the  Prophet
The  latter  was  the  Christian  servant  of  a  family  from  Had-
ramaut,  and  the  Prophet  is  said  to  have  much  frequented  his
cell.  The  former,  better  known  under  the  name  of  Abu
Fukeiha,  was  subjected  to  great  persecution.  His  daughter
Fukeiha  was  married  to  Hattab,  a  convert,  whom  we  find
with  others  of  his  family  among  the  subsequent  emigrants
to  Abyssinia.  Both  these  slaves  died  probably  before
Mohammad  left  Mecca.^
Soheib  A  more  important  convert,  styled by  Mohammad 'the

first  fruits  of  Greece,'  was  Soheib  son  of  Sinan.^  His  home
was  at  Mosul  or  some  neighbouring  village  in  Mesopotamia.
His  father,  or  his  uncle,  had  been  the  Persian  governor  of
OboUa.  A  Grecian  band  having  made  a  raid  into  Mesopo-
tamia, carried  him  off  while  yet  a  boy  to  Syria,  perhaps  to
Constantinople.  Bought  afterwards  by  a  party  of  Bedawin,
he  was  sold  at  Mecca  to  the  chief,  Ibn  Jud'an,  who  gave  him

1  He  was  left  in  charge  of  the  city  at  the  battle  of  Ohod.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  260.  ^  Ibid.  p.  265.


Further
slave  con-
verts


Yesar,  or
Abu  Fu-
keiha


IV.]


SLAVE  CONVERTS


67


freedom  and  protection.  A  fair  skin  and  ruddy  complexion
marked  his  northern  birth,  and  broken  Arabic  betrayed  a
foreign  education.  By  traffic  he  acquired  considerable
wealth  at  Mecca  ;  but  having  embraced  Islam,  and  being  left
by  the  death  of  his  former  master  without  a  patron,  he
suffered  much  at  the  hands  of  the  unbelieving  Koreish.  It
is  probable  that  Mohammad  gained  some  acquaintance  with
Christianity  from  him,  and  he  may  indeed  be  the  person
mentioned  in  the  following  verse  as  the  source  of  his
scriptural  information; — And  indeed  We  know  that  the
Unbelievers  say,  VERILY  A  CERTAIN  MAN  TEACHETH  HIM,
But  the  tongue  of  him  whom  they  intend  is  foreign,  whereas
this  Revelation  is  in  pure  Arabic}  At  the  general  emigration
to  Medina,  the  people  of  Mecca  endeavoured  to  prevent
Soheib's  departure  ;  but  he  bargained  to  relinquish  his  whole
property  that  they  might  let  him  go  free.  Mohammad,  when
he  heard  of  it,  exclaimed :  '  SoJieib,  verily,  hath  trafficked  to
profit^  Another  freed  slave,  ^Ammdr,  used  to  resort  to  the  'Ammar
house  of  Al-Arkam,  and,  simultaneously  with  Soheib,
embraced  Islam.^  His  father,  a  stranger  from  the  Yemen,
his  mother,  and  his  brother,  were  also  believers.

As  time  went  on,  the  jealousy  and  enmity  of  Koreish  Persecution
were  aggravated  by  the  continued  success  of  the  new  sect,  gilves^^'^^^
which  now  numbered  more  than  fifty  followers.  The  brunt
of  their  wrath  fell  upon  the  converted  slaves  and  strangers,
and  the  weak  and  poor  of  the  lower  classes  who  had  no
patron  or  protector.  These  were  seized  and  imprisoned ;
or  they  were  exposed  on  the  scorching  gravel  of  the  valley  to
the  intense  glare  of  the  mid-day  sun.  The  torment  was
enhanced  by  intolerable  thirst,  until  the  wretched  sufferers
hardly  knew  what  they  said.  If  under  this  torture  they
reviled  Mohammad  and  acknowledged  the  idols  of  Mecca,
they  were  refreshed  by  draughts  of  water,  and  then  taken  to
their  homes.  Bilal  alone  escaped  the  shame  of  recantation.
In  the  depth  of  his  anguish,  the  persecutors  could  force  from
him  but  one  expression,  Ahad  !  Ahad!  'One,  One  (only
God)  1 '  On  such  an  occasion,  Abu  Bekr  passed  by,  and
secured  liberty  of  conscience  to  the  faithful  slave  by  purchas-
ing his  freedom. Some  of  these  confessors  retained  the  scars

*  Sura  xvi.  105. See  also  Sura  xxv.  5  ;  and  xliv.  13.
2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  165.


68 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.


Converts
permitted  to
dissemble


Mohammad
safe  with
Abu  Talib ;


and  con-
verts con-
nected with
influential
families


of  sores  and  wounds  now  inflicted  to  the  end  of  their  lives.
Khabbab  and  'Ammar  used  in  after  days  to  exhibit  such
marks  of  suffering  and  constancy  to  a  wondering  genera-
tion, in  which  fortune  and  glory  had  well-nigh  effaced  the
very  thought  of  persecution  as  a  possible  condition  of
Islam.

Towards  such  as  under  these  trying  circumstances
renounced  their  faith,  Mohammad  showed  much  commisera-
tion. He  even  permitted  them  to  dissemble,  in  order  that
they  might  escape  the  torment.  Happening  to  pass  by
'Ammar,  as  he  sobbed  and  wiped  his  eyes,  Mohammad
inquired  of  him  what  was  the  matter.  '  Evil ;  O  Prophet !
They  would  not  let  me  go  until  I  had  abused  thee,  and
spoken  well  of  their  gods.'  '  But  how  dost  thou  find  thine  own
heart  ? '  '  Secure  and  steadfast  in  the  faith.'  '  Then,'  replied
Mohammad,  '  zf  they  repeat  their  cruelty,  repeat  thou  also  thy
words!  A  special  exemption  for  such  unwilling  deniers  of
Islam  is  even  provided  in  the  Kor'an.^

Mohammad  himself  was  safe  under  the  shadow  of  the  re-
spected and  now  venerable  Abu  Talib,  who,  although  uncon-
vinced by  the  Prophet,  scrupulously  acknowledged  the  claims
of  the  kinsman,  and  withstood  resolutely  every  approach  of
Koreish  to  detach  him  from  his  guardianship.  Abu  Bekr,
too,  and  those  who  could  claim  affinity  with  any  powerful
family  of  Mecca,  though  exposed  perhaps  to  contumely  and
reproach,  were  generally  secure  from  personal  injury.  The
chivalry  which  makes  common  cause  among  the  members  and
connections  of  an  Arab  family,  and  arouses  fierce  impetuosity
against  the  injurers  of  a  single  member,  deterred  the  enemies
of  Islam  from  open  and  violent  persecution.  Such  immunity,
however,  depended  in  part  on  the  goodwill  of  the  convert's
friends.  Where  the  entire  family  or  tribe  was  inimical  to
the  new  religion,  there  would  always  be  the  risk  of  insult
and  injury.  Thus,  when  the  Beni  Makhzum  were  minded  to
chastise  the  converts  of  their  tribe,  and  among  them  Al-Walld,
son  of  their  aged  chief,  they  repaired  to  his  brother  Hisham,
a  violent  opposer  of  the  Prophet,  and  demanded  his  permis-
sion ;  this  he  readily  gave,  but  added : '  Beware  of  killing

^  Whoever  dejtieth  God  after  that  he  hath  believed  {excepting  him  who
is  forcibly  compelled  thereto,  his  heart  remaining  steadfast  in  the  faith)  on
such  resteth  the  wrath  of  God. — Sura  xvi.  io8.


IV.]


FIRST  EMIGRATION


69


him  ;  for  if  ye  do,  verily  I  shall  slay  in  his  stead  the  chief  est
ajnong you.'  ^

To  escape  these  indignities,  and  the  danger  of  perversion,
Mohammad  now  recommended  such  of  his  followers  as  were
without  protection,  to  seek  an  asylum  in  a  foreign  land.^
*  Yonder'  pointing  to  the  west,  ^ licth  a  country  wherein  no
one  is  wronged: — a  land  of  righteousness.  Depart  thither ;
and  remain  until  it  pleasetJi  the  Lord  to  open  your  way  before
you!  Abyssinia  was  well  known  at  Mecca  as  a  market  for
the  goods  of  Arabia  ;  and  the  Court  of  the  Negus  or  Najdshi
was  the  ordinary  destination  of  a  yearly  caravan.  In  the
seventh  month  of  the  5th  year  of  Mohammad's  mission,  eleven
men,  some  mounted,  some  on  foot,  and  four  of  them  accom-
panied by  their  wives,  set  out  for  the  port  of  Sho'eiba ;  ^
where,  finding  two  vessels  about  to  sail,  they  embarked  in
haste,  and  were  conveyed  to  Abyssinia  for  half  a  dinar  a-
piece.  Koreish  pursued  them,  but  they  had  already  left
the  port.  Among  the  emigrants  were  'Othman,  son  of 'Affan,
followed  by  his  wife  Rokeiya  the  Prophet's  daughter,  and
'Abd  ar-Rahman,  both  perhaps  as  merchants  already  ac-
quainted with  the  country.  The  youths  Az-Zubeir  and  Mus'ab
were  also  of  the  number.  The  party  was  headed  by  'Othman,
son  of  Maz'un,  as  its  leader.  They  met  with  a  kind  recep-
tion from  the  Najashi  and  his  people,  and  the  period  of  exile
was  passed  in  peace  and  in  comfort.^

This  is  termed  'Cuo.  first '■  Hijra'  or  flight  to  Abyssinia,  as
distinguished  from  the  later  and  more  extensive  emigration
to  the  same  quarter.  On  this  occasion  the  emigrants  were
few,  but  the  part  they  acted  was  of  deep  importance  in  the
history  of  Islam.  It  convinced  Koreish  of  the  sincerity
and  resolution  of  the  converts,  and  proved  their  readiness  to
undergo  any  loss  and  any  hardship  rather  than  abjure  the
faith  of  Mohammad.  A  bright  example  of  self-denial  was  ex-
hibited to  the  whole  body  of  believers,  who  were  led  to  regard
peril  and  exile  in  '  the  cause  of  God '  as  a  privilege  and  dis-
tinction. It  may  also  have  suggested  the  idea  that  the  hos-

'  [Ibn  Hisham,  p.  207.  Al-Walld  ibn  al-Walid  was  converted  after
the  battle  of  Bedr.]

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  208  ff.;  At-Tabari,  i.  1181  ff.;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  136  f.

3  The  ancient  port  of  Mecca,  not  far  from  Jidda.
*  [At-Tabari,  i.  1181  f.]


First  emi-
gration to
Abyssinia,
A.D.  615


Bearing
and  advan-
tages of
this  emi-
gration


70 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.

tile  attitude  of  their  fellow-citizens,  combined  with  the  merits
of  their  creed,  might  secure  for  them  within  the  limits  of
Arabia  itself  a  sympathy  and  hospitality  as  cordial  as  that
afforded  by  the  Abyssinian  king ;  and  thus  given  birth  to
the  idea  of  a  greater  '  Hijra,' — the  emigration  to  Medina.
Finally,  it  turned  the  attention  of  Mohammad  more  closely  and
more  favourably  to  the  Christian  religion.  If  an  Arab
asylum  had  not  at  last  offered  itself  at  Medina,  the  Prophet
might  haply  himself  have  emigrated  to  Abyssinia,  and
Mohammadanism  have  dwindled,  like  Montanism,  into  an
ephemeral  Christian  heresy.

The  Kor'an  as  Revealed  during  the  Period
OF  THIS  Chapter


Suras  of
this  period


Change
observable


Gradual
decline  of
life  and
spirit


To  complete  the  view  of  the  period  just  described,  it  is  need-
ful to  examine  the  portions  of  the  Revelation  belonging  to  it ;
for  their  purport,  and  even  their  style,  will  throw  an  important
light  upon  the  inner,  as  well  as  the  external,  struggles  of
Mohammad.

To  the  two  or  three  years  intervening  between  the  commis-
sion to  preach  and  the  first  emigration  to  Abyssinia,  may  be
assigned  about  twenty  of  the  Suras  as  they  now  stand  in  the
Kor'an.  During  even  this  short  time  a  marked  change  may  be
traced,  in  form  as  well  as  sentiment.  At  first,  like  a  moun-
tain stream,  the  current  dashes  headlong,  pure,  wild,  impetuous.
Advancing,  the  language  becomes  calmer  and  more  uniform  ;
yet  ever  and  anon,  mingled  with  oaths  and  wild  ejaculations,  we
come  upon  a  tumultuous  rhapsody,  like  the  unexpected  cataract,
charged  with  thrilling  words  of  conviction  and  fervid  aspiration.
Onward  still,though  the  dancing  stream  sometimes  sparkles  and
foam  deceives  the  eye,  we  trace  a  rapid  decline  in  the  vivid
energy  of  natural  inspiration,  and  eyen  the  mingling  with  it  of
earth-born  elements.  There  is  yet,  indeed,  a  wide  difference
from  the  prosaic,  tame,  and  sluggish  flow  of  later  days  ;  but  the
tendency  cannot  be  mistaken.  Decay  of  life  is  met  by  artificial
expedient.  Elaborate  periods,  and  the  measured  cadence  of
rhyming  prose,  convey  too  often  little  more  than  simple  truisms
and  antiquated  fable.  Although  we  still  meet  with  powerful
reasoning  against  idolatry  and  the  burning  words  of  a  living
faith,  yet  the  chief  substance  begins  to  be  of  native  legend


IV.]


FALLING  OFF  IN  KOR'AN


71


expanded  by  the  Prophet's  imagination  ;  pictures  of  heaven
and  hell,  the  resurrection  and  the  judgment  day  ;  dramatic
scenes  in  which  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  angels,  Genii
and  infernal  spirits,  converse  in  language  framed  adroitly  as
arguments  in  the  cause  of  Mohammad.

The  Suras  gradually  extend  in  length.  In  the  preceding
stage  a  whole  Sura  seldom  exceeds  the  quarter  of  a  page.  Now
it  occupies  one,  and  sometimes  two  pages.^  The  theory  of  in-
spiration becomes  more  fully  developed.  The  Almighty,  from
whom  revelation  alone  proceeds,  is  the  sole  authority  also  for  its
recitation  and  interpretation.  On  these  points  Mohammad
must  wait  for  heavenly  guidance.  He  must  not  be  hasty  in  its
repetition,  for  Uhe  Kor'dn  is  revealed  by  a  gradual  revelation '
(Ixxvi.  23) ;  and  it  is  the  prerogative  of  the  Lord  to  prescribe
what  passages  shall  be  remembered  and  what  forgotten.^  How
much  soever  the  Prophet  may  have  sincerely  believed  that  this
regulating  influence  was  exercised  by  the  Deity,  the  doctrine
offered  the  temptation  to  suit  his  revelations  to  the  varying
necessities  of  the  hour. It  led  eventually  to  the  teaching  that


The  Suras

become

longer,  and

theory  of

inspiration

further

developed


^  It  is  interesting  to  watch  the  gradual  lengthening  of  which  Fliigel's
beautiful  edition,  each  page  having  22  lines,  forms  an  excellent  standard.
The  22  Suras  first  revealed  contain  an  average  of  only  five  lines  each.
The  next  20  (those  of  the  present  chapter)  16  lines.  From  this  period
to  the  Hijra,  the  average  length  of  the  50  Suras  is  about  three-and-a-half
pages  ;  one  being  nearly  twelve  pages  long.  The  average  length  of  the
twenty-one  Medina  Suras  is  five  pages, — the  Surat  al-Bakara  having  as
many  as  22  pages.  As  before  noticed,  the  arrangement  is  directly  the
reverse  of  chronological,  the  longest  and  latest  Suras  coming  first,  the
shortest  and  earliest  last.  At  first,  the  Suras  being  shorter  appear  to
have  been  produced  at  once,  as  we  now  find  them.  Subsequently  it
became  the  practice  to  throw  together,  according  to  their  subject-matter,
passages  given  forth  at  various  times, — one  reason  why  the  latter  Suras
are  of  such  great  length.

2  'We  shall  cause  thee  to  rehearse  (the  Revelation),  and  thou  shalt
not  forget  excepting  that  which  the  Lord  shall  please  ;  for  He  knoweth
both  that  which  is  public  and  that  which  is  hid  ;  and  We  shall  facilitate
unto  thee  that  which  is  easy.' — Sura  Ixxxvii.  6.  Again  :  'And  move  not
thy  tongue  in  the  repetition  of  the  Kor'iin  so  that  thou  shouldest  be  hasty
therewith.  Verily  upon  Us  devolveth  the  collection  thereof,  and  the
recitation  thereof;  and  when  We  shall  have  recited  it  unto  thee,  then
follow  the  recitation  thereof.  Further,  upon  Us  devolveth  the  explanation
thereof.' — Sura  Ixxv.  17  f.  So  in  a  later  Siira :  'And  be  not  hasty  in
reciting  the  Koran,  before  that  the  revelation  thereof  hath  been
completed.' — Sura  xx.  113.


72 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.


A  heavenly
original
assigned  to
the  Kor'an


Sura  Ixxx,
13,  14

Sura  xcvii


The  '  holy
Spirit '
came  to
signify
Gabriel


Visions  of
Gabriel


where  two  passages  are  opposed  to  one  another,  the  earlier  is
abrogated  by  the  later.  Notwithstanding,  we  begin  to  trace
the  claim  not  only  of  divine  inspiration,  but  of  a  heavenly
original.  So  in  Sura  Ixxxv.  22  :  '  Truly  it  is  the  glorious
Kor'an,  IN  THE  PRESERVED  TABLET ;' ^  and  the  following:^

It  is  an  admonition,  in  revered  pages  ;  exalted,  pure  ;
Written  by  scribes  (angels)  honourable  and  just.

Verily  We  caused  it  to  descend  on  the  Night  of  power  ;
And  what  shall  make  thee  know  what  the  Night  of  power  is?

The  Night  of  power  excelleth  a  thousand  months  :
On  that  night,  the  Angels  and  the  Spirit  descend  by  their  Lord's
command  upon  every  errand.

It  is  peace  until  the  breaking  of  the  morn.^

It  is  not  clear  what  ideas  Mohammad  at  first  attached  to  *  the
Spirit '  here  spoken  of.  They  were  perhaps  indefinite.  It  was
a  phrase  he  had  doubtless  heard  used,  but  with  different  mean-
ings, both  by  Jews  and  Christians.  That  the  '  Holy  Ghost'
(however  understood)  was  intended  by  the  term,  appears  prob-
able from  the  recurrence  in  the  Kor'an  of  the  expression — "  God
strengthened  Him  (Jesus)  by  the  holy  Spirit'  (ii.  81,  254).  But
eventually  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  holy  Spirit,  in  the
acceptation  of  Mohammad,  came  to  signify  the  angel  Gabriel.
He  had  learned  that  Jesus  was  '  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  by
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; '  and  either  knowingly  reject-
ing the  divinity  of  that  blessed  Person,  or  imperfectly  informed
as  to  His  nature,  confounded  Gabriel  announcing  the  concep-
tion, with  the  Holy  Spirit  that  overshadowed  Mary.  And  so
the  two  expressions  became,  in  the  language  of  the  Kor'an,
synonymous.

Gabriel,  the  '  Spirit,'  was  the  messenger  who  communicated
to  Mohammad  the  words  of  God,  and  appeared  sometimes  to
him  in  a  material  form.  The  traditional  account  of  the  first
vision  of  Gabriel  has  been  already  noticed  ;  and  it  is  perhaps

^  I.e.  'The  original  of  which  is  written  on  a  tablet  kept  in  heaven' ; —
namely  the  Table  of  the  divine  decrees.  See  Sale  in  loco;  also  Preliin.
Discourse,  Sect.  iii.

2  Thus  abruptly  does  the  97th  Siira,  a  fragment  of  five  verses,  open
and  close.  What  God  is  said  to  have  sent  down  on  this  night  may  either
signify  (with  Sale  and  the  Commentators)  the  Kor'an  ;  or  more  probably
the  clear  view  of  divine  truth  which  on  that  night  burst  upon  Mohammad's
mind.  The  'Night  of  power'  is  the  famous  Lailat  al-Kadr,  of  which  so
much  has  been  made  in  after  days.


IV.]  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT  73

to  the  same  apparition  that  the  Prophet  alludes  in  an  early
Sura  of  the  present  period  : —

I  swear  by  the  Star  that  is  retrograde  ;  Sura  Ixxxi.

By  that  which  goeth  forward,  and  that  which  disappeareth  ;  15  ff.

By  the  Night  when  it  closeth  ;  by  the  morn  when  it  breaketh  !
I  swear  that  this  verily  is  the  word  of  an  honoured  Messenger  ;
Powerful ;  and,  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  of  the  Throne,  of  great

dignity  ;  obeyed  by  all ;  and  faithful.
And  your  Companion  is  not  mad  ;

Truly  he  hath  seen  him  in  the  clear  Horizon  ;
And  he  entertaineth  not  any  suspicion  regarding  the  Unseen  ;
Neither  is  this  the  word  of  a  rejected '  Devil.
Whither  then  are  ye  going  ?
Verily  this  is  no  other  than  an  Admonition  to  all  creatures, —
To  him  amongst  you  that  willeth  to  walk  uprightly.
But  ye  shall  not  will  unless  the  Lord  willeth — the  Lord  of  Creation  !

The  concluding  verses  show  that  Mohammad  already  con-  Doctrine  of
templated  his  Revelation  as  a  lesson  for  all  mankind.  But  fjo^  ^^  ^"^
the  vivid  conviction  of  his  heavenly  commission  contrasted
strangely  with  the  apathy  and  unbelief  around  him  ;  and
hence  is  springing  up  the  idea  of  election  and  reprobation,
which  alone  could  account  for  these  spiritual  phenomena : —
Ye  shall  not  will  unless  the  Lord  willeth.  Again  in  the  very
strength  of  the  asseveration  that  he  was  not  deceived,  and
that  his  inspiration  was  not  that  of  a  '  rejected  devil,'  may  we
not  trace  symptoms  of  the  old  doubts  and  questionings?

The  teaching  of  the  Kor'an  is,  up  to  this  stage,  very  simple. Teaching
The  Unity  of  God,  Mohammad  his  messenger,  the  Resurrec- cepts"^^"
tion  of  the  dead,  and  Retribution  of  good  and  evil,  are  perhaps
the  sole  doctrines  insisted  upon  ;  and  the  only  duties,  prayer,^
and  charity,  honesty  in  weights  and  measures,  truthfulness,
chastity,^  and  the  faithful  observance  of  covenants.

1  ^Driven  away^  and  so  unable  to  overhear  the  secrets  of  Heaven.

2  The  times  of  prayer  are,  up  to  this  time,  mentioned  only  generally
as  morning,  evening,  and  night.

2  Among  other  features  of  the  Believer,  his  chastity  is  thus  described,

Ixx.  29  f. :

'  And  they  are  continent,

Except  as  regardeth  their  Wives,  and  that  which  their  right  hands  possess  : —
For  in  respect  of  these  they  shall  be  blameless.
But  he  that  lusteth  after  more  than  that,  verily  they  are  transgressors.'

Note  that  even  at  this  early  period  Mohammad  admitted  slave-girls  to  be
lawful  concubines,  besides  ordinary  wives. Bond-women with  whom


Renuncis
tion  of
idolatry


Sura  cix


74 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.

It  is  doubtful  whether,  at  this  period,  Mohammad  inculcated
the  rites  of  pilgrimage  as  of  divine  obligation.  The  absence  of
allusion  to  them  inclines  to  the  opinion  that,  though  observed
by  himself  and  his  followers,  they  formed  no  part  of  his  positive
teaching.  There  was  at  any  rate  a  clear  and  conclusive
renunciation  of  idolatry  : —

Say,  O  ye  unbelievers  ! I  worship  not  that  which  ye  worship, —

Nor  do  ye  worship  that  which  I  worship.

Never  shall  I  worship  that  which  ye  worship,
Neither  will  ye  worship  that  which  I  worship.
To  you  be  your  Religion  ;  to  me  mine.

This  Sura  is  said  to  have  been  revealed  when  the  aged  Al-
Walid  pressed  Mohammad  to  consent  to  a  compromise  by
which  his  God  should  be  worshipped  in  conjunction  with
their  deities,  or  alternately  every  other  year.^  Whatever  the
occasion,  it  breathes  a  spirit  of  uncompromising  hostility  to
idolatry.


The  Para-
dise of  Mo-
hammad


The  vivid  pictures  of  Heaven  and  Hell,  placed  in  close
juxtaposition,  are  now  painted  in  colours  of  material  joy  and
torment ;  which,  however  strange  to  our  conceptions,  were
well  calculated  to  effect  the  wished-for  impression  on  the
simple  Arab  mind.  Rest  and  passive  enjoyment ;  verdant
gardens  watered  by  murmuring  rivulets,  wherein  the  believers,
clothed  in  green  silk  brocades  and  silver  ornaments,  repose
beneath  the  wide-spreading  shade  on  couches  well  furnished
with  cushions  and  carpets,  drink  the  sweet  waters  of  the
fountain,  and  quaff  aromatic  wine  such  as  the  Arab  loved
from  goblets  placed  before  them  or  handed  round  in  silver


cohabitation  is  thus  permitted  are  here  specified  by  the  same  phrase
as  was  afterwards  used  for  female  slaves  taken  captive  in  war,  or  obtained
by  purchase,  viz.  ''that  which  your  right  hands  possess.'  The  license,
however,  was  not  at  this  time  used  by  Mohammad  himself,  for  he  was
now  living  continently  with  a  single  wife.  Though,  therefore,  it  was  in
after  days  taken  advantage  of  both  for  his  own  indulgence,  and  as  an  in-
ducement to  fight  in  the  hope  of  capturing  females  who  would  then  be
lawful  concubines  as  '  that  which  their  right  hand  possessed,'  yet  these
were  not  the  original  motives  for  the  rule.  It  was  in  fact  the  natural
compromise  by  which  Mohammad  fitted  his  system  to  the  usages  around
him.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  239;  At-Tabari,  i.  1191  f.


IV.]


DESCRIPTION  OF  PARADISE


75


cups  resplendent  as  glass  by  beautiful  youths;^  while  clusters
of  fruit  hang  close  by  inviting  the  hand  to  gather  them  ; —
such  is  the  Paradise  framed  to  captivate  the  inhabitant  of
the  thirsty  and  sterile  Mecca.

Another  element  is  soon  added  to  complete  the  Paradise The  Hur
of  the  pleasure-loving  Arab  : —  °^  Paradise

Verily  for  the  Pious  is  a  blissful  abode  ;  Sura  Ixxviii.

Gardens  and  Vineyards,  3i  ff-

And  damsels  with  swelling  bosoms,  of  an  equal  age,
And  a  full  cup.

In  the  oft-described  shady  garden  'with  fruits  and  meats,
and  beakers  of  wine  causing  not  the  head  to  ache,  neither
disturbing  the  reason,'  these  damsels  of  Paradise  are  intro-
duced as  '  lovely  large-eyed  girls  resembling  pearls  hidden  in
their  shells^  a  reward  for  that  which  the  faithful  have  wrought.
.  .  .  Verily  We  have  created  them  of  a  rare  creation;  We
have  made  them  virgins,  fascinating,  of  an  equal  age.' "^


The  following  passages  will  illustrate  the  artificial  style Further


into  which  the  fire  of  early  inspiration  was  now  rapidly
degenerating.  The  first  is  taken  from  a  psalm  with  a  fixed
alternating  versicle  throughout,  quaintly  addressed  in  the
dual  number  to  men  and  Genii.  To  suit  the  rhyme  the
objects  are  introduced  in  pairs,  excepting  the  damsels,  whose
number  may  not  thus  be  limited.

*  *  * This  is  the  Hell  which  the  wicked  deny  ;
They  shall  pass  to  and  fro  between  the  same  and  scalding  water.
Which  then  of  the  Signs  of  your  Lord  will  ye  deny  ?
But  to  him  that  dreadeth  the  appearing  of  his  Lord,  there  shall  be  two
gardens,
Which  then  of  the  Signs  of  your  Lord  will  ye  deny  ?

Planted  with  shady  trees. Which  then,  &r^c.
Through  each  of  them  shall  two  fountains  flow, Which  then,  Q^c.
And  in  each  shall  there  be  of  every  fruit  two  kinds. Which  then,  &^c.
They  shall  repose  on  brocaded  carpets,  the  fruits  of  the two gardens
hanging  close  by, Which  then,  Gt'c.

^  In  one  passage  the  wine  is  spoken  of  as  sealed  with  musk  and
spiced  with  ginger. Ixxxiii.  25  fif.  ;  cf.  Ixxvi.  17.

2  Sura  lii.  21  ff.  ;  Ivi.  11  fif.  These  Hur  come  now  first  upon  the
stage,  \_liilr  means  having  the  white  of  the  eye  intensely  white  and  the
black  intensely  black,  or  having  eyes  like  a  gazelle.  For  the  fern.  sing.
hfirlya  is  used,  whence  the  English  '  houri.']


description
of  Paradise


Sura  Iv.  43  ff.


76 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.


'  Houris  *
revealed
when  Mo-
hammad
had  but
one  wife


In  them  shall  be  modest  damsels,  refraining  their  looks,  whom  before
them  no  man  shall  have  deflowered,  neither  any  genius,
Which  then  of  the  Signs  of  your  Lord  will  ye  deny  f
Like  as  if  they  were  rubies  or  pearls.^

It  is  remarkable  that  the  notices  in  the  Kor'an  of  this
voluptuous  Paradise  are  almost  entirely  confined  to  a  time
when,  whatever  the  tendency  of  his  desires,  Mohammad  was
living  a  chaste  and  temperate  life  with  a  wife  threescore  years
of  age.2  Gibbon  characteristically  observes  that  *  Mohammad
has  not  specified  the  male  companions  of  the  female  elect,  lest
he  should  either  alarm  the  jealousy  of  the  former  husbands,
or  disturb  their  felicity  by  the  suspicion  of  an  everlasting
marriage.'  The  remark,  made  in  raillery,  is  pregnant  with
meaning,  and  forms  a  sensible  indictment  against  the
paradise  of  Islam.  Faithful  women  will  renew  their  youth
in  heaven  as  well  as  faithful men ; why  should not their


^  The  above  is  the  reward  of  the  highest  class  of  believers.  Another
set  of  gardens  and  females  follows  for  the  common  faithful  (v.  62  ff.)

And  besides  these,  there  shall  be  two  other  gardens,

Which  then  of  the  Signs  of  your  Lord  will  ye  defiy  f
Of  a  dark  green.  Which  then,  6yc.

In  each,  two  fountains  of  welling  water.  Which  then,  &-c.

In  each,  fruits  and  the  palm  and  the  pomegranate.  Which  then,  &•€.

In  them  shall  be  women,  amiable,  lovely  ;  Which  then,  &c.

Black-eyed  damsels  kept  within  pavilions  ;  Which  then,  5fc,

Whom  no  man  shall  have  deflowered  before  them,  nor  any  genius.

Which  then,  S/c,
The  Believers  shall  recline  upon  green  rugs,  and  lovely  carpets,

Which  then  of  the  Signs  of  your  Lord  will  ye  deny  ?

So  at  a  somewhat  later  date  :  'And  close  unto  the  believers  shall  be
modest  damsels  refraining  their  looks,  like  unto  ostrich  eggs  delicately
covered  over,'  xxxvii.  47.  In  a  passage  of  the  same  period,  the  faithful
are  said  to  be  ' fnarricd'  to  these  'black-eyed  ones.'  In  other  places  of
a  later  date,  probably  after  Khadlja's  death,  the  Wives  of  believers  (their
proper  wives  of  this  world  apparently)  are  spoken  of  as  entering  into
Paradise  with  their  husbands.  Did  Mohammad  deem  it  possible  that
the  earthly  wives  might  still  remain  united  to  their  husbands  in  Paradise,
in  spite  of  their  black-eyed  rivals  ?

2  Note  that  in  all  the  voluminous  revelations  of  the  ten  years  following
the  Hijra — women  are  only  twice  referred  to  as  one  of  the  rewards  in
Paradise  ;  and  on  both  occasions  in  these  simple  words, — and  to  them
there  shall  be  therein  pure  wives.  Was  it  that  satiety  had  then  left  no
longings  unfulfilled  ;  or  that  closer  contact  with  Judaism  had  repressed
the  picture  of  a  sensual  Paradise  such  as  had  been  drawn  at  Mecca?


IV.]


AND  HELL


77


The  Hell
of  the
Kor'an


Sura  Ivi.
40  £f.


good  works  merit an equal and analoj^ous reward  ? But
Mohammad  shrank  from  the  legitimate  conclusion.

The  Hell  of  the  Kor'an  is  no  less  material  than  its
Heaven.  The  drink  of  the  lost  is  described  as  boiling  water
and  filthy  corruption.  When  cast  into  the  pit,  they  hear  it
roar  wildly  like  the  braying  of  an  ass.  *  Hell  boileth  over,
it  almost  bursteth  with  fury :  the  smoke,  rising  in  three
columns,  affordeth  neither  shade  nor  protection,  but  casteth
forth  great  sparks  like  castles,  or  as  it  were  yellow  camels.'

* * And  the  companions  of  the  Left  hand,  how  miserable  they  !
In  scorching  blasts  and  scalding  water,

And  the  shade  of  smoke,
That  is  neither  cold  nor  is  it  grateful.
Verily  before  that,  they  lived  in  pleasure  ;
And  they  were  bent  upon  great  wickedness  ;

And  used  to  say,
What !  after  we  have  died a7id  become  dtist  a7id bones,  shall  we  be  raised?
Or  our  Fathers  that  preceded  us  ?
Say,  Yea,  verily,  both  the  former  and  the  latter
Shall  be  gathered  at  the  time  of  an  appointed  Day.
Then  shall  you,  oh  ye  that  err  and  reject  the  Truth,
Eat  assuredly  of  the  tree  of  Zakkutvi,

Filling  your  bellies  therewith,
And  drinking  with  it  boiling  water.
As  a  thirsty  camel  drinketh.
This  shall  be  your  entertainment  on  the  Day  of  reckoning?

The  menace  also  of  a  nearer  vengeance  in  this  life  begins  Threats  of
to  loom  darkly  forth,  but  as  yet  mingled  mysteriously  with  judement
the  threats  of  the  Judgment-day  and  Hell,  thus  : —


Sura
Ijcxvii.  14  fi.


* * * The  Day  of  separation  !
And  what  shall  teach  thee  what  the  Day  of  separation  is?
Woe  on  that  day  unto  the  deniers  of  the  Truth !
What !  Have  We  not  destroyed  the  former  Nations  ?
Wherefore  We  shall  cause  the  latter  also  to  follow  them.
Thus  shall  We  deal  with  the  wicked  People  1
Woe  on  that  day  unto  the  deniers  of  the  Truth  I

*  *  *

Verily,  We  warn  you  of  a  Punishment  close  at  hand, —  Sura  Ixxviii.

The day  whereon a  man shall see that which his  hands have

wrought ;
And  the  unbelievers  shall  say,  0  would  that  I  were  dust!

*  *  *

What  !  are  ye  secure  that  He  who  dwelleth  in  the  Heavens will  not Sura  kvii
cause  the  Earth  to  swallow  you  up,  and  she  shall  quake  ?


16  ff


78 EXTENSION  OF  ISLAM  AND  EARLY  CONVERTS [chap.


Defiance
of  the
Meccans

Sura  Ixvii
24  ff.


Objections
of  the  un-
believers


Resurrec-
tion derided


The  Kor'an
impugned


Derision


Sura  Ixxxiii.
29  ff.


Patience
and  stead-


Or  that  He  will  not  send  upon  an  you  overwhelming  blast,  then  ye

shall  know  my  warning  ?
And  verily  the  Nations  that  preceded  thee,  denied  the  Truth ; and

how  awful  was  my  vengeance  !

But  the  men  of  Mecca  scoffed  at  the  menace,  and  defied
its  execution : —

They  say,  When  shall  this  threatened  vengeance  be,  if  ye  speak  the  truth?
Say,  '  Nay,  verily,  the  knowledge  thereof  is  with  God  alone  ;  as  for

me  I  am  but  a  plain  Warner.'
But  when  they  see  it,  the  countenance  of  those  who  disbelieved  shall
fall  ;
And  it  shall  be  said.  This  is  that  which  ye  have  been  calling  for.
Say,  '  What  think  ye  ?  whether  the  Lord  destroy  me  and  those  that  be
with  me,  or  have  mercy  upon  us,  who  shall  deliver  the  unbelievers
from  a  dreadful  punishment  ? '

We  begin  also  to  find  in  the  Kor'an  arguments  used
against  the  Prophet,  and  the  mode  in  which  he  replied  to
them.  The  progress  of  incredulity  can  thus  be  followed,  and
some  of  the  very  expressions  employed  by  either  party
traced.  The  Resurrection  of  the  body  was  derided  by  his
fellow-citizens  as  an  idle  imagination.  When  Mohammad
sought  to  illustrate  the  raising  of  the  dead  by  the  analogies
of  Nature,  and  the  power  of  God  in  creation,  he  was  scouted
as  a  sorcerer  or  magician,  who  would  pretend  that  a  living
body  could  be  reproduced  from  dust  and  dead  men's  bones.

The  Kor'an  was  denounced  at  times,  as  a  bare-faced
imposture, — as  Fables  of  the  Ajicients  borrowed  from
foreigners,  and  dressed  up  to  suit  the  occasion ;  at  others,
as  the  effusion  of  a  frenzied  poet,  or  the  incoherent  drivel-
ling of  an  insane  madman.

Jeers  and  jests  were  the  ordinary  weapons  by  which  the
believers  were  assailed  : —

Verily,  the  Sinners  laugh  the  Faithful  to  scorn.

When  they  pass  them  by,  they  wink  at  one  another.
And  when  they  turn  aside  unto  their  own  people,  they  turn  aside
jesting  scurrilously.

And  when  they  see  them,  they  say,  Verily,  these  ar^  the  erring  ones.

But  they  are  not  sent  to  be  keepers  over  them.
Wherefore  one  day  the  Faithful  shall  laugh  the  Unbelievers  to  scorn.

Lying  upon  couches,  they  shall  behold  them  in  Hell.

Amid  the  derision  and  the  plots  of  Koreish,  patience  is
inculcated  on  the  Prophet. His followers  are  exhorted  to


iv.l


THE  MECCANS


79


steadfastness  and  resignation,  and  in  one  passage  reminded fastness
of  the  constancy  of  the  Christian  martyrs  in  Nejran.


By  the  Heavens  with  their  Zodiacal  signs  ;
By  the  threatened  Day  !
By  the  Witness  and  the  Witnessed  !
Cursed  be  the  Diggers  of  the  pits  filled  with  burning  fuel,  when  they

sat  around  the  same.
They  were  witnesses  of  that  which  they  did  unto  the  Believers.
And  they  tormented  them  no  otherwise  than  because  they  believed  in
God  the  Mighty  and  the  Glorious.
Verily, they who  persecute  the  Believers, male  and female, and
repent  them  not.
For such the torment of Hell is prepared, and a burning
anguish,  &c.^


inculcated

Sura  Ixxxv.
I  ff.


There  is  at  this  period  hardly  any  allusion  to  Jewish  and Former
Christian  Scripture  or  legend. The  Kor'an  did  not  as  yet  notTe"'^^^
rest  its  claim  on  the  evidence  of  previous  revelation  and  its ferred  to
close  correspondence  therewith. But  the  peculiar  phraseology Language
of  the  new  faith  was  already  becoming  fixed. The  dispensa-  becoming
tion  of Mohammad  was distinguished as Islam, that is,
Surrender  of  the  soul  to  God  ;  his  followers  as  MUSLIMIN
(those who surrender themselves)^ or as Believers ; his
opponents  as Kafirin,  that  is,  those  who  reject  the  divine
message^ or  as Mushrikin,  such as associate companions
with  the  Deity. Faith,  Repentance,  Heaven,  Hell,  Prayer,
Almsgiving,  and many  other terms of  the religion, soon
acquired  their  stereotyped  meaning. The  naturalisation  in
Arabia  of  Judaism  and  Christianity  (chiefly  of  the  former)
provided  a  large  and  ready  fund  of  theological  speech,  which,
if  not  already  in  current  use,  was  at  least  widely  known  in  a
sense  approaching  that  in  which  Mohammad  desired  to  use  it.^

^  The  'diggers  of  the  pits'  were  the  Jewish  persecutors  of  the  Chris-
tians of  Nejran. See  Introduction,  Chap.  II.

"  See  remarks  on  the  prevalence  of  Jewish  legends  and  expressions,
in  Introduction,  Chapters  II.,  III.  It  is  difficult  to  overestimate  the
advantages  which  Mohammad  thus  possessed  in  the  tacit  acquiescence
of  Koreish  in  the  truth  of  former  Revelations,  and  in  being  able  to
appropriate  apt  and  ready  terms  already  current  as  expressive  of  the
spiritual  ideas  he  wished  to  attach  to  them,  or  at  least  of  ideas  closely
allied.

Thus  the  phrase,  '  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate,'  affixed  by
Mohammad  to  the  name  of  God,  though  not  actually  in  use,  was  known
among  the  idolatrous  tribes,  as  we  shall  see  by  the  treaty  of  Al-Hodeibiya.


CHAPTER V

FROM THE FIFTH TO THE TENTH YEAR OF THE
MISSION OF MOHAMMAD


Return  of
the  Abys-
sinian
refugees,
615  A.D.


Lapse  of
Mohammad

Narrative
byAl-
Wakidi  and
At-Tabari


^TAT. 45-50. A.D. 614-620

Three  months  had  hardly  elapsed  from  the  departure  of  the
little  band  to  Abyssinia,  when,  notwithstanding  their  secure
retreat  and  hospitable  reception  at  the  Najashi's  Court,  the
refugees  again  appeared  in  Mecca.^  Their  return  is  linked
with  one  of  the  strangest  episodes  in  the  life  of  the  Prophet.
Ibn  Hisham  contents  himself  with  saying  that  they  came
back  because  tidings  reached  them  of  the  conversion  of
Koreish,  But  Al-Wakidi  and  At-Tabari  narrate  a  story,
of  which  the  following  is  an  outline.

The  aim  of  Mohammad  had  been  the  regeneration  of  his
people.  But  he  had  fallen  miserably  short  of  it.  The  con-
version of  forty  or  fifty  souls  ill  compensated  the  bitter
alienation  of  the  whole  community.  His  heart  was  vexed,
and  his  spirit  chafed,  by  the  violent  opposition  of  the  most
respected  and  influential  chiefs.  The  prospect  was  dark  ;  to
the  human  eye,  hopeless.  Sad  and  dispirited,  the  Prophet
longed  for  a  reconciliation,  and  cast  about  how  it  could  be
effected.  On  a  certain  day  the  chief  men  of  Mecca,  gathered
in  a  group  beside  the  Ka'ba,  discussed,  as  was  their  wont,
the  affairs  of  the  city.  Mohammad  appeared  and  seating
himself  near  them  in  a  friendly  manner,  began  to  recite  in
their  hearing  Sura  liii.  The  chapter  opens  with  a  description
of  Gabriel's  first  visit  to  Mohammad  (already  known  to  the
reader) ;  2 it  then  proceeds  to  unfold  a  second  vision  of  that

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  241  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1194  f. ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  137  f.
*  See  an/e,  p.  46  ;  also  p.  72.


v.]


THE  PROPHET'S  LAPSE


8i


angel,  at  which certain heavenly  mysteries  were  revealed.
The  passage  is  as  follows  (v.  13  ff.) : —

* * He  also  saw  him  (Gabriel)  another  time,
By  the  Lote-tree  '  at  the  furthest  boundary,
Near  to  which  is  the  Paradise  of  rest.

When  the  Lote-tree  covered  that  which  it  covered,
His  sight  turned  not  aside,  neither  did  it  wander.
And  verily  he  beheld  some  of  the  greatest  Signs  of  his  Lord.

What  think  ye  of  Al-Lat  and  Al-Ozza,

And  Manat  the  third  beside  } —

When  he  had  reached  this  verse,  the devil suggested to Satan  sug-
Mohammad (so we are told) thoughts which had long fJoiatrous
possessed his soul; and put into his mouth words of  concession
reconciliation  and  compromise  such  as  he  had  been  yearning
that  God  might  send  unto  his  people,  namely : —

These  are  exalted  Females.

Whose  intercession  verily  is  to  be  sought  after.


Koreish  were  astonished  and  delighted  at  this  acknow-
ledgment of  their  deities ;  and  as  Mohammad  wound  up  the
Sura  with  the  closing  words,  Wherefore  bow  down  before  God^
and  serve  Him,  the  whole  assembly  prostrated  themselves
with  one  accord  on  the  ground  and  worshipped.  Al-Walld
alone,  unable  from  the  infirmities  of  age  to  bow  down,  took
a  handful  of  earth  and  worshipped,  pressing  it  to  his
forehead.

Thus  all  the  people  were  pleased  at  that  which
Mohammad  had  spoken,  and  they  began  to  say :  Now  we
knoiu  that  it  is  the  Lord  alone  that  giveth  life  a?id  taketh  it
away,  that  createth  and  supportetJi.  And  as  for  these  our
goddesses,  they  make  intercession  with  Him  for  us  ;  ivJierefore,
as  thou  hast  conceded  tmto  them  a  portion,  we  are  content  to
follow  thee.  But  their  words  disquieted  Mohammad,  and  he
retired  to  his  house.  In  the  evening  Gabriel  visited  him ;
and  the  Prophet  (as  was  his  wont)  recited  the  Sura  to  him ;
on  which  Gabriel  said  :  What  is  this  that  tJiou  hast  done  ?
thou  hast  repeated  before  the  people  words  that  I  never  gave
unto  thee.  So  Mohammad  grieved  sore,  and  feared  the  Lord
greatly ;  and  he  said,  /  have  spoken  of  God  that  zuhich  He
hath  not  said. But  the Lord comforted his Prophet,  and

*  The  Lote  is  the  wild  plum  tree,  called  in  India  the  Ber.

F


Koreish
worship
with  him


The  people
pleased


Mohammad
disowns
the  whole
proceeding


82


FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [chap.


Koreish

more

embittered


The  nar-
rative
founded
on  fact


The  con-
cession not
unpremedi-
tated, nor
immediately
withdrawn


restored  his  confidence,^  and  cancelled  the  verse,  and  revealed
the  true  reading  thereof  (as  it  now  stands),  namely —

What  think  ye  of  Al-Lat  and  Al-'Ozza,

And  Manat  the  third  beside?
What !  shall  there  be  male  progeny  unto  you,  and  female  unto  Him?
That  were  indeed  an  unjust  partition  !
They  are  naught  but  names,  which  ye  and  your  fathers  have  invented,  &c.

Now  when  Koreish  heard  it,  they  spoke  among  themselves,
saying :  Mohammad  hath  repented  his  favourable  mention  of
the  I'ank  of  our  goddesses  with  the  Lord.  He  hath  changed  the
same,  and  brought  other  words  instead.  So  the  two  Satanic
verses  were  in  the  mouth  of  every  one  of  the  unbelievers,
and  they  increased  their  malice,  and  stirred  them  up  to
persecute  the  faithful  with  still  greater  severity.^

Pious  Mussulmans  of  after  days,  scandalised  at  the  lapse
of  their  Prophet  into  so  flagrant  a  concession,  would  reject
the  whole  story.  But  the  authorities  are  too  strong  to  be
thus  summarily  dismissed.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  conceive
how  the  tale,  if  not  in  some  shape  or  other  founded  in  truth,
could  ever  have  been  invented.  The  stubborn  fact  remains,
and  is  by  all  admitted,  that  the  first  refugees  did  return
about  this  time  from  Abyssinia ;  and  that  they  returned  in
consequence  of  a  rumour  that  Mecca  was  converted.  To  this
fact  the  narrative  affords  the  only  intelligible  clue.  At  the
same  time  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  adopt  in  its
entirety  the  exculpatory  version  of  tradition ;  or  seek,  in  a
supernatural  interposition,  the  explanation  of  actions  to  be
equally  accounted  for  by  the  natural  workings  of  the  Prophet's
mind.

It  may  be  assumed  that  the  lapse  was  no  sudden  event.
It  was  not  a  concession  won  by  surprise,  or  an  error  of  the

^  Tradition  tells  us  that  Mohammad  was  consoled  by  the  following
passage  in  Sura  xxii.  51,  52,  which,  however  (from  the  reference  to
former  apostles  and  prophets),  must  have  been  revealed  at  a  somewhat
later  period  :  And  We  have  not  sent  before  thee  any  Apostle,  nor  any
Prophet,  bid  when  he  longed,  Sataft  cast  suggestions  into  his  longing.
But  God  shall  cancel  that  which  Sataft  suggesteth.  Then  shall  God
establish  His  revelations  {attd  God  is  knotaing  and  wise); — that  He  may
make  what  Satan  hath  suggested  a  trial  unto  those  whose  hearts  are
diseased  and  hardened,  (Sr^c.

2  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  137  ;  At-Tabari,  i,  1192  ff.


v.]


HOW  EXPLAINED


83


tongue  committed  unawares,  and  immediately  withdrawn.
The  hostility  of  his  people  had  long  pressed  upon  the  spirit
of  Mohammad  ;  and,  in  his  inward  musings,  it  is  admitted
even  by  orthodox  tradition,  that  he  had  been  meditating  the
very  expression  which,  as  is  alleged,  the  Evil  one  prompted
him  to  utter.  Neither  can  we  believe  that  the  condition
lasted  but  a  day.  To  outward  appearance  the  reconciliation
must  have  been  complete ;  and  it  must  have  continued  at
the  least  for  some  days,  probably  indeed  longer,  to  allow  of
the  report  going  forth  and  reaching  the  exiles  in  a  shape
sufficient  to  inspire  them  with  confidence.  We  are  warranted
therefore  in  assuming  a  wider  basis  for  the  event  than  is
admitted  by  tradition.

The  circumstances  may  be  thus  conceived.  Up  to  this
point  Mohammad's  was  a  spiritual  religion,  of  which  faith,
and  prayer,  and  the  inculcation  of  virtue,  formed  the
prominent  features.  Though  the  Ka'ba  and  its  ancient  rites
were  held  to  have  been  founded  by  the  patriarch  Abraham,
yet  the  worship  of  idols  engrafted  on  it,  and  heretofore
consistently  rejected  by  Mohammad,  was  an  integral  part  of
the  existing  system.  To  this  superstition,  with  all  its
practices,  the  people  were  obstinately  wedded ;  and,  unless
permission  were  given  to  join  more  or  less  the  time-honoured
institutions  of  Mecca  with  the  true  faith,  there  was  little
hope  of  a  general  conversion.  How  far  would  a  strong
expediency  justify  compromise  with  the  prevailing  system ;
and  was  it  the  will  of  God  to  approve  it  ?

Was  not  the  worship  of  the  Ka'ba,  after  all,  a  divine
institution?  The  temple  was  built  at  the  command  of  God  ;
the  compassing  of  it  symbolised  the  circling  course  of  the
heavenly  bodies,  and  the  obedience  of  all  creation  to  the
Deity.  Pious  devotion  was  nurtured  by  kissing  the  sacred
corner-stone ;  the  slaying  of  sacrifices,  in  commemoration  of
Abraham's  readiness  to  offer  up  his  son,  signified  a  like  sub-
mission ;  the  pilgrimage  to  'Arafat,  the  shaving  of  the  head,
and  other  popular  observances,  were  innocent,  if  not  directly
religious,  in  their  tendency.  But  how  shall  he  treat  the
idols,  and  the  worship  rendered  to  them  ?  In  their  present
mind  Koreish  would  never  abandon  these.  If,  however  (as
they  now  professed  their  readiness),  they  would  acknowledge
the  one  true  God  as  the  supreme  Lord,  and  look  to  the  idols


Mohammad
tempted  by
the  hope  of
gaining
over  his
people


Considera-
tions by
which  he
may  have
been  influ-
enced


84


FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [chap.


Error  soon
discovered  :


and  reme-
died by  a
complete
disavowal


only  as  symbolical  of  the  angels,  what  harm  would  result
from  their  bare  continuance?  Incredible  as  the  concession
may  appear,  and  irreconcilable  with  his  first  principles  of
action,  Mohammad  would  seem  to  have  acceded  to  it,  and
consented  to  maintain  the  heathen  deities  as  representatives
of  heavenly  beings  '  whose  intercession  was  to  be  hoped  for
with  the  Deity.'  The  imperfect  and  garbled  notices  of
tradition  give  no  further  insight  into  the  compromise.  If
Mohammad  stipulated  for  any  safeguards  against  the  abuses
of  idolatry,  no  trace  of  them  can  be  now  discovered.  We
are  only  told  that  the  arrangements,  of  whatever  nature,  gave
satisfaction  to  the  chiefs  and  people,  and  produced  a  tem-
porary union.

But  Mohammad  was  not  long  in  perceiving  the  inconsis-
tency into  which  he  had  been  betrayed.  The  people  still
worshipped  images,  and  not  God.  No  reasoning  on  his  part,
no  assurance  from  them,  could  dissemble  the  galling  fact  that
idolatry  was  as  gross  and  prevalent  as  ever.  His  only  safety
now  lay  in  disowning  the  concession.  Satan  had  deceivea
him.  The  words  of  compromise  were  no  part  of  the  divine
faith  received  from  God  through  his  heavenly  messenger.
The  lapse  was  thus  atoned  for.  The  heretical  verses  spoken
under  delusion  were  cancelled,  and  others  revealed  in  their
stead,  denying  the  existence  of  female  angels  such  as  Al-Lat
and  Al-'Ozza,  and  denouncing  idolatry  with  a  sentence  of
irrevocable  condemnation.  Henceforward  the  Prophet  wages
mortal  strife  with  images  in  every  shape.  His  system
gathers  itself  up  into  a  pure  and  stern  theism ;  and  the
Kor'an  begins  to  breathe  (though  as  yet  only  in  the
persons  of  Moses  and  Abraham)  intimations  of  iconoclastic
revenge.

Ever  after,  the  intercession  of  idols  is  scouted  as  futile
and  absurd.  Angels  dare  not  intercede  with  the  Almighty  ;
how  much  less  idols,  who

Have  no  power  over  even  the  husk  of  a  date  stone  ;
Upon  whom  if  ye  call,  they  hear  not  your  calling,

And  if  they  heard  they  would  not  answer  you  ;
And  in  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  they  shall  themselves  disclaim  your
deification  of  them.

And  the The following passage, produced shortly after his lapse,
government ghows  how  Mohammad  refuted  his  adversaries,  and  adroitly


Idols  re-
probated


Sura  XXXV.
14  ff.


v.]


IDOLS  REPROBATED


85


turned  against  them  the  concession  of  the  supreme  divinity asserted  to
of  God:—  ^'^"'^'^


only

Sura  xxxix.
39


And  if  thou  askest  them  who  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,
they  will  surely  answer  God.  Say,  What  think  ye  then?  If  the  Lord
be  pleased  to  visit  me  with  affliction,  can  those  upon  whom  ye  call
besides  God, — what  !  could  i]iey  remove  the  visitation  ?  Or  if  He  visit
me  with  mercy,  could  they  withhold  His  mercy  ?  Say,  God  sufficeth  for
me  ;  in  Him  alone  let  those  that  put  their  trust  confide.


However  short  his  fall,  Mohammad  retained  a  keen  sense  of  The  danger
its  dishonour,  and  of  the  danger  which  lay  in  parleying  with pro^mke
his  adversaries  ; —  keenly  felt


And  truly  they  had  well-nigh  tempted  thee  to  swerve  from  what  We
had  revealed  unto  thee,  that  thou  shouldest  devise  concerning  Us  a
different  thing  ;  and  then  would  they  have  taken  thee  for  their  friend.

And  if  it  had  not  been  that  We  stablished  thee,  verily  thou  hadst
nearly  inclined  unto  them  a  little  ;

Then  verily  We  had  caused  thee  to  taste  both  the  punishment  of  Life
and  the  punishment  of  Death  ;

Then  thou  shouldest  not  have  found  against  Us  any  helper.

And  now,  ever  and  anon,  the  Prophet  is  cautioned  in  the
Kor'an  to  beware  lest  he  should  be  induced  to  change  the
words  of  inspiration  out  of  a  desire  to  deal  gently  with  his
people  ;  or  be  deluded,  by  the  pomp  and  numbers  of  the
idolaters,  into  following  after  them  and  deserting  the  straight
and  narrow  path  pointed  out  to  him  by  God.

But  although  Mohammad  may  have  completely  re-estab-
lished his  own  convictions,  and  regained  the  confidence  of
his  adherents,  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  concession,
followed  by  a  recantation  so  sudden  and  peremptory,
seriously  weakened  his  position  with  the  people  at  large.
They  would  not  readily  credit  the  excuse,  that  words  of
error  had  been  'cast  by  Satan  into  his  mouth.'  Even
supposing  it  to  have  been  so,  what  faith  could  be  placed  in
the  revelations  of  a  Prophet  liable  to  such  influences?  The
divine  Author  of  a  revelation  must  know  beforehand  all  that
he  will  at  any  subsequent  period  reveal.  If  the  Kor'an  were
in  truth  His  oracle,  Mohammad  would  never  be  reduced  to
the  petty  shift  of  retracting  as  a  mistake  what  had  once  been
given  forth  as  a  message  from  heaven.  And  thus  Koreish
laughed  to  scorn  his  futile  endeavour  to  effect  a  compromise


Sura  xvii.
76  ff.


Moham-
mad's posi-
tion injured
by  the  lapse


86


FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [chaP.


Sura  XXV.
43  f.


He  reiter-
ates his  own
conviction

Sura  xvi.
103,  104


Return  of
Abyssinian
emigrants,
A.D,  615


Second
emigration
to  Abys-
sinia, A.D.
615-616


which should draw them away from idolatry. They
addressed  him  ironically  in  such  terms  as  these : —

And  when  they  see  thee,  they  receive  thee  no  otherwise  than
scoffingly, — Ah!  is  this  he  whom  God  hath  sent  as  an  Apostle?  Verily
he  had  nearly  seduced  us  from  our  gods  ^  unless  we  had  -patiently  persevered
therein.  But  they  shall  know  hereafter,  when  they  see  the  torment,  who
had  erred  most  from  the  right  way.

To  the  accusations  thus  cast  upon  him,  Mohammad  could
but  oppose  the  reiteration  of  his  own  assurance  : —

And  when  We  change  one  verse  in  place  of  another  (and  God  best
knoweth  that  which  He  revealeth)  they  say,  Verily  thou  plainly  art  a
fabricator.  Nay  !  but  the  most  of  them  understand  not.  Say,  The  Holy
Spirit  hath  brought  it  down  from  thy  Lord  in  truth,  to  stablish  them  that
believe.

We  have  seen  that  the  tidings  of  reconciliation  with
Koreish  induced  the  little  band  of  emigrants,  after  residing
but  two  months  in  Abyssinia,  to  set  out  on  their  return  to
Mecca.  Approaching  the  city,  they  met  a  party  of  travellers
who  told  them  that  Mohammad  had  withdrawn  his  conces-
sions, and  that  Koreish  had  resumed  their  oppression.  After
consulting  what  should  now  be  done,  they  resolved  to  go
forward  and  visit  their  homes.  If  things  came  to  the
worst,  they  could  but  again  escape  to  Abyssinia.  So  they
entered  Mecca,  each  under  the  protection  of  a  relative  or
friend.^

The  report  brought  by  the  emigrants  of  their  kind  recep-
tion by  the  Najashi,  following  upon  the  late  events,  annoyed
Koreish,  and  the  persecution  became  hotter  than  ever.
Mohammad,  therefore,  again  recommended  his  followers  to
take  refuge  in  Abyssinia.  The  first  party  of  the  new
expedition  set  out  about  the  6th  year  of  the  mission  ;  and
thereafter  at  intervals  small  bodies  of  converts,  accompanied
sometimes  by  their  wives  and  children,  joined  the  exiles,
until  they  reached  (without  calculating  their  little  ones)  the
number  of  loi.  Of  these,  83  were  men.  Amongst  the
women,  1 1  were  of  Koreish,  and  7  belonged  to  other  tribes.
Thirty-three  of  the  men  and  8  women  (including  'Othman
and his  wife,  Rokeiya,  the  daughter  of  Mohammad)  again


Ibn  Hisham,  241  ff.


v.]  SECOND  EMIGRATION  87

returned  to  Mecca,  and  eventually  emigrated  to  Medina.
The  rest  of  the  refugees  remained  in  Abyssinia  for  several
years,  and  did  not  rejoin  Mohammad  until  his  expedition  to
Kheibar,  in  the  7th  year  of  the  Hijra.

Although  Mohammad  himself  was  not  yet  forced  to  quit  Endeavour
his  native  city,  he  was  nevertheless  exposed  to  indignity  and  ^^'"^-^,-.
insult,  while  the  threatening  attitude  of  his  adversaries  gave  abandon
ground  for  apprehension  and  anxiety.  If,  indeed,  it  had  not  ^^ohammad
been  for  the  influence  and  steadfast  protection  of  Abu  Talib,
it  is  clear  that  the  hostile  intentions  of  Koreish  would  have
imperilled  the  liberty,  perhaps  the  life,  of  Mohammad,  A
body  of  Elders,  we  are  told,  repaired  to  the  aged  chief,  and
said  :  This  nephew  of  thhie  hath  spoken  opprobrionsly  of  our
gods  and  our  religion ,  and  hath  upbraided  us  as  fools,  and
given  out  that  our  forefathers  were  all  astray.  Now,  avenge
us  of  our  adversary  ;  or  {see if tg  that  thou  art  in  the  same  case
with  ourselves)  leave  him  to  us  that  we  may  take  our  satisfac-
tion. But  Abu  Talib  answered  them  softly  and  in  courteous
words ;  so  they  turned  and  went  away.  In  process  of  time,
as  Mohammad  would  not  change  his  attitude,  they  went
again  to  Abu  Talib  in  great  exasperation ;  and,  reminding
him  of  their  former  demand  that  he  would  restrain  his
nephew  from  such  offensive  conduct,  added  :  And  now  verily
we  cannot  have  patience  any  longer  with  his  abuse  of  us,  our
ancestors,  and  our  gods :  wherefore  either  do  thou  hold  him
back  from  us,  or  thyself  take  part  with  him  that  the  matter
may  be  decided  between  us.  Having  thus  spoken,  they
departed.  While  it  appeared  grievous  to  Abu  Talib  to
break  with  his  people,  and  be  at  enmity  with  them,  neither
did  it  please  him  to  desert  and  surrender  his  nephew.  Thus
being  in  straits,  he  sent  for  Mohammad,  and  having  com-
municated the  saying  of  Koreish,  proceeded  earnestly :
Therefo7'e,  save  thyself  and  me  also  ;  and  cast  not  tipon  me  a
burden  heavier  than  I  can  bear.  Mohammad  was  startled  and
alarmed.  He  imagined  that  his  Uncle,  finding  himself
unequal  to  the  task,  had  resolved  to  abandon  him.  His
high  resolve  did  not  fail  him  at  this  critical  moment.  If  tliey
broicgJit  the  sun  on  my  rigJit  hand,  he  said,  and  the  moo?i  on
my  left,  to  force  me  from  my  imdertaking,  verily  I  would  not
desist  therefrom  until  the  Lord  made  manifest  my  cause,  or  I
should  perish  in  the  attcjupt. But  the  thought  of  desertion


88  FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [chap.

by  his  kind  protector  overcame  him. He  burst  into  tears,

and turned to depart. The aged Chief  was moved too.

'  Son of my brother ! ' he cried, '  come back. And now

Abu  Talib depart  in  peace  ! and  say  whatsoever  thou  wilt. For,  by  the

hfs^'roVc- Lord of  the Ka'ba, I will  not,  in  any  wise,  give  thee  up

tion  for  ever.'

Some add the following incident. The same day
Mohammad disappeared, and was nowhere to be found.
Abu  Talib Abu  Talib,  apprehensive  of  foul  play,  forthwith  made  ready
arthe^^'^^'^^  a  band  of  Hashimite  youths  each  armed  with  a  dirk,  and  set
Ka'ba  out for the Ka'ba. On  the  way  he  was  stopped  by  the

intelligence  that  Mohammad  was  safe  in  a  house  at  As-Safa ;
so  he  returned  with  his  people  home.  On  the  morrow  the
aged  chief  again  made  ready  his  party,  and,  taking
Mohammad  with  them,  repaired  to  the  Ka'ba.  There
standing  before  the  assembly  of  Koreish,  he  desired  his
young  men  to  uncover  that  which  they  had  with  them ;  and
each  drew  forth  a  sharp  weapon.  Then,  turning  to  Koreish,
he  exclaimed  :  By  the  Lord !  Had  ye  killed  hivi^  there  had
not  remained  ofte  alive  amongst  you.  Ye  should  have  perished,
or  we  had  every  one  of  us  been  slain.  The  bold  front  of  Abu
Talib  awed  Koreish,  and  repressed  their  insolence.
Personal  Though the tendency of tradition is to magnify the

sustained^)  i^sults  of  Korcish,  yet,  apart  from  invective  and  abuse,  we
Mohammad  hardly  read  of  any  personal  injury  or  suffering  sustained  by
the  Prophet  himself.  A  few  of  the  inveterate  enemies  of
Islam  (Abu  Lahab  among  the  number)  who  lived  close  by
his  house,  used  spitefully  to  throw  unclean  and  offensive
things  at  the  Prophet,  or  upon  his  hearth  as  he  cooked  his
food.  Once  they  flung  in  the  entrails  of  a  goat,  which
Mohammad,  putting  upon  a  stick,  carried  to  the  door,  and
called  aloud!  'Ye  children  of  'Abd  Menaf!  What  sort  of
good  neighbourhood  is  this  ? "  Then  he  cast  forth  the
offensive  stuff  into  the  street.  Two  or  three  centuries  after-
wards, a  little  closet,  a  few  feet  square,  was  still  shown  at
the  entrance  of  Khadlja's  house,  within  which,  under  the
ledge  of  a  projecting  stone,  the  Prophet  used  to  crouch  when
he  retired  for  prayer,  and  shelter  himself  from  the  missiles  of
his  neighbours.  There  is  also  a  tradition  (but  ill  sustained)
of  actual  violence  once  offered  to  Mohammad  in  public.  As
he  passed  through  the  court  of  the  Ka'ba,  he  was  suddenly


v.]  THE  PROPHET  INSULTED  89

surrounded  by  Koreish,  who  '  leaped  upon  him  as  one  man,
and  seized  his  mantle.  But  Abu  Bekr  stood  manfully  by
him,  and  called  out :  *  Woe's  me  !  Will  ye  slay  a  man  because
he  saith  that  God  is  my  Lord?'  So  they  departed  from
him.^

In  the  sixth  year  of  his  mission,  the  cause  of  Mohammad  Conversior
was  strengthened  by  the  accession  of  two  powerful  citizens,  ?  ,  g™/^'
Hamza,2  son  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib's  old  age,  and  'Omar.  The
details  of  their  conversion  will  be  interesting  to  the  reader.
The  Prophet  was  one  day  seated  on  the  rising  ground  of
As-Safa.  Abu  Jahl,  coming  up,  accosted  him  with  a  shower
of  taunts  and  reproaches ;  while  Mohammad  answered  not
a  word.  Both  left  the  place,  but  a  slave-girl  had  observed
the  scene.  It  chanced  that,  shortly  after,  Hamza  returned
that  way  from  the  chase,  his  bow  hanging  from  his  shoulder
(for  he  was  a  hunter  of  renown);  and  the  maid  related  to
him  with  indignation  the  gross  abuse  of  Abu  Jahl.  Hamza,
though  not  much  older  than  Mohammad,  was  at  once  his
uncle  and  his  foster-brother.  His  pride  was  offended,  his
rage  kindled.  He  hurried  with  rapid  steps  to  the  Ka'ba ;
and  there,  in  the  court  of  the  Holy  House,  found  Abu  Jahl
sitting  with  a  company  of  Koreish.  Hamza  rushed  upon
him,  saying :  Ah  !  hast  thou  been  abusing  him,  and  I  too
follow  his  religion ;  there  (raising  his  bow  and  striking  him
violently),  return  that  if  thou  darest !  The  kinsmen  of  Abu
Jahl  started  to  his  succour ;  but  Abu  Jahl  motioned  them
away,  saying :  '  Let  him  alone,  for  indeed  I  did  revile  his
nephew  shamefully.'^  The  profession  of  Islam,  suddenly
asserted  by  Hamza  in  the  passion  of  the  moment,  was
followed  up  by  the  deliberate  pledging  of  himself  to
Mohammad  in  the  house  of  Al-Arkam,  and  by  a  steady
adherence  ever  after  to  his  faith.

The  conversion  of  'Omar  took  place  shortly  after.^ He

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  184;  At-Tabari,  i.  1186.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  184  f.;  At-Tabarl,  i.  11 87  f.

^  Abu  Jahl  (so  called  by  the  Muslims  as  the  'father  of  ignorance 'or
folly)  is  the  butt  of  tradition  as  the  witless  and  obstinate  opponent  of
Islam. He  was  a  nephew  of  Al-Walld,  son  of  Al-Moghlra.

*  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  224  ff.;  At-Tabari,  i.  1189.  It  occurred  in  Dhu'l-
Hijra,  the  last  month  in  the  year.  The  Believers  are  said  now  to  have
amounted  in  all  to  40  men  and  10  women  ;  or,  by  other  accounts,  to  45
men  and  1 1  women. See  a?ite,  p.  63,  note.


90  FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [chap.

Conversion was  notorious  for  his  enmity  to  Islam,  and  the  harshness  and
°^!P^^^'^  a  violence with  which  he  treated its professors. His sister

A.D,  OI5-DIO  '■

Fatima,  and  her  husband  Sa'Id,  were  both  converts,  but
secretly,  for  fear  of  Koreish.^  While  'Omar  was  threatening
certain  believers,  a  friend  suggested  to  him  that  he  had
better  begin  at  home,  and  hinted  the  conversion  of  his  sister
and  her  husband.  His  wrath  was  aroused,  and  he  proceeded
forthwith  to  their  house.  They  were  listening  to  the  20th
Sura,  which  the  slave  Khabbab  recited  to  them  from  a  manu-
script. The  persecutor  drew  near,  and  overheard  the  low
murmur  of  the  reading.  At  the  noise  of  his  steps  Khabbab
retired  into  a  closet.  What  sound  zvas  tJiat  I  heard  just  now  ?
exclaimed  'Omar,  entering  angrily.  *  There  was  nothing,'
they  replied.  '  Nayl  said  he,  swearing  fiercely,  '  /  hear  that
ye  are  renegades !^  'But  what,  O  'Omar!'  interposed  his
brother-in-law,  '  may  there  not  be  truth  in  another  religion
than  thine?'  The  question  confirmed  the  suspicions  of
'Omar,  and  he  sprang  exasperated  upon  Sa'Id  and  kicked
him.  His  sister  flew  to  the  rescue.  In  the  struggle  her  face
was  wounded,  and  began  to  bleed.  Stung  by  the  insult,  she
could  no  longer  contain  herself ;  and  cried  aloud  :  '  Yes,  we  are
converted ;  we  believe  in  God  and  in  his  Prophet ;  now  do
thy  worst  upon  us.'  When  'Omar  saw  her  face  covered  with
blood  he  was  softened ;  and  he  asked  to  see  the  paper  they
had  been  reading.  But  his  sister  required  that  he  should
first  cleanse  himself;  'for  none,'  she  said,  'but  the  pure  may
touch  it'  So  'Omar  arose  and  washed,  and  took  the  paper
(for  he  could  read),  and  when  he  had  deciphered  a  part,  he
exclaimed :  How  excellent  is  this  discourse,  and  gracious !
Then  Khabbab  came  forth  from  his  hiding-place,  and  said :
'  O  'Omar !  I  trust  that  the  Lord  hath  verily  set  thee  apart
for  himself,  in  answer  to  his  Prophet ;  it  was  but  yesterday
I  heard  him  praying  thus :  '  Strengthen  Islam,  O  God,  by  Abu
Jahl,  or  by  ^Oniar!^  Then  said  'Omar:  'Lead  me  unto
Mohammad,  that  I  may  make  known  unto  him  my  conver-
sion.' And  he  was  directed  to  the  house  of  Al-Arkam.  So
'Omar  knocked  at  the  door,  and  Hamza  with  others  looked
through  a  crevice,  and  started  back,  exclaiming  that  it  was
Omar.  But  Mohammad  bade  them  let  him  in,  and,  catching
hold  of  his  skirt  and  the  sword-belt,  said :  '  How  long,  O
^  [Ibo  Ishak  says  for  fear  of  'Omar  ;  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  225.]


v.]


'OMAR  CONVERTED


9t


'Omar,  wilt  thou  not  refrain  from  persecuting,  even  until  the
Lord  send  some  calamity  upon  thee?'  And  'Omar  replied:
*  Verily  I  testify  that  thou  art  the  Prophet  of  God!'  Filled
with  delight,  Mohammad  cried  aloud, '  Allahu  Akbar  !  Great
is  the  Lord.'  ^

The  gain  of  two  such  men  was  a  real  triumph  to  the
cause.  Hamza  and  'Omar  both  possessed,  with  great  bodily
strength,  an  indomitable  courage ;  which,  added  to  their
social  position,  secured  an  important  influence  at  Mecca.
The  heroism  of  Hamza  earned  for  him  the  title,  familiar  to
the  present  day,  of  the  Lion  of  God ;  but  he  was  prematurely
cut  off  on  the  field  of  Ohod.  'Omar,  now  in  the  pride  of
early  manhood,  was  robust  in  frame,  ruddy  in  countenance,
and  of  such  commanding  stature  that  he  towered  above  his
fellows  as  if  he  had  been  mounted.  Bold  and  overbearing,
impulsive  and  precipitate,  endowed  with  a  keen  glance  and
steady  purpose,  he  was  always  ready  both  in  word  and  deed
at  the  decisive  moment.  His  anger  was  easily  aroused,  and
Koreish  stood  in  awe  of  him,  because  of  his  uncertain  and
impetuous  temper.  'Omar  outlived  Mohammad  and,  succeed-
ing Abu  Bekr  in  the  Caliphate,  left  the  stamp  of  his  dauntless
spirit  upon  Islam.  At  the  period  of  his  conversion  he  was
but  six-and-twenty  years  of  age,  yet  so  great  and  instant  was
the  effect  of  his  accession  upon  Islam,  that  from  this  era  is
dated  the  commencement  of  its  public  and  fearless  profession
at  Mecca.  From  a  cause  of  anxiety  and  alarm  to  Moham-
mad, he  was  suddenly  converted  into  a  tower  of  strength.
The  house  of  Al-Arkam  was  abandoned.  The  claims  of  the
faith  began  to  override  the  bonds  of  kinship,  and  members  of
the  same  family  might  be  seen  openly  ranged  on  either  side.
Believers  no  longer  concealed  their  worship  within  their  own
dwellings,  but  with  conscious  strength  and  defiant  attitude
assembled  in  companies  about  the  Ka'ba,  and  there  per-
formed their  rites  of  worship  openly.  Their  courage  rose.
Dread  and  uneasiness  seized  Koreish.

Koreish,  indeed,  had  cause  for  alarm.  They  were  dis-
quieted by  the  hospitable  reception  of  the  refugees  at  the
Abyssinian  Court.  An  embassy  of  two  chief  men  from
Mecca, laden with costly presents, had made a fruitless

^  [According  to  another  account,  'Omar  heard  Mohammad  praying  in
the  Ka'ba  one  night,  and  was  converted  ;  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  22S.]


Importance
of  these
conversions


'Omar
described


Position
and  fears
of  Koreish


92  FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [chap.

attempt  to  obtain  their  surrender.^  What  if  the  Najashi
should  support  them  with  an  armed  force,  and  seek  to
establish  a  Christian  or  reformed  faith  at  Mecca,  as  certain
of  his  predecessors  had  done  in  the  Yemen?  Apart  even
from  foreign  aid,  there  was  ground  for  apprehension  at  home.
The  Muslim  body  no  longer  consisted  of  oppressed  and
despised  outcasts,  struggling  for  a  weak  and  miserable  exist-
ence. Rather  it  was  a  powerful  faction,  adding  daily  to  its
strength  by  the  accession  of  influential  citizens.  It  chal-
lenged an  open  hostility.  The  victory  of  either  party
involved  the  downfall  of  the  other.

^  Koreish  despatched  two  envoys  with  presents  of  precious  leather
and  other  rare  articles  for  the  Najashi.  They  gained  over  the  courtiers,
and  then  presented  their  gifts  to  the  Christian  Prince,  saying,  that
'certain  fools  amongst  their  own  people  had  left  their  ancestral  faith  ;
they  had  not  joined  Christianity,  but  had  set  up  a  new  religion  of  their
own.  They  had  therefore  been  deputed  by  Koreish  to  fetch  them  back.
The  courtiers  supported  their  prayer,  but  the  king  said  he  would  inquire
into  the  matter  in  presence  of  the  accused.  Now  the  refugees  had
agreed  that  they  would  not  garble  their  doctrine,  but,  come  what  might,
say  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  teaching  of  their  Prophet.  So  on  the
morrow  they  were  summoned  into  the  royal  presence,  where  also  were
the  bishops  with  their  books  open  before  them.  The  king  inquired  of
the  refugees  the  cause  of  their  secession.  Ja'far  (Mohammad's  cousin)
answered,  'that  they  used  to  worship  images,  eat  the  dead,  commit
lewdness,  disregard  family  ties  and  the  duties  of  neighbourhood  and
hospitality,  until  Mohammad  arose  a  prophet ; '  he  concluded  by
describing  his  system,  and  the  persecutions  which  had  forced  them  to
flee  to  Abyssinia.  On  the  king  asking  him  to  repeat  some  part  of  the
Prophet's  teaching,  he  recited  Surat  Maryain  (regarding  the  births  of
John  and  Jesus,  with  notices  of  Abraham,  Moses,  &c.) ;  whereupon  the
king  wept,  and  the  bishops  also  wept  so  that  their  tears  ran  down  upon
their  books,  saying  :  '  Verily,  this  revelation  and  that  of  Moses  proceed
from  one  and  the  same  source.'  Then  the  Najashi  said  to  the  refugees  :
'  Depart  in  peace,  for  I  will  never  give  you  up.'  Next  day  the  envoys
endeavoured  to  entrap  the  refugees  into  a  declaration  depreciatory  of
Jesus,  and  therefore  offensive  to  the  king.  But  the  king  fully  concurred
in  their  doctrine  that  Jesus  was  nothing  more  than  'a  servant  of  God,
and  his  Apostle  ;  his  Spirit  and  his  word,  placed  in  the  womb  of  Mary,
the  immaculate  Virgin.'  So  the  Koreishite  embassy  departed  in  bad
case.

The  above  story  is,  no  doubt,  a  mere  amplification  of  certain  passages
in  the  Kor'an  to  the  effect  that  the  Jews  and  Christians  wept  for  joy  on
hearing  the  Kor'an  because  of  its  correspondence  with  their  own  Scriptures.
A  similar  tale  has  been  told  of  the  bishops  of  Nejran  ;  and  also  regarding
an  embassy  of  Christians  from  Abyssinia,  who  are  said  to  have  visited


v.]


EMBASSY  TO  ABYSSINIA


93


Influenced  by  such  fears,  Koreish  fell  upon  a  new  device  Communi-
to  check  the  dangerous  opposition.^  If  Abu  Talib  could  not  *^^''°"s
restrain  his  nephew,  they  would  hold  him  responsible.
Further  they  saw  Mohammad  supported  not  only  by  his  own
disciples,  but  also,  excepting  Abu  Lahab,  by  all  the  house  of
Hashim,  who,  whether  converts  or  not,  held  themselves
bound  to  keep  their  kinsman  safe.  Accordingly  they  bound
themselves  in  a  new  confederacy.  Thus  the  religious  struggle
merged  for  a  time  into  a  civil  feud  [or  boycott]  between  the
Hashimites  and  the  rest  of  Koreish  ;  and  (as  we  have  seen)
there  were  not  wanting  long-rooted  associations  to  add
bitterness  to  the  strife.  To  secure  their  purpose,  Koreish  The  Ban
entered  into  this  league  against  the  Hashimites — tJiat  they
would  not  marry  their  ivoinen,  nor  give  their  own  in  marriage
to  them  ;  that  they  would  sell  nothing  to  them,  nor  buy  aught
from  them  ;  in  short,  that  dealings  of  every  kind  should  cease.
The  ban  thus  framed  was  committed  to  writing,  and  sealed
with  three  seals.  When  all  had  thus  bound  themselves,  the
record  was  hung  up  in  the  Ka'ba,  and  religious  sanction
thus  given  to  its  provisions.

Unable to withstand this hostile demonstration, the  The  Shi'b
Hashimites  withdrew  into  the  secluded  quarter  known  as  the of  AbT^^"^
Shi'b  of  Abu  Talib,  a  defile  of  the  mountain,  where  the  pro-  Talib
jecting  rocks  of  Abu  Kobeis  pressed  upon  the  eastern  out-


Mohammad  at  Mecca,  so  that  not  much  rehance  can  be  placed  on  the
narrative.

When  the  Abyssinians  rose  up  against  their  king  on  account  of  the
favour  he  was  showing  to  the  Muslim  doctrine,  the  Najashi  put  into  his
pocket  a  scrap  inscribed  with  the  Mohammadan  creed,  and  on  his
people  desiring  him  to  say  'that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God,'  he  responded
thus  (putting  his  hand  upon  his  pocket)  :  'Jesus  never  went  beyond  i/us'
— apparently  agreeing  in  what  they  said,  but  inwardly  referring  to  the
scrap  ! — a  childish  story.  Mohammad  is  said  to  have  regarded  him  as  a
convert  to  Islam,  and  to  have  prayed  for  him  as  such  at  his  death.  A
light  is  also  related  to  have  issued  from  his  tomb.

There  is  probably  a  basis  of  truth  for  the  general  outline  given  in  this
note  ;  but  it  would  be  difficult  to  draw  a  probable  line  between  the  real
and  the  fictitious  parts  of  it.  Had  the  leaning  towards  Mohammadan
doctrine  in  Abyssinia  been  as  great  as  is  here  represented,  we  should
have  heard  more  of  its  inhabitants  in  the  troublous  times  immediately
following  Mohammad's  decease.  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  217  fT. ;  At-Tabari,  1.
1 189.

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  230  ff.;  At-Tabari,  i.  11S9  f.;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  139  f


94  FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [chap.

skirts  of  the  city. It  was  entered  from  the  town  by  a  narrow

alley  closed  by  a  low  gateway  through  which  a  camel  could

pass  with  difficulty. On  all  other  sides  it  was  detached  by

cliffs  and  buildings.^

Hashimites  On  the  first  night  of  the  first  month  of  the  seventh  year

hami^d" °^  ^^^  mission,  the  Hashimites,  including  the  Prophet  and

retire  into his  family,  retired  into  the  quarter  of  Abu  Talib ;  and  with

^A.i>^6i6-6yj  them followed also the descendants of Al-Muttalib the

brother  of  Hashim. Abu  Lahab  alone,  moved  by  hatred  of

the  new  religion,  went  forth  to  the  other  party. The  ban  of

separation  was  put  rigorously  in  force. The  Hashimites  soon

found  themselves  cut  off  from  all  supply  of  corn  and  other

necessaries  of  life. They  were  not  strong  enough  to  send

forth  a  caravan  of  their  own  ;  if  foreign  merchants  came,  they

were made to withhold their commodities except at an

exorbitant  price  ;  Koreish  themselves  would  sell  them  nothing ;

and  a  great  scarcity  ensued. No  one  ventured  forth  from  the

SM'd  except  at  the  season  of  pilgrimage,  when,  all  enmities

being  hushed,  Mohammad  and  his  party  were  free  to  join

securely in  the  ceremonies. For  two or three years the

attitude  of  both  parties  remained  unaltered,  and  the  failing

stock  of  the  Hashimites,  replenished  only  by  occasional  and

Their  dis- surrcptitious  ventures,  reduced  them  to  want  and  distress.

tress  'Yhe  citizens  could  hear  the  wailing  of  the  famished  children

within  the  Shi'b. Many  hearts  were  softened  at  the  sight  of

such  hardship,  and  mourned  over  the  hostilities  which  gave

them rise. Among  these,  and  among  the  relatives  of  the

isolated  band,  were  found some  who  ventured,  in  spite  of

1  The  several  quarters  of  Mecca  skirting  the  foot  of  Abu  Kobeis  are
still  distinguished  by  the  name  Shi''b :  thus  we  have  the  Shi'^b  al-Maulid
(quarter  in  which  Mohammad  was  born)  ;  and  the  Shi''b  '■All  which  was
probably  comprised  in  the  Shi'-b  of  Abu  Talib.  Burckhardt  tells  us :
'On  the  east  side,  towards  the  mountain,  and  partly  on  its  declivity,
stands  the  quarter  called  Shab  Aly,  adjoining  the  Shab  el  Moled  ;  here
is  shown  the  venerated  place  of  Aly's  nativity.  Both  these  quarters  are
among  the  most  ancient  parts  of  the  town,  where  the  Koreysh  formerly
lived  ;  they  are  even  now  inhabited  principally  by  Sherlfs,  and  do  not
contain  any  shops.  The  houses  are  spacious  and  in  an  airy  situation.' —
Arabia^  i.  226.  It  was  into  one  of  these  quarters  of  the  city,  situated  in
a  defile  having  behind  it  the  steep  ascent  of  the  hill,  and  so  built  about
as  to  be  inaccessible  on  all  sides,  except  by  a  narrow  entrance  from  the
city,  that  the  Hashimites  retired.


v.]


THE  'BOYCOTT'


95


threats,  to  introduce  from  time  to  time  provisions  by  stealth
at  night.  Thus  we  read  of  one  conducting  a  camel  laden
with  corn  cautiously  into  the  Shi'b,  and  making  over  the
burden  to  the  hungry  inmates.  Hakim,  grandson  of  Khu-
weilid,  used  also,  though  the  attempt  was  sometimes  perilous,
to  carry  supplies  to  his  aunt  Khadlja.

Though  the  sympathies  of  many  were  thus  aroused  by  the Unfavour-
sufferings  of  the  Hashimites,  the  cause  of  Islam  itself  did  not  able  effect

1 .  ,  .  .  , .  on  the

advance  during  the  period  of  this  weary  seclusion,  which  had
its  expected  effect  in  cutting  off  the  city  from  the  personal
influence  of  Mohammad  and  his  converts.  The  efforts  of  the
Prophet  were  of  necessity  confined  to  the  members  of  his  own
noble  clan,  who,  though  unbelievers  in  his  mission,  had  re-
solved to  defend  his  person ;  and  to  strengthening  in  the
faith  his  previous  converts.  Accordingly  we  find  in  the
portions  of  the  Kor'an  delivered  at  this  time  directions  to
retire  from  the  unbelievers,  and  confine  his  preaching  to  his
kinsmen  and  to  the  faithful : —


cause  of
Mohammad


Verily  they  are  a  rebellious  people  ;

Wherefore  turn  from  them,  and  thou  shalt  not  be  blamed.
And  admonish  ;  for  admonition  profiteth  the  believers.
*****  -x-  *

Invoke  with  God  no  other  god,  lest  thou  be  of  those  consigned  to
torment.
And  preach  unto  thy  relatives,  those  that  be  of  nearer  kin.
And  conduct  thyself  gently  ^  towards  the  believers  that  follow  thee.
If  they  disobey  thee,  Say  /  a7?i  free  from  ihat  which  ye  do.
And  put  thy  trust  in  Him  that  is  glorious  and  merciful.

The  exemplary  bearing  of  Mohammad  under  these  trying
circumstances,  and  the  spirit  of  clanship  that  knit  together

*  Literally,  Lower  thy  wings. So  in  Siira  xv.  88  ff.  ;  xvii.  25.

'  Stretch  not  forth  thine  eyes  unto  the  provision  which  We  have  given  unto
several  of  them,  neither  be  covetous  thereof.
But  behave  with  gentleness  (Jou'er  thy  wings)  towards  the  believers  ;
And  say ; Verily  I  am  a  plain  preacher.  .  .  .

And publish  that  which thou art commanded, and withdraw from  the
idolaters.
Verily,  We  shall  suffice  for  thee  against  the  scoffers,  those  that  set  up  with

God  other  gods  ;  and  they  shall  shortly  know  ;
But do thou praise thy Lord with thanksgiving, and be among the
worshippers  : —
And  serve  thy  Lord  until  death  overtake  thee.'

[So  xvii.  25,  'lower  to  them  the  wing  of  humility.']


Sura  li,  53ff.


Sura  xxvL
213  ff.


But  closer
union
with  the
Hashimites


96


FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [cHAP.


Mohammad
visits  the
fairs  and
assemblages
of  pilgrims


Is  repulsed
and  dis-
pirited


all  who  shut  themselves  up  with  him,  must  have  secured  in
some  degree  the  general  countenance  of  the  Hashimites,  and
may  perhaps  have  helped  to  add  some  few  followers  from
their  ranks.  But  the  weary  years  of  confinement  dragged  on
with  no  important  result.  The  time  of  pilgrimage  alone
afforded  Mohammad  a  wider  field.  That  interval  of  universal
amnesty  was  turned  (as  it  had  been  before)  to  careful  account
in  visiting  and  exhorting  the  various  tribes  that  flocked  to
Mecca  and  the  adjacent  fairs.  Thus  the  Prophet  used  to
visit  the  great  assemblages  at  'Okaz  and  other  places,  as  well
as  the  pilgrim  encampments  at  Mecca  and  Mina.  On  these
occasions  he  warned  his  countrymen  against  idolatry ;  invited
them  to  the  worship  and  service  of  the  true  God ;  and
promised  them  not  only  Paradise  hereafter,  but  prosperity
and  dominion  here  on  earth,  if  they  would  believe.^  No  one
responded  to  his  call.  Abu  Lahab  would  dog  his  steps
crying  aloud  :  Believe  him  7tot,  he  is  a  lying  renegade  I  ^  And
the  strangers,  too,  would  reply  to  Mohammad  in  such
taunting  words  as  these:  Thine  own  kijidred  and  people  sJioiild
know  thee  best ;  wherefore  is  it  that  they  have  cast  thee  off?
So  the  Prophet,  dispirited  and  grieved,  would  look  upwards
and  make  complaint :  O  Lord,  if  Thou  willedst,  it  would  not
be  thus  ! But  the  prayer  seemed  to  pass  unheeded.

About  this  time  Mohammad  must  have  found  means  of
communicating  with  the  Jews,  or  at  least  with  some  person
acquainted  with  Jewish  lore ;  for  his  revelation  begins  now
to  abound  with  narratives  taken,  often  at  great  length,  from

^  Al-Wakidi  says  that  Mohammad  frequented  the  three  great  fairs  in
the  neighbourhood  every  year.  There  is  some  foreshadowing  of  the
victories  of  Islam  in  his  supposed  address,  which  rather  throws  doubt
upon  these  traditions.  This  was  the  alleged  drift:  '  Ye  people!  Say,
There  is  no  God  but  the  Lord.  Ye  will  be  betiefited  thereby.  Ye
will  gain  the  rule  of  all  Arabia,  and  of  Al-''Ajam  (foreign  lands),  and
when  ye  die  ye  will  reigji  as  kings  in  Paradise.

There  would  be  numerous  Christians  and  Jews  at  the  fairs,  though
they  did  not,  of  course,  attend  the  Meccan  pilgrimage.

2  'And  behind  him  there  followed  a  squint-eyed  man,  fat,  having  flow-
ing locks  on  both  sides,  and  clothed  in  raiment  of  fine  Aden  stuff.  And
when  Mohammad  had  finished  his  preaching,  this  man  would  begin  to
address  them,  saying :  This  fellow'' s  only  object  is  to  draw  you  away
f 7-01)1  your  gods  and  Genii,  to  his  fancied  revelations  j  wherefore  follow
him  not,  neither  listen  unto  him.  And  who  should  this  be  but  his
uncle  'Abd  al-'Ozza  Abu  Lahab.' — Ibn  Hisham.


v.]  SURAS  OF  THIS  PERIOD  q7

their  Scriptures  and  legends,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  follow-
ing extracts.

The  Kor'an  as  Revealed  during  this  Period

About  twenty  Suras  belong  to  this  period  ;  they  are  con- Analogies
siderably  longer  that  the  early  ones,  and  occupy  now  each °f^°^s

JO  J  ■<  ^ I  J  power  and

several  pages.  The  style,  though  often  enlivened  by  tales  of  the  Re-
from  native  and  (now  also)  from  Jewish  legend,  has  become  ^^'■''^'^''"^*^
as  a  rule  still  more  flat  and  prosaic.  The  substance  is  little
changed ;  but,  mingled  with  instruction  for  believers,  and
denunciation  of  scoffers,  we  begin  to  have  powerful  illustra-
tions from  nature  of  the  might  and  wisdom  of  the  Deity,  and
of  the  reasonableness  of  the  Resurrection  from  the  dead.
The  following  may  be  taken  as  a  specimen  : —

Of  His  signs  it  is  one,  that He sendeth the winds bearing good Sura  xxx.
tidings,  that  He  may  cause  you  to  taste  of  His  mercy,  and  that  the  ships 45  ff-
may  sail  by  His  command,  and  ye  may  seek  to  enrich  yourselves  of  His
bounty  ;  peradventure  ye  may  be  thankful.

And  verily  We  have  sent  before  thee,  Apostles  unto  their  nations,
and  they  came  unto  them  with  clear  proofs,  and  We  took  vengeance  on
the  transgressors  ;  and  it  behoved  Us  to  assist  the  believers.

It  Is  God  that  sendeth  the  winds  which  raise  up  the  clouds  ;  then  He
spreadeth  the  same  in  the  heavens  as  He  pleaseth,  and  He  disposeth
them  in  layers,  and  thou  mayest  see  the  rain  issuing  from  between  them.
And  when  He  causeth  the  same  to  reach  unto  such  of  His  servants  as
He  chooseth,  behold  they  are  filled  with  joy  ;  and  before  it  was  sent
down  unto  them,  they  were  already  despairing.

Wherefore  survey  the  tokens  of  God's  mercy,  how  He  quickeneth  the
earth  after  it  hath  become  dead  ;  verily,  the  same  will  be  the  Quickener
of  those  who  have  died  ;  and  He  is  over  all  things  Mighty.

And  if  We  send  a  blasting  wind,  and  they  should  see  their  fields
withered,  they  would,  after  that,  become  ungrateful.

Thou  canst  not  make  the  dead  to  hear  ;  neither  canst  thou  make  the
deaf  to  hear  thy  calling,  when  they  turn  their  backs  upon  thee.  Nor
canst  thou  guide  the  blind  out  of  their  error.  Thou  shalt  make  none  to
hear  excepting  such  as  believe  in  Our  signs  ;  for  these  are  the  true
Muslims  {i.e.  those  resigned  unto  God).

In  language  which  though  strange  is  full  of  meaning,
Mohammad  repeatedly  affirms  that  the  universe  was  not
made  by  chance  or  '  in  play'  but  that  God  had  in  creation  a
sovereign  purpose  and  design  : —

We  created  not  the  heavens  and  the  earth  and  that  which  is  between Sura  xxi.
them,  by  way  of  sport.  i6ff.

G


FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [chap.


Sura  xxxiii
72  f.


Connection
with  Ju-
daism, and
appeal  to
Jewish
Scriptures


Testimony
of  the
Jews  in
favour  of
Mohammad


If  We  had  pleased  to  take  diversion,  verily  We  had  taken  it  in  such
wise  as  beseemeth  Us,  if  We  had  been  bent  thereon.

Nay,  but  We  will  oppose  the  True  to  the  False,  and  it  shall  confound
the  same  ;  and,  lo  !  it  shall  vanish  away.

In  another  passage,  but  of  later  date,  the  doctrine  of  the
responsibility  of  the  human  race  and  consequent  liability  to
punishment,  in  contrast  with  those  bodies  which  obey  of
necessity,  is  taught  thus  mystically  : —

Verily  We  offered  Faith  unto  the  heavens  and  the  earth  and  the
mountains  ;  but  they  refused  to  undertake  the  same,  and  were  afraid
thereof.

But  man  undertook  it  ;  for  verily  he  is  rash  and  foolish  ; —

That  God  should  punish  the  evil-minded  men,  and  the  evil-minded
women,  and  the  idolaters  and  the  idolatresses  ;

And  that  God  may  be  turned  graciously  unto  the  believing  men  and
believing  women  ;  for  God  is  gracious  and  merciful.

A  close  connection  is  now  springing  up  between
Mohammad  and  the  Jews ;  and  frequent  reference  to  their
books,  and  recital  of  their  legends,  begin  to  form  a  leading
feature  of  the  Kor'an.^  The  Pentateuch  is  constantly
mentioned  as  a  revelation  from  God  to  Moses.  The  grand
object  of  the  Kor'an  at  this  stage  is  'to  attest'  the  divine
origin  of  the  Taurat  and  the  succeeding  Scriptures.  The
Jewish  books  are  said  to  contain  '  clear  evidence '  of  the  truth
of  the  Kor'an,  and  of  the  mission  of  Mohammad.  Jewish
witnesses  are  appealed  to  in  proof  that  the  dispensation  of
Islam  is  'foretold'  in  their  sacred  books,  and  that  the  Kor'an
is  in  close  conformity  therewith.^

The  confidence  with  which  Mohammad  thus  refers  to  the
testimony  of  the  Jews  and  their  Scriptures  is  very  remarkable.
It  leaves  no  room  to  doubt  that  some  amongst  the  Jews,
acquainted  perhaps  but  superficially  with  their  own  books
and  traditions,  encouraged  Mohammad  in  the  idea  that  he
might  be,  or  even  affirmed  that  -he  was  tAat  Prophet  whom
the  Lord  their  God  should  raise  up  unto  them  of  their  brethren.
His  profound  veneration  for  the  Jewish  Scriptures  would  lull
and  draw  the  Israelites  kindly  towards  him.  '  If  this  man,'
they  would  say,  '  hold  firmly  by  the  Law  and  the  Prophets,

^  Sprenger  has  remarked  that  about  this  period  the  Kor'an  begins  to
mention  a  great  number  of  'prophets,'  by  the  Jewish  term  nabij  the
limited  references  before  being  to  'apostles,' or 'messengers,' from  God
{rasi'il).


v.]


JEWISH  INFLUENCE


99


and  seek  the  guidance  of  the  GOD  of  our  fathers,  he  will  not
go  astray.  Peradventure,  the  Lord  will,  through  him,  lead
the  heathen  Arabs  to  the  truth.  Nay  ;  what  if  we  ourselves
have  erred  in  our  interpretation  as  to  the  lineage  of  the
coming  prophet,  and  this  prove  the  very  Messiah  sprung
from  the  seed  of  Abraham  ?  In  anywise  let  us  wait,  watch-
ing the  result ;  and  meanwhile  encourage  him  in  the  love  of
the  Word  of  God,  and  the  seeking  of  His  face  in  prayer.'
Every  Jew  must  have  exulted  in  the  Jewish  tendencies  which
had  possessed  his  mind.  We  meet  with  frequent  passages
like  the  following  (xiii.  36) :  '  Those  unto  whom  We  have
given  the  Book  rejoice  for  that  which  hath  been  revealed  unto
thee.'  Some  going  further  bore  a  direct  and  unequivocal
testimony  to  his  mission.  Nothing  short  of  such  witness
could  be  referred  to  by  Mohammad  when  he  said  :  They  unto  Sura  vi.  20
zvJiom  We  have  given  the  Scripture  recognise  the  Prophet  (or
the  Kor'an)  as  they  do  their  oivn  children  ;  and —


Sura  xxvi.
192  ff.


Verily  this  is  a  Revelation  from  the  Lord  of  Creation  ;
The  faithful  Spirit  hath  descended  with  it
Upon  thy  heart,  that  thou  mightest  be  a  Warner,

In  the  tongue  of  simple  Arabic.

And  verily  it  is  borne  witness  to  in  the  former  Scriptures  ;
Hath  it  not  been a Sign unto them that the learned among the
Children  of  Israel  recognised  it ;

And  if  We  had  revealed  it  to  a  Foreigner,
And  he  had  recited  it  unto  them,  they  had  not  believed.

Say  :  What  think  ye,  if  this  Revelation  be  from  God,  and  ye  reject  it. Sura  xlvL  9
and  a  Witness  from  amongst  the  children  of  Israel  hath  witnessed  unto
the  like  thereof  {that  is,  to  its  conformity  with  the  Old  Testament),  and
hath  believed  therein,  and  ye  turn  away  scornfully  ? — Verily,  God  doth
not  direct  the  erring  folk.


Whether  this  '  Witness,'  and  the  other  Jewish  supporters
of  Mohammad,  were  among  his  professed  followers,  slaves
perhaps,  at  Mecca  ;  or  casual  visitors  there  from  the  Israelitish
tribes ;  or  belonged  to  the  Jewish  residents  of  Medina  (with
the  inhabitants  of  which  city  the  Prophet  was  on  the  point  of
establishing  friendly  relations),  we  can  but  conjecture.
Whoever  his  Jewish  friends  may  have  been,  it  is  evident  that
they  had  a  knowledge — rude  and  imperfect,  perhaps,  but
comprehensive — of  the  outlines  of  Jewish  history  and  tradi-
tion. These,  distorted  by  rabbinical  fable,  and  embellished
or  travestied  by  the  Prophet's  fancy,  supplied  the  material


Conjectures
as  to  the
'  Witness '


Materials
for  Kor'an
supplied  by
Jews


loo FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [chap.

for  the  Scriptural  stories  which  at  this  period  form  a  chief
portion  of  the  Kor'an.  The  mixture  of  truth  and  fiction,  of
graphic  imagery  and  childish  fancy,  the  repetition  over  and
over  of  the  same  tales  in  stereotyped  expression,  and  the
elaborate  effort  to  draw  an  analogy  between  the  former
prophets  and  himself,  and  between  their  opponents  and
Koreish,  by  putting  the  speech  of  his  own  day  into  their
lips,  fatigue  the  patient  reader  of  the  Kor'an.  A  bare
enumeration  of  some  of  the  topics  will  illustrate  both  the
remarkable  correspondence  of  the  Kor'an  with  the  Jewish
Scriptures,  and  the  many  strange  and  fanciful  deviations
from  them.  The  fabulous  turn  of  the  stories  can  often  be
Illustra-  traced  to  rabbinical  legend ;  thus  to  the  facts  of  Abel's
tions  history,  it  is  added  that  God,  sending  a  raven  to  scratch  the

ground,  thus  instructed  Cain  that  the  corpse  should  be  buried
in  the  earth  (v.  34).  The  narrative  of  the  Creation  is  given  by
way  of  specimen  below,  from  Sura  vii.  For  the  rest  it  will
suffice  if  we  but  allude  to  the  stories  of  Abraham,  who  broke
in  pieces  the  idols  of  his  people,  and  miraculously  escaped
the  fire  into  which  the  tyrant  cast  him ;  of  the  angel's  visit,
when  Sarah  laughed  at  the  promise  of  a  son,  and  the
patriarch,  vainly  pleading  for  Sodom,  was  told  that  Lot
would  be  saved,  but  that  his  wife  was  predestined  to  destruc-
tion ;  of  Abraham's  hand  being  stayed  from  the  sacrifice  of
his  son,  who  was  ransomed  by  '  a  noble  victim  ; '  of  Joseph,
in  envy  of  whose  beauty  the  Egyptian  women  cut  their
hands  with  knives ;  of  Jacob,  who,  when  the  garment  of
Joseph  was  cast  over  him  by  the  messengers  from  Egypt,
recovered  his  long-lost  sight ;  of  mount  Sinai  held  above  the
heads  of  the  terrified  Israelites  to  force  their  acceptance  of
the  law ;  of  the  Seventy  who,  when  struck  dead  upon  the
same  mount,  were  quickened  to  life  again  ;  of  David,  whom
the  mountains  joined  in  singing  the  praises  of  God ;  and  of
Solomon,  on  whose  gigantic  works  the  Genii  and  devils  were
forced  to  labour  at  his  bidding ;  of  the  Genii,  who  brought  the
throne  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba  to  Solomon  in  '  the  twinkling
of  an  eye,'  and  of  the  lapwing  that  flew  to  her  with  the  royal
summons  ;  of  the  Jews,  who  broke  the  sabbath,  and  were
changed  into  apes ;  of  Ezekiel,  who  quickened  a  great
multitude  of  the  dead ;  and  of  Ezra,  who  with  his  ass  was
raised  to  life  after  being  dead  a  hundred  years. The  follow-


v.]  BORROWED  MATERIAL  loi

ing  passage  may be  taken  as  a  fair  specimen  of  the  half-
Scriptural,  half-legendary  style  of  these  stories  : —

And  verily  We  created  you,  then  fashioned  you,  and  then  said  unto Sura  vii,

the Angels, 'Fall down and worship Adam;' and they all ^° •

worshipped,  excepting  IblTs  who  was  not  one  of  the  worshippers  ; —
God  said,  'What hindereth thee that thou worshippest not when I

command thee?' He answered, 'I am better than he: Thou

createdst  me  of  fire,  and  thou  createdst  him  of  clay.'
God  said,  '  Get  thee  down  from  Heaven  ;  it  shall  not  be  given  thee  to

behave  arrogantly  therein  ; get  thee  hence  ; verily,  thou  shalt  be

amongst  the  despicable.'
He  said,  'Respite  me  unto  the  day  of  Resurrection.'
God  said,  '  Verily,  thou  art  of  the  number  respited.'
The  Devil  said,  '  Now,  for  that  Thou  hast  caused  me  to  fall,  I  will  lie  in

wait  for  them  in  thy  straight  path  ; —
Then  I  will  fall  upon  them  from  before  and  from  behind,  and  from  their

right  hand  and  from  their  left ;  and  Thou  shalt  not  find  the  most

part  of  them  thankful.'
God  said,  '  Depart  from  hence,  despised  and  driven  away  ;  verily,  who-
soever of  them  shall  follow  thee, I will  surely  fill hell with you

together.
And  thou,  Adam,  dwell  thou  and  thy  wife  in  Paradise,  and  eat  of  its

fruit  wherever  ye  will  ;  but  approach  not  this  tree,  lest  ye  become  of

the  number  of  the  transgressors  1 '
And  the  Devil  tempted  them  both,  that  he  might  discover  that  which

was  hidden  from  them  of  their  nakedness.
And  he  said, '  Your  Lord  hath  only  forbidden  you  this  tree,  lest  ye

should  become  Angels,  or  become  immortal.'
And  he  sware  unto  them,  'Verily,  I  am  unto  you  as  one  that  counselleth

good.'
And  he  caused  them  to  fall  through  guile  ;  and  when  they  had  tasted  of

the  tree,  their  nakedness  appeared  unto  them,  and  they  began  to

join  the  leaves  of  Paradise,  to  cover  themselves  withal.
And  their  Lord  called  unto  them,  '  What !  did  I  not  forbid  you  this  tree,

and  say  unto  you  that  Satan  was  your  manifest  enemy  ?'
They  said,  '  Oh,  our  Lord  ! We  have  injured  our  own  souls,  and  if  Thou

forgivest  us  not,  and  are  not  merciful  unto  us,  we  shall  be  numbered

with  the  lost.'
God  said,  '  Get  ye  down,  the  one  of  you  an  enemy  to  the  other ; and

there  shall  be  unto  you  on  the  earth  an  habitation  and  a  provision

for  a  season  : ' —
He  said,  moreover,  'Therein  shall  ye  live,  and  therein  shall  ye  die,  and

from  thence  shall  ye  be  taken  forth.'

Certain  favourite  passages  from  the  Old  Testament  are
the  subject  of  special  amplification  and  repetition,  some  as
often  as  a  dozen  times. Such  are  the  history  of  Moses,  the


FROM  FIFTH  TO  TENTH  YEAR  OF  MISSION [chap.


Time  spent
in  study
and  compo-
sition


Sura  Ixxiii.
I  ff .


Idea  of

study  and

inspiration

possibly

blended

together


catastrophe  of  the  Flood,  and  the  overthrow  of  Sodom,
through  which  the  Arabian  prophet,  with  a  wearisome
reiteration,  seeks  to  deal  forth  exhortation  and  warning  to
the  citizens  of  Mecca.  An  adequate  conception  of  these
curious  recitals  can  be  gained  only  from  a  perusal  of  the
Kor'an  itself;  if  the  reader  have  patience  and  interest  let
him  peruse,  for  an  example,  the  history  of  Moses  in  the  20th
and  28th  Suras.

To  acquire  so  minute  a  knowledge  of  considerable
portions  of  Jewish  Scripture  and  legend,  to  assimilate  these
to  his  former  materials,  and  to  work  them  up  into  elaborate
and  rhythmical  Suras,  was  a  work  that  no  doubt  required
much  time  and  patience.  The  revelation  is  seldom  now  the
spontaneous  eloquence  of  a  warm  imagination ;  it  is  rather
the  tame  and  laboured  result  of  ordinary  composition.  For
this  end  many  a  midnight  hour  must  have  been  stolen  from
sleep.  Such  employment  is  probably  referred  to  in  passages
like  the  following  : —

Oh  thou  that  art  wrapped  up !
Arise  during  the  night,  excepting  a  small  portion  thereof: —

A  half  thereof ;  or  diminish  the  same  a  little,
Or  add  thereto. And  recite  the  Koran  with  well  measured  recitation.

Verily,  We  shall  inspire  thee  with  weighty  words.
Verily,  the  hours  of  night  are  the  best  for  fervent  devotion,  and  dis-
tinct utterance  ;

For  truly  by  day  thou  hast  a  protracted  labour.
And  commemorate  the name of  thy Lord,  and consecrate thyself
wholly  unto  Him.

It  is  possible  that  the  convictions  of  Mohammad  may
have  become  so  blended  with  his  grand  object  and  course  of
action,  that  the  study  and  repetition  of  the  Kor'an  were
regarded  as  his  best  seasons  of  devotion.  But  the  way  in
which  he  now  made  use  of  Jewish  information  and  produced
the  result  as  evidence  of  itispiration,  points  to  the  beginning
of  an  active,  though  it  may  have  been  unconscious,  course  of
unacknowledged  appropriation  ;  ^ — a  weak  point  on  which
his  enemies  were  not  slow  to  seize. They  accused  him of

1  Thus,  in  the  story  of  Man's  creation  and  the  fall  of  Satan,
Mohammad  is  desired  to  say:  '/  had  no  knowledge  regarditig  the
Heavenly  Chiefs  when  they  disputed;  verily,  it  hath  been  revealed  unto
me  for  no  other  purpose  than  (to  prove)  that  I  am  a  public  Preacher.'


v.]


MUCH  STUDY


T03


fabrication,  and  of  being  assisted  therein  by  others  :  *  They
are  fables,'  they  said,  'of  the  ancients  which  he  hath  had
written  down ;  they  are  dictated  unto  him  every  morning
and  evening.'  To  these  imputations  Mohammad  could  only
answer:  'He  hath  revealed  it  who  knoweth  that  which  is
hidden  in  heaven  and  in  earth :  He  is  forgiving  and
merciful.'

Up  to  this  period  there  is  little  mention  of  the  Christian
Scriptures,  the  available  sources  of  information  being
probably  as  yet  imperfect.


Imputa-
tions of  his
enemies

Sura  XXV.
5-7


Christian
Scriptures
Httle  men-
tioned


— Sura  xxxviii.  69  f.  So  regarding  Moses  at  Mount  Sinai,  Sura  xxviii.
And  again,  after  relating  the  history  of  Joseph,  it  is  added  :  '  This  is  one
of  the  secret  Jiistories  which  We  have  revealed  unto  thee;  thou  wast  not
present  with  theni^  &c. — Sura  xii.  103.


CHAPTER VI


VISIT  TO  AT-TA'IF. islam PLANTED AT MEDINA


A.D.  620-621


Mohammad
and  his
party  under
the  ban
from  617-
619  A.D.


Sympathy
of  their
opponents


Abu  Talib
upbraids
Koreish  ;
deed  eaten
by  insects


In  the  tenth  year  of  his  ministry,  the  fiftieth  of  his  life,
Mohammad  and  his  kinsmen  were  still  shut  up  in  the
isolated  quarter  of  Abu  Talib ;  the  only  interval  of  freedom
and  relief  being  at  the  annual  pilgrimage.  Between  them
and  the  rest  of  Koreish  the  intercourse  of  social  life  was
totally  suspended.  The  Hashimites  were  thus  virtually
blockaded  for  the  space  of  two  or  three  years.  At  last  the
sympathies  of  many  were  aroused.  They  saw  in  the
persecution  of  Mohammad  something  more  than  a  con-
scientious struggle  against  an  impostor.  The  justice  of
extending  the  ban  to  the  whole  Hashimite  stock  was  doubt-
ful, and  many,  especially  those  related  to  the  clan,  grieved
at  the  rupture.

It  was  discovered  by  some  friend  of  the  Prophet  that  the
parchment  in  the  Ka'ba,  on  which  the  ban  was  engrossed,
had  been  defaced  by  ants.  The  important  news  was  told  to
Mohammad ;  and  Abu  Talib  resolved  to  found  thereon  an
effort  for  the  dissolution  of  the  league.  The  venerable  chief,
now  more  than  fourscore  years  of  age,  issued  forth  from  his
defile  and  proceeded,  with  a  band  of  followers,  to  the  Ka'ba.
Addressing  the  chief  men  of  Koreish  assembled  there,  he
said  :  '  Intelligence  hath  reached  me  that  your  parchment  is
eaten  up  of  insects.  If  my  words  be  true,  desist  from  your
evil  designs ;  if  false,  I  will  deliver  up  my  brother's  son  unto
you  that  ye  may  do  with  him  as  ye  list'  The  company
agreed  that  it  should  be  so,  and  sent  for  the  document.
When  they  had  opened  it  out,  they  saw  that  it  was  even  as
Abu  Talib  had  said;  a great  part  had been devoured  by


VI.]  THE  'BOYCOTT'  BROKEN  105

white  ants  and  was  no  longer  legible.  Abu  Talib,  perceiving
their  confusion,  bitterly  upbraided  their  inhumanity  and
breach  of  social  obligations.  He  then  advanced  with  his
band  to  the  Ka'ba,  and,  withdrawing  behind  the  curtain  that
shrouded  the  Holy  House,  prayed  for  deliverance  from  their
machinations.  This  done,  he  straightway  retired  to  his
secluded  abode.

The  murmurs  of  the  sympathisers  now  found  utterance.  Ban  re-
The  partisans  of  the  Prophet  were  emboldened.  Koreish  ™p^^5jQ
had  scarce  recovered  from  surprise  at  the  sudden  appearance
and  as  sudden  departure  of  Abu  Talib,  when  five  chief  men
(possibly  on  a  preconcerted  plan)  rose  up  from  their  midst,
and,  declaring  themselves  opposed  to  the  league,  put  on
their  armour  and  proceeded  to  the  defile  of  Abu  Talib.
Standing  by  its  entrance,  they  commanded  all  that  had
taken  refuge  there  to  go  forth  to  their  respective  homes  in
security  and  peace.  So  they  went  forth.  Koreish,  con-
founded by  the  boldness  of  the  stroke,  offered  no  opposition.
They  perceived  that  a  strong  party  had  grown  up  who  would
resent  by  arms  any  attempt  to  lay  violent  hands  upon  the
Muslims.

Repose and liberty followed the breaking up of  the Domestic
hostile league; but they were not long to be enjoyed ^""'^  ^
without  alloy by Mohammad. In a few months he was
visited  by  trials  more  severe  than  any  that  had  yet  befallen
him. The  tenth  year  (third  before  the  Hijra)  had  not  yet
passed  when  Khadija  died  ;  and  five  weeks  later  he  lost  his
protector  Abu  Talib.^ The  death  of  his  wife  was  a  grievous Death  of
affliction. For five-and-twenty years she had been his Dec^nber
counsellor  and  support ;  and  now  his  heart  and  home  were  a.d.  619
desolate. His  family,  however,  no  longer  needed  maternal
care. The  daughters  had  all left him for their  husbands'
homes,  excepting  the  youngest,  Fatima,  who  was  approach-
ing womanhood,  and  between  whom  and  her  cousin  'All  an
attachment  was  perhaps  already  forming. Though  Khadija
(at  her  death  threescore-and-five  years  old)  must  long  ago
have  lost  the  charms  of  youth,  and  though  the  custom  of  the
country  allowed  polygamy,  yet  Mohammad  was  during  her
lifetime restrained from other  marriages by affection  and
gratitude,  perhaps  also  by  the  wish  to  secure  the  influence
1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  276  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1 199.


io6  VISIT  TO  AT-TA'IF  [chap.

of  her  family  more  entirely  for  his  cause.  His  grief  at  her
death  at  first  was  inconsolable,  liable  as  he  was  to  violent  and
deep  emotion ;  but  its  effects  were  transient.  The  place  of
Khadija  could  be  filled,  though  her  devotion  might  not  be
rivalled,  by  her  many  successors.  The  virtues  of  this  noble
lady  are  still  held  in  veneration ;  and  her  tomb,  in  the  valley
just  above  the  city,  is  visited  to  the  present  day  by  Muslim
pilgrims.^
Death  of  The  loss  of  Abu  Talib,  who  died as he had lived,  an

Abuialib, unbeliever,  was,  if  possible,  a  still  severer  bereavement. We

January,  >  >  jr  >  ^

A.D.  620  may  dismiss  the  legend  that  on  his  deathbed  he  declared,  in
reply  to  the  Prophet's  earnest  appeal,  that  he  was  prevented
from  assenting  to  the  creed  of  Islam  only  lest  Koreish
should  set  it  down  to  fear  at  the  approach  of  death.  What-
ever he  may  have  said  to  comfort  Mohammad,  his  life  belies
the  accusation  that  apprehended  contempt  of  Koreish
restrained  him  from  avowing  his  convictions.  The  sacrifices
to  which  Abu  Talib  exposed  himself  and  his  family  for  the
sake  of  his  nephew,  while  yet  incredulous  of  his  mission,
stamp  his  character  as  singularly  noble  and  unselfish.  They
afford  at  the  same  time  strong  proof  of  the  sincerity  of
Mohammad.  Abu  Talib  would  not  have  acted  thus  for  an
interested  deceiver ;  and  he  had  ample  means  of  scrutiny.
The  loss  of  When the patriarch felt that life was ebbing, he

Abu  Talib summoned  his  brethren,  the  sons  of  *Abd  al-Muttalib,  around
(elt  his  bed ; commended  his  nephew  to  their  protection ;  and,

relieved  of  the  trust,  died  in  peace,  and  was  buried  near
Khadlja's  grave.  Mohammad  wept  as  he  followed  the  bier,
and  not  without  reason.  For  forty  years  Abu  Talib  had
been  his  faithful  friend, — the  prop  of  his  childhood,  the
guardian  of  his  youth,  and  in  later  life  a  very  tower  of
defence.  His  unbelief  only  made  his  influence  the  stronger.
So  long  as  he  survived,  Mohammad  needed  not  to  fear
violence  or  attack.  But  there  was  no  strong  hand  now  to
protect  him  from  his  foes.  A  second  Khadija  might  be
found,  but  not  a  second  Abu  Talib.

Grieved  and  dispirited  by  these  bereavements  following

1  Sprenger  thinks  that,  but  for  Khadija,  Mohammad  would  never
have  been  a  prophet,  and  that  by  her  death  Islam  lost  in  purity  and  the
Kor'an  in  dignity.  Mohammad  is  said  occasionally  to  have  slaughtered
a  sheep  and  distributed  it  among  the  poor  in  remembrance  of  her.


VI]  MOHAMMAD  WITHOUT  A PROTECTOR  107

SO  closely  one  upon  the  other,  and  dreading  the  now  Abu  Lahab
unchecked  insolence  of  Koreish,  Mohammad  seldom  went  Mohammad
abroad.  The  dying  behest  of  Abu  Talib  had  now  an  for  a  little
unexpected  effect ;  for  Abu  Lahab,  heretofore  the  avowed
enemy  of  Mohammad,  was  softened  by  his  despondency  and
distress,  and  spontaneously  became  his  guardian.  'Do,'  he
said,  *  as  thou  hast  been  in  the  habit  of  doing  while  Abu  Talib
was  yet  alive.  By  Al-Ldt !  no  one  shall  hurt  thee  while  I
live!  But  the  pledge  was  not  long  observed,  for  Abu  Lahab
was  soon  gained  back  again  by  Koreish,  and  became  his
enemy  more  determined  than  before.  At  first,  indeed,  he
was  rather  praised  by  Koreish  for  his  attempt  to  'bind  up
family  differences.'  But,  bid  by  Abu  Jahl  to  ask  where  'Abd
al-Muttalib  now  was,  and  on  the  Prophet  confessing  that  he
was  in  the  place  of  the  lost,  Abu  Lahab  left  him  in  indigna-
tion, saying,  '  I  will  not  cease  to  be  thine  enemy  for  ever ; '
and  so  he  did  remain.^  The  embittered  relations  between  Bitter  re-
Abu  Lahab  and  his  nephew,  notwithstanding  that  two  of  su^me"d  ^^'
his  sons  had  married  daughters  of  Mohammad,  may  be
gathered  from  a  memorable  passage  in  the  Kor'an.  The
Prophet,  we  are  told,  called  his  relatives  together  to  hear
his  message.  When  he  had  delivered  it,  '  Blast  the  fellow  ! '
cried  Abu  Lahab ;  *  is  that  all  that  he  hath  called  us  for
together  ? '  To  chide  the  blasphemer,  and  also  to  curse  his
wife,  who  had  strewn  thorns  in  his  path,  this  drastic  Sura,
containing  a  savage  play  upon  the  name,  was  pro-
mulgated : —

Blasted  be  the  hands  of  Abu  Lahab  !  and  let  himself  be  blasted  !

His  riches  shall  not  profit  him,  nor  that  which  he  hath  gained.

He  shall  be  cast  into  the  broiling  Flame j

His  wife  also,  laden  with  fuel,

A  halter  of  palm-coir  round  her  neck. — Sura  cxi.^

The  indignities  he  suffered  at  this  time  evince  the  hostile
attitude  of  the  city.  On  one  occasion  the  populace  cast
dirt  upon  his  head ;  returning  home  in  this  plight,  one  of  his

1  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  141.

^  It  is  uncertain  when  this  incident  occurred.  From  the  short  and
impulsive  style  of  the  SiTira,  it  may  probably  have  belonged  to  an  earlier
period ;  but  anyhow  it  illustrates  the  Prophet's  feelings  towards  his
hostile  uncle.  The  play  is  on  the  name  Lahab,  'flame.'  Ibn  Hisham,
p.  233  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  11 70  f.


io8


VISIT  TO  AT-TA'IF


[chap.


Critical
position  of
Mohammad


He  resolves
to  make
trial  of
At-Ta'if


His  journey
thither,
January,
A.D.  620


daughters  rose  to  wipe  it  off,  and  as  she  did  so,  wept.
Mohammad  seeing  it,  comforted  her  and  said  :  ^  My  daughter,
weep  not !  for  verily  the  Lord  will  be  thy  father's  helper'  ^  It
is  added  that  he  suffered  no  such  indignity  as  that  while  Abu
Talib  lived.  His  position  indeed  was  now  becoming  critical.
He  must  either  gain  the  ascendancy  at  Mecca,  abandon  his
prophetical  claims,  or  else  perish  in  the  struggle.  Islam
must  destroy  idolatry,  or  idolatry  destroy  Islam.  Things
could  not  remain  as  they  were.  His  followers,  though
devotedly  attached,  and  numbering  some  once  influential
citizens,  were  but  a  handful  against  a  host ;  besides,  the
greater  part  of  them  were  now  in  Abyssinia.  Open
hostilities,  notwithstanding  every  endeavour  to  prevent  them,
might  any  day  precipitate  the  struggle,  and  irretrievably
ruin  his  cause.  The  new  faith  had  not  recently  been  gaining
ground  at  Mecca.  There  had  been  no  conversions,  none  at
least  of  any  note,  since  those  of  'Omar  and  Hamza  three
or  four  years  before.  A  few  more  years  of  similar  dis-
couragement, and  his  chance  of  success  was  gone.

Urged  by  such  reflections,  Mohammad  began  to  look
around.  Mecca  knew  not  the  day  of  its  visitation,  and  its
doom  was  well-nigh  sealed.  It  might  perchance  be  the  will
of  the  Lord  that  succour  should  come  from  some  other
quarter.  At-Ta'if  (sixty  or  seventy  miles  east  of  Mecca)  was
the  nearest  city  of  importance.  God  might  turn  the  hearts
of  its  inhabitants,  the  idolatrous  Thaklf,  use  them  as  instru-
ments to  chastise  the  reprobate  men  of  Mecca,  and  establish
the  true  religion  on  the  earth.  To  them,  accordingly,  he
would  now  deliver  his  message.^

Abu  Talib  had  been  buried  hardly  a  fortnight  when  the
Prophet,  followed  only  by  the  faithful  Zeid,  set  out.  Jonah-
like, to  summon  At-Ta'if  to  repentance.  His  road  as  far  as
•Arafat  was  the  pilgrim  route,  and  then  lay  over  dismal  rocks
through  barren  defiles  for  about  forty  miles,  when  it  emerged


1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  277.  [Ibn  Hisliam  says  (p.  184):  'The  worst  of
what  the  Apostle  met  with  from  Koreish  was  that  he  went  out  one  day,
and  not  one  of  the  people  looked  at  him  or  spoke  to  him  or  injured  him,
either  freeman  or  slave.  So  the  Apostle  returned  to  his  dwelling  and
wrapped  himself  up  for  the  violence  of  his  calamity.'  Then  God  sent
down  (Sura  Ixxiv.) :  '  O  thou  wrapt  up,  arise  and  warn,'  &c.]

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  279  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1199  f. ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  141  f.


VI.]  ATTEMPTS  TO  CONVERT  THAKIF  109

on  the  crowning  heights  of  Jebel  Kora.  Thence,  descending
through  fertile  valleys,  the  smiling  fruits  and  flowers  of  which
suggested  perhaps  the  bright  picture  of  the  conversion  of  the
Thaklfites,  he  advanced  to  their  city.  Though  connected  by
frequent  intermarriage,  the  inhabitants  of  At-Ta'if  were
jealous  of  the  Koreish.  They  had  a  Ldt,  or  chief  idol,  of
their  own.  It  might  be  possible,  by  appealing  to  their  tribal
pride  as  well  as  conscience,  to  enlist  them  on  the  side  of
Islam  against  the  people  of  Mecca.  Mohammad  went  first
to  the  three  principal  men  of  the  city,  brothers  ;  and  having
explained  his  mission,  invited  them  to  the  honour  of  sustain-
ing the  new  faith,  and  supporting  him  in  the  face  of  his
hostile  tribe.  But  he  failed  in  producing  conviction.  They
cast  in  his  teeth  the  common  objections  of  his  own  peoplci
and  advised  him  to  seek  protection  in  some  other  quarter.

Mohammad  remained  in  At-Ta'if  for  about  ten  days  ;  but, ^^  igno-

,  ,■  . „  • 1  '  L \  •  11  1  r 1 miniously

though  many  mfluential  men  came  at  his  call,  no  hopeful  expelled
impression  was  made.  Thus  repulsed,  he  solicited  only  one  ^^^  <^''y-
favour  ;  that  they  would  not  divulge  the  object  of  his  visit,
for  he  feared  on  his  return  the  taunts  and  aggravated  hostility
of  Koreish.  But  this,  even  if  it  had  been  possible,  the  men
of  At-Ta'if  were  little  likely  to  concede.  For  the  first  few
days,  perhaps,  the  common  people  regarded  with  awe  the
prophet  who  had  turned  Mecca  upside  down,  and  whose
preaching  probably  most  of  them  had  heard  at  some  of  the
neighbouring  fairs  or  at  the  yearly  pilgrimage.  But  the
neglect  manifested  by  their  chiefs,  and  the  disproportion  to
outward  eye  between  the  magnitude  of  the  prophet's  claims
and  his  present  solitary  helpless  condition,  turned  fear  into
contempt.  Stirred  up  to  hasten  the  departure  of  the  un-
welcome visitor,  the  people  hooted  him  through  the  streets,
pelted  him  with  stones,  and  at  last  obliged  him  to  flee  the
city  pursued  by  a  relentless  rabble.  Blood  flowed  from  both
his  legs  ;  and  Zeid,  endeavouring  to  shield  him,  was  wounded
in  the  head.  The  mob  did  not  desist  until  they  had  chased
him  two  or  three  miles  across  the  sandy  plain  to  the  foot  of
the  surrounding  hills.  There,  wearied  and  mortified,  he  took
refuge  in  one  of  the  numerous  orchards,  and  rested  under  a
vine.  In  this  the  day  of  his  humiliation,  little  did  even  his
unwavering  faith  anticipate  that  in  little  more  than  ten
years  he  should  stand  upon  the  same  spot  at  the  head  of  a


no  VISIT  TO  AT-TA'IF  [chap.

conquering  army  ;  and  that  the  great  idol  of  At-Ta'if,  despite
the  entreaties  of  its  votaries,  would be  demolished at  his
command.
Rests  at  a  Hard  by  was  a  vineyard  belonging  to  two  Koreish,  'Otba

fhe*out- "  and  Sheiba  ;  for  the  wealthy  citizens  of  Mecca  had  gardens
skirts  of  (as  they  still  have)  in  the  vale  of  At-Ta'if  They  watched  the
At-Tai  flight of  Mohammad; and, moved with compassion, sent

'Addas  their  servant  with  a  tray  of  grapes  for  his  refreshment.
The  servant,  a  Christian  slave  from  Nineveh,  marvelled  at  the
pious  invocation  with  which  the  fruit  was  received  by  the
weary  traveller  '  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  ; '  and  a  conversa-
tion ensued  in  which  Mohammad,  learning  from  whence  he
came,  made  mention  of '  the  righteous  Jonas,  son  of  Mattai  of
Nineveh, — a  brother  prophet  like  himself.'  Thereupon
'Addas  did  homage  to  Mohammad,  who,  we  may  believe,  was
solaced  more  by  the  humble  devotion  of  the  slave  than  by  the
welcome  fruit  and  grateful  shade.^  After  a  little,  composed
and  reassured,  he  betook  himself  to  prayer,  and  the  following
touching  petitions  are  still  preserved  as  those  in  which  his
burdened  soul  gave  vent  to  its  distress  : —

His  prayer  O  Lord  ! I  make  my  complaint  unto  thee  of  my  helplessness  and

frailly,  and  my  insignificance  before  mankind.  But  thou  art  the  Lord  of
the  poor  and  feeble,  and  thou  art  my  Lord.  Into  whose  hands  wilt  thou
abandon  me?  Into  the  hands  of  strangers  that  beset  me  round  about?
or  of  the  enemy  thou  hast  given  at  home  the  mastery  over  me?  If  thy
wrath  be  not  upon  me,  I  have  no  concern  ;  but  rather  thy  favour  is  the
more  wide  unto  me.  I  seek  for  refuge  in  the  light  of  thy  countenance.
It  is  thine  to  chase  away  the  darkness,  and  to  give  peace  both  for  this
world  and  the  next ;  let  not  thy  wrath  light  upon  me,  nor  thine  indigna-
tion. It  is  thine  to  show  anger  until  thou  art  pleased  ;  and  there  is  none
other  power  nor  any  resource  but  in  thee.^

And  reassured  thus  he  again  set  out  on  his  return  to  Mecca.
Audience  of  Half  way  lay  the  vale  of  Nakhla,  with  an  idol  fane  and

^^^N^L-hV  shady  grove.  Dreading  the  reception  at  home  which,
after  his  sorry  mission  to  the  rival  city,  might  await  him,
he  halted  there.  And,  as  he  arose  at  night  to  prayer,  or
perhaps  in  a  dream  or  trance,  his  excited  imagination  pictured

1  We  are  told  that  'Addas  fell  to  kissing  the  head,  hands,  and  feet  of
Mohammad,  to  the  astonishment  of  his  masters  looking  on  from  a  dis-
tance ;  and  that  he  influenced  them  afterwards  in  favour  of  Islam.'  Ibn
Hisham,  p.  280  f.

2  At-Tabari,  1.  120 1,


VI]  HIS  RETURN  TO  MECCA  in

crowds  of  Genii  pressing  forward  to  hear  his  exhortations,
and  ardent  to  embrace  Islam.  The  romantic  scene  is  thus
pictured  in  the  Kor'an  : —

And  do  thou  call  to  mind  when  We  caused  a  company  of  the  Genii  Sfira  xlvi.
to  turn  aside  unto  thee,  listening  to  the  Kor'an.  When  they  were  ^8  ft.
present  at  its  recitation  they  said  one  to  the  other,  Give  ear.  And  when
it  was  ended,  they  returned  unto  their  people,  preaching.  They  said, —
Oh  our  People  !  verily  we  have  been  listening  to  a  Book  which  hath
been  sent  down  since  the  days  of  Moses,  and  which  attesteth  the  truth
of  the  preceding  Scripture.  It  guideth  unto  the  truth,  and  into  the
straight  path.  Oh  our  People  !  obey  the  preacher  of  God,  and  believe
in  him,  that  he  may  forgive  you  your  sins,  and  save  you  from  a  fearful
doom.

And  again  : — •

Say:  It  hath  been  revealed  unto  me  that  a  company  of  Genii  listened. Sura  Ixxii.

and  they  said, — '  Verily  we  have  heard  a  marvellous  discourse  ;  i  fl-

it guideth  toward  the  right  faith  ;

Wherefore  we  believed  therein,  and  we  will  not  henceforth

associate  any  with  our  Lord  ;
And  as  to  Him  (may  his  Majesty  be  exalted  !)
He  hath  taken  no  spouse,  neither  hath  He  any  offspring.'

And  so  on,  at  considerable  length,  the  Genii  in  this  curious
passage  speaking  the  language  of  true  believers.^

^  The  passage  is  so  curious,  and  the  scene  so  grotesque,  that  I  give
the  continuation  below  : —

'  But verily  the foolish  people  amongst  us  have  spoken  of  God  that which  is

unjust ;
And  we  verily  thought  that  no  one  amongst  Men  or  Genii  would  have  uttered  a

lie  against  God.
And  truly  there  are  people  amongst  men  who  have  sought  for  refuge  amongst

the  Genii,  but  they  only  multiplied  their  folly.
And  they  fancied,  as  ye  do,  that  Gcd  would  not  raise  any  from  the  dead.
And  we  tried  the  Heavens,  but  found  them  filled  with  a  powerful  guard,  and  with

flaming  darts  ;
And  we  sat  on  some  of  the  Stations  to  listen,  but  whoever  listeneth  now  findeth

an  ambush  of  flaming  darts.  * * »

And  verily  we  thought  that  no  one  could  frustrate  God  on  earth,  neither  could

we  escape  from  him  by  flight ;
Wherefore  when  we  heard  the  right  direction,  we  believed  therein ' — (ana  so  on,

the  Genii  speaking  as  Muslims'). * » *
And  verily  when  the  servant  of  God  (Mohammad)  stood  up  to  call  upon  Him,

they  (the  Genii)  were  near  jostling  him  by  their  numbers,'  &c.

Notwithstanding  the  crowds  of  Genii  here  spoken  of  as  jostling  the
Prophet,  Ibn  Hisham  (whose  authorities  had  a  wonderful  acquaintance
with  their  habits  and  haunts)  states  (p.  281)  that  there  were  but  seven


VISIT  TO  AT-TA'IF


[chap.


Mohammad
returns  to
Mecca


Mission
to  At-Ta'if
memorable


After  spending  some  days  at  Nakhla,  he  again  went  on
towards  Mecca.  But  before  entering  the  city,  which  he
feared  to  do  (now  that  the  object  of  his  visit  to  At-Ta'if
could  not  be  kept  secret)  without  a  protector,  he  turned  aside
by  a  northward  path  to  his  ancient  haunts  on  mount  Hira.
From  thence  he  sent  twice  to  solicit  the  guardianship  of
certain  influential  chiefs  ;  but  without  success.  At  last  he
bethought  him  of  Al-Mut'im  (one  of  those  who  had
helped  to  procure  the  removal  of  the  ban) ;  and  sent  word
beseeching  that  he  would  bring  him  into  the  city  under  his
protection.  The  chief  assented  ;  and,  having  summoned  his
sons,  bade  them  buckle  on  their  armour  and  take  their  stand
by  the  Ka'ba.  Assured  of  his  guarantee,  Mohammad  and
Zeid  re-entered  Mecca.^  When  they  had  reached  the  Ka'ba,
Al-Mut'im  stood  upright  on  his  camel  and  called  aloud :  '  O
ye  Koreish !  verily  I  have  given  the  pledge  of  protection
unto  Mohammad  ;  wherefore,  let  not  any  one  amongst  you
molest  him.'  Then  Mohammad  went  forward,  kissed  the
corner-stone,  and  returned  to  his  house  guarded  by  Al-Mut'im
and  his  party.  The  generosity  and  faithfulness  of  this  chief
have  been  perpetuated  by  Hassan  ibn  Thabit,  the  poet  of
Medina  and  the  Prophet's  friend.^

There  is  something  lofty  and  heroic  in  this  journey  of
Mohammad  to  At-Ta'if;  a  solitary  man,  despised  and  rejected
by  his  own  people,  going  boldly  forth  in  the  name  of  God,
like  Jonah  to  Nineveh,  and  summoning  an  idolatrous  city  to

Genii  belonging  to  Nisibin,  who,  happening  to  pass  that  way,  were
arrested  by  hearing  Mohammad  reciting  the  Kor'an  ;  others  that  there
were  nine^  and  that  they  came  from  the  Yemen,  or  from  Nineveh,  and
professed  the  Jewish  religion  !

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  251  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1203.

2  The  following  are  the  lines.  They  show  how  valuable  contem-
porary poetry  may  be  as  an  auxiliary  to  tradition  : —

Weep,  O  my  eyes  !  for  the  chief  of  men;  let  tears  gush  forth  ;  and  when  they

run  dry,  then  pour  forth  blood  1
If  greatness  had  caused  any  to  survive  for  ever  amongst  mankind,  then  greatness

had  preserved  Al-Mut'im  unto  this  day.
Thou  gavest  the  pledge  of  protection  to  the  Prophet  of  God  from  Koreish ;  and

they  became  thy  servants  so  long  as  a  pilgrim  shall  shout  '  Labbeik  ! '  or

assume  the  pilgrim  garb.

Al-Mut'im  was  a  chief  descended  from  Naufal,  brother  of  Hashim
(great-grandfather  of  Mohammad)  ;  and,  along  with  Harb,  commanded
his  tribe  in  the  Sacrilegious  War,  a.d.  586.


vi.l


HE  RECEIVES  PROTECTION


"3


repent  and  support  his  mission. It  sheds  a  strong  light  on
the  intensity  of  his  belief  in  the  divine  origin  of  his  calling.

The  outlook  was  dark. If  help  should  not  come  from  else- Marries
where,  there  was  little  hope  of  success  at  Mecca. Meanwhile,  ,^^b^trothed
amid  trial  and  discouragement,  Mohammad  sought  solace  in to'.\'isha;
fresh  nuptials. Sauda,  the  lady  on  whom  he  now  set  his  ^"^^-S^
affections, was of mature age, widow of Sakran. Of
Koreishite  blood  (but  of  a  stock  remote  from  Mohammad),
they  both  became  early  converts  to  Islam,  and  emigrated  to
Abyssinia. Sakran had recently died on their return to
Mecca. Mohammad now made suit to Sauda, and the
marriage  was  celebrated  within  two  or  three  months  from  the
death  of  Khadlja.^ About  the  same  time  he  betrothed  himself
to  'A'isha,  the  daughter  of  Abu  Bekr ;  an  alliance  mainly
designed  to  cement  the  attachment  of  his  bosom  friend. The
yet  undeveloped  charms  of  'A'isha  could  hardly  have  swayed
the  Prophet's  heart. He  was  now  fifty,  she  but  six  or  seven,
years  of  age. Still  there  may  have  been  something  more
than  ordinarily  precocious  about  the  child,  for  the  marriage
took  place  about  three  years  afterwards.

We  are  not  told  of  the  terms  on  which  Mohammad  con-
tinued to  live  with  the  family  of  Khadija,  and  whether  he
retained  any  part  of  the  property  that  belonged  to  her.
During  the  troublous  years  he  had  lately  encountered,  and
especially  under  the  ban,  it  is  probable  that  her  wealth  had
much  diminished.  Perhaps  he  shared  it  with  the  poorer
brethren.  It  is  certain  that  during  the  remaining  stay  at
Mecca  he  had  not  much  at  his  disposal ;  and  there  are  even
indications  (as  we  shall  see)  of  straitened  means.  He  still
continued  to  live,  at  least  occasionally  in  the  quarter,  if
not  in  the  house,  of  Abu  Talib.


His  private
means


Repulsed from At-Ta'if, and despairing of  success at
home,  the  fortunes  of  Mohammad  were  enveloped  in  thick

^  On  the  conquest  of  Kheibar,  eight  years  after,  Sauda  had  her
portion  assigned  her  from  its  revenues  with  the  Prophet's  other  wives.
In  the  following  year  it  is  said  somewhat  obscurely  that  either  on  account
of  her  age,  or  some  doubt  of  her  fidelity,  Mohammad  wished  to  put  her
away,  but  was  afterwards  reconciled.  She  is  also  said  to  have  given  up
'her  turn'  to  'A'isha.  She  survived  Mohammad  ten  years.  She  had  by
Sakran  a  son  who  was  killed  in  the  wars  under  'Omar.


Mohammad

meets

pilgrim

party  from

Medina,

March,

A.D.  620  ;


114  ISLAM  PLANTED  AT  MEDINA  [chap.

gloom,  when  a  gleam  of  hope  shot  across  his  path  from  an
unexpected  quarter.  The  season  of  pilgrimage  was  at  hand  ;
and,  as  his  custom  was,  the  Prophet  plied  the  crowds  of
devotees  wherever  he  saw  a  likely  audience.  The  rites  were
nearly  over,  and  the  multitudes  about  to  disperse,  when,
wandering  through  the  busy  scene  in  the  narrow  valley  of
Mina,  he  was  attracted  by  a  little  group  of  six  or  seven  men,
whom  he  recognised  as  strangers  from  Medina.^  '  Of  what
tribe  are  ye  ?^  said  he,  coming  up  and  kindly  accosting  them.
'  Of  the  tribe  of  Al-Khazraj,'  they  replied.  '  AJi  !  confederates
of  the  fews  ?'  *  We  are.'  *  Then,  why  not  sit  ye  down  for  a
little,  and  I  will  speak  with  you  ? '  The  offer  was  accepted
willingly,  for  the  fame  of  Mohammad  had  been  noised  abroad
in  Medina,  and  the  strangers  were  curious  to  see  more  of  the
man  who  had  created  such  turmoil  in  Mecca.  So  he  ex-
pounded to  them  his  doctrine,  asserted  the  warrant  of  a
divine  mission,  and,  after  setting  forth  the  difficulties  of  his
position  at  home,  asked  whether  they  would  receive  and
who  believe  protect  him  at  Medina.  '  Thy  teaching  we  commend,'  they
and  spread g^j^j i  ^^^  ^g  |-qj.  protecting  thee,  our  tribes  have  been  long

his  cause  in  '  r-  o  >  &

Medina  at  deadly  feud  among  ourselves  and  have  fought  great
battles.  If  thou  comest  to  us  thus,  we  may  be  unable  to  rally
round  thee.  Let  us,  we  pray  thee,  return  unto  our  people,  if
haply  the  Lord  will  create  peace  amongst  us ;  and  we  will
come  back  again  to  thee  at  this  set  time  next  year.'  So  they
returned  to  their  homes,  and  invited  their  people  to  the  faith  ;
and  many  believed,  so  that  there  remained  hardly  a  family
in  Medina  in  which  mention  was  not  made  of  the
Prophet.^
Settlement  ^^  ^^^  interest  of  our  story  will  now  in  great  measure

of  the  Jews  centre  in  Medina,  an  account  must  here  be  given  of  its  in-
habitants and  the  state  of  parties  there.  Arab  legend
peoples  northern  Arabia  in  ancient  days  with  Amalekites,
probably  Abrahamic  races  of  other  than  Israelitish  descent.
From  time  to  time,  these  were  supplanted  by  inroads  of  the
Jews.  The  sack  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  the
attack  of  Pompey  64  years  before  the  Christian  era,  with  that
of  Titus  70  years  after  it,  and  the  bloody  retribution  inflicted
by  Hadrian  on  Judea,  A.D.  136,  are  some  of  the  later  causes
1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  286  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1208  ff.
-  See  Introduction,  p.  civ  ff.


at  Medina


VI.]  NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  MEDINA  115

which  dispersed  the  Jews  and  drove  large  numbers  into
Arabia.  Such  may  have  been  the  three  tribes,  An-Nadir,
Koreiza,  and  Kainuka',  who,  finding  Medina  (the  ancient
Yatlirib)  weakly  peopled,  took  possession  of  the  city,
formed  settlements  in  its  neighbourhood,  and  built  for  them-
selves strong  castellated  houses  capable  of  resisting  armed
attack.

In  the  beginning  of  the  4th  century,  a  branch  of  those Supplanted
numerous  Arab  tribes,  which  (as  we  have  seen)  had  been ^^  ^'^^  ,
migratmg  from  the  Yemen  northwards  and  settlmg  on  the  Khazraj
Syrian border, gained a footing at Medina. They were
divided into  two  clans,  the  Aus  and the Khazraj. These
soon encroached upon the Jews ; and enmity  sprang up
between  them. Aided  by  their  Syrian  brethren,  and  having
treacherously  massacred the  leading  Jews assembled at a
banquet,  they  became  masters  of  Medina,  and  took  possession
of  the  richest  lands  around  it. Thus  established,  it  was  not  Discord
lonsr  before  the  Aus  and  the  Khazraj  fell  out  among  them- between

o  .  the  two

selves ;  and  in  the  beginning  of  the  6th  century  we  find  them  clans
in  a  state  of  chronic  enmity,  if  not  actual  warfare  with  each
other.  Four  or  five  years  previous  to  the  period  of  our
history,  hostilities  had  reached  a  crisis  between  them.  Each
was  reinforced  by  allies  from  other  Arab  tribes ;  ^  the  Jews
were  divided,  the  Beni  Koreiza  and  An-NadIr  siding  with
the  Aus,  Kainuka'  with  the  Khazraj.  In  the  year  616  A.D.
there  was  fought  the  great  battle  of  Bo'ath.  At  first  the  Aus
were  worsted  and  fled  ;  but  their  chief,  in  indignation,  pierced
himself  and  fell ;  and  at  the  sight,  stung  by  shame,  they
returned  to  the  charge  and  fought  so  bravely  that  they  dis-
persed the  Khazraj  with  great  slaughter.  They  burned  the
date  groves  of  their  enemy,  and  were  scarce  restrained  from
razing  their  fortified  houses  to  the  ground.

The  Khazraj  were  humbled  but  not  reconciled. No  open Abdallah
engagement  after  this  took  place,  but  numerous  assassina- "
tions  gave  token  from  time  to  time  of  hardly  suppressed  ill-
blood. Wearied  with the protracted  discord,  both  parties

^  Thus  a  deputation  from  the  Aus  sought  aid  from  Koreish  ;  but  they
declined  to  fight  against  the  Khazraj,  with  whom  some  (as  Mohammad's
own  family)  were  allied  by  marriage.  The  Prophet  is  said  to  have
addressed  this  embassy,  and  pressed  the  claims  of  his  mission  upon
them,  but  without  success.


Ii6


ISLAM  PLANTED  AT  MEDINA


[chap.


Medina
prepared
for  Islam


Internal
strife  neu-
tralised
fear  of
foreign
influence


were  about  to  take  'Abdallah  ibn  Obei,  a  distinguished
citizen  of  the  Khazraj,  as  their  chief.  This  man  had  resented
the  treacherous  murder  by  his  own  tribe  of  certain  Jewish
hostages  ;  he  had  taken  no  part  in  the  field  of  Bo'ath  ;  and  he
was  respected  by  both  factions.  But  his  bright  prospects
were  destined  to  be  eclipsed  by  the  rising  fortunes  of  the
stranger  driven  from  Mecca.

From  this  review  it  will  be  clear  that  the  success  at
Medina  of  Islam,  though  unexpected,  was  not  without  per-
ceptible cause.  There  was,  first,  the  vague  expectation,
derived  from  the  Jews,  of  a  coming  prophet.  When  the  Jews,
dividing  their  allegiance  between  the  Aus  and  Khazraj  clans,
used  to  fight  on  either  side,  they  would  say :  A  prophet  is
about  to  arise  ;  his  time  draweth  nigh.  Him  shall  we  follow  ;
and  then  tve  shall  slay  you  with  the  slaughter  of  the  ungodly
nations  of  old.  So  when  Mohammad  addressed  the  pilgrims
of  Medina  at  Mina,  they  spoke  one  with  another :  Know
surely  that  this  is  the  prophet  with  whom  the  Jews  are  ever
threate7iing  us  ;  wherefore  let  us  make  haste  and  be  the  first  to
join  him.  Such  is  the  Muslim  tradition,  and  there  is  truth,
no  doubt,  though  exaggerated  and  distorted,  in  it.  In  their
close  and  constant  intercourse  with  the  Arabs  of  Medina,  the
expectation  of  a  Messiah  must  in  some  form  or  other  have
been  communicated  by  the  Jews  to  their  heathen  neighbours.
Nor  could  the  people  live  in  daily  contact  with  a  race  pro-
fessing the  pure  theism  and  stern  morality  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment without  realising  its  practical  protest  against  the  errors
of  heathenism,  and  its  contrast  with  the  worship  of  the  one
true  God.  Moreover,  Medina  was  only  half  the  distance  of
Mecca  from  the  Christian  tribes  of  Syria ;  the  poet  Hassan
ibn  Thabit,  and  men  of  his  stamp  from  Medina,  used  to
frequent  the  Christian  court  of  the  Ghassanid  king  ;  and  thus
Christianity  as  well  as  Judaism  had  probably  wrought  a  more
powerful  effect  upon  the  social  condition  of  Medina  than  upon
any  other  part  of  the  Peninsula.  Again,  the  city  had  been
long  torn  by  internal  war.  The  recent  sanguinary  conflict  of
Bo'ath  had  weakened  and  humiliated  one  of  the  factions
without  materially  strengthening  the  other.  Assassination
succeeded  open  strife.  No  one  yet  appeared  bold  enough  to
seize  the  reins  of  government ;  the  citizens,  both  Arab  and
Jewish,  lived  in  uncertainty  and  suspense.  '  With  such  varied


VI.]


STATE  OF  PARTIES  THERE


"7


distractions,  the  advent  of  a  stranger  would  excite  but  little
jealousy  and  apprehension.

Such  was  the  position  of  Medina.  Its  people  addicted  to
the  superstition  of  Mecca,  yet  well  acquainted  with  a  purer
faith,  were  in  the  best  state  of  preparation  to  join  one  who
aimed  at  reforming  the  worship  of  the  Ka'ba.  Impressed
with  the  Jewish  anticipation  of  a  Messiah,  they  might  be
ready  to  recognise  in  Mohammad  the  coming  prophet.  A
city  wearied  with  faction  and  strife  would  cheerfully  admit
him  to  their  hospitality  as  a  refugee,  if  not  welcome  him  to
their  counsels  as  a  chief.  And  lastly,  the  politics  of  Mecca
and  the  ministry  of  the  Prophet  were  well  known  at  Medina.
Syrian  caravans  of  Koreish  not  unfrequently  halted  there.
Occasional  intermarriages  took  place  between  the  inhabitants
of  the  two  cities.  Moreover,  through  the  marriage  of  Hashim
with  a  lady  of  Medina,  Mohammad  himself  had  the  blood  of
the  Khazraj  in  his  veins ;  and  a  favourable  interest,  among
that  tribe  at  least,  was  thus  secured.  Abu  Keis,  a  famous
poet  of  Medina,  had  some  time  before  addressed  Koreish  in
verses  intended  to  dissuade  them  from  interference  with
Mohammad  and  the  new  religion.  The  Jews  were  already
acquainted  with  the  Prophet  as  a  zealous  supporter  of  their
Scriptures.  Parties  from  Medina  went  up  yearly  to  the
solemnities  of  the  Ka'ba.  Many  had  thus  come  under  the
direct  influence  of  his  preaching,  and  all  were  familiar  with
the  general  tenour  of  his  claims.  To  this  was  now  to  be
superadded  the  advocacy  of  actual  converts.^

^  We  find  notices  of  conversion  among  the  citizens  of  Medina  at  an
earlier  period,  but  none  well  substantiated.  Thus,  before  the  battle  of
Bo'ath,  when  a  deputation  visited  Mecca  seeking  for  auxiliaries,  we  are
told  that  'they  listened  to  Mohammad,  and  a  youth  of  their  number
declared  that  this  new  doctrine  was  far  better  than  the  errand  they  had
come  upon  ;  but  their  chief  cast  dust  upon  him,  saying  that  they  had
another  business  than  to  hear  such  things.'  The  youth,  killed  shortly
after  in  the  struggles  at  Medina,  died  a  true  Muslim.  Similarly,  Suweid,
a  Medina  poet,  repeated  to  the  Prophet  at  Mecca  the  Persian  tale  of
Lokman.  Mohammad,  saying  he  had  something  better  than  that,  recited
the  Kor'an  to  him.  The  poet  was  delighted  with  it;  'he  was  not  far
from  Islam,  and  some  said  that  he  died  a  Muslim.'

And  again:  'The  first  that  believed  at  Medina  were  As'ad  and
Dhakwan,  who  set  out  for  Mecca  to  contend  in  rivalry  with  'Otba  son  of
Rabi'a.  On  their  arrival,  'Otba  said  :  That  praying  felloiv  who  fancieth
himself  to  be  a  prophet,  hath  occupied  us  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other


Medina
prepared  to
accept
Mohammad


Its  inhabi-
tants famil-
iar with
his  claims


ii8


ISLAM  PLANTED  AT  MEDINA


[chap.


A  time  of
anxiety
and  sus-
pense,
A.D.  620


P'irst  pledge
of  the
'Akaba  by
men  of
Medina,
April,
A.D.  621


Spread  of
Islam  at
Medina,
A.D.  621


To  return  to  Mecca,  the  year  A.D.  620  was  to  Mohammad
one  of  expectation  and  anxiety.  Would  the  handful  of
Medina  converts  remain  steady  to  the  cause  ?  Would  they
succeed  in  winning  adherents  from  amongst  their  fellow-
citizens?  If  they  should  prove  unfaithful,  or  fail  of  success,
what  then  ?  He  might  be  forced  to  flee  to  Syria  or  Abys-
sinia ;  and  seek  refuge  at  some  Christian  court,  or  with  the
Ethiopian  Negus,  or  amongst  the  tribes  of  the  northern
desert.  Such  are  the  doubts  that  must  have  exercised  his
soul,  during  this  long  year  of  waiting.

The  days  of  pilgrimage  at  last  came  round,  and  Moham-
mad sought  the  appointed  spot,  in  a  narrow  sheltered  glen
near  Mina.^  His  apprehensions  were  at  once  dispelled ;  a
band  of  twelve  faithful  disciples  were  there  ready  to
acknowledge  him  their  prophet.  Ten  were  of  the  Khazraj,
and  two  of  the  Aus,  tribe.  They  plighted  their  faith  to
Mohammad  thus  :  '  We  will  not  worship  any  but  the  one  God ;
we  will  not  steals  neither  will  we  commit  adultery,  nor  kill  our
children  ;  we  will  not  slander  in  anywise  ;  nor  will  we  disobey
the  Prophet  in  anything  that  is  right!  This  was  afterwards
called  the  Pledge  of  Women,  because,  as  not  embracing  any
stipulation  to  defend  the  Prophet,  it  was  the  only  oath
required  of  the  female  sex.  When  the  twelve  had  taken  this
engagement,  Mohammad  replied:  ^  If  ye  fulfil  the  pledge.
Paradise  shall  be  your  reward.  He  that  shall  fail  in  any  part
thereof  to  God  belongeth  his  concern  either  to  punish  or  to
forgive!  The  memorable  proceeding  is  known  in  the  annals
of  Islam  as  THE  first  PLEDGE  OF  THE  'AKABA,  for  that  was
the  name  of  the  little  eminence  or  defile  whither  Mohammad
with  the  twelve  retired.  A  Mosque  still  marks  the  spot  hard
by  the  pilgrim  road.

The  twelve  were  now  committed  to  the  cause  of
Mohammad.  They  returned  to.  Medina  missionaries  of
Islam, again to report their success at the following

business.  Now  As'ad  used  to  converse  with  a  friend  at  Medina  about
the  unity  of  God.  When  Dhakwan,  therefore,  heard  this  saying  of
'Otba,  he  exclaimed  :  Listoi,  O  As\id !  this  must  be  thy  religion.  So
they  went  straight  to  Mohammad,  who  expounded  to  them  Islam,  and
they  both  believed.  On  their  return  to  Medina,  As'ad  related  to  his
friend  what  had  passed,  and  he  said :  /  too  am  a  believer  with  thee.'
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  146.

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  288  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  121 1  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  147  f.


VI.]  FIRST  PLEDGE  OF  AL-'AKABA  119

pilgrimage.  So  prepared  was  the  ground,  and  so  zealous
the  propagation,  that  the  new  faith  spread  rapidly  from
house  to  house  and  from  tribe  to  tribe.  The  Jews  looked  on
in  amazement.  The  people  whom  for  generations  they  had
vainly  endeavoured  to  convince  of  the  errors  of  heathenism
were  now  of  their  own  accord  casting  their  idols  to  the  moles
and  to  the  bats,  and  professing  belief  in  the  one  true  God.
The  secret  lay  in  the  adaptation  of  the  instrument.  Judaism,
foreign  in  its  birth,  touched  no  Arab  sympathies ;  Islam,
engrafted  on  the  faith  and  superstition,  the  customs  and  the
nationality  of  the  Peninsula,  found  ready  access  to  the  heart.

The leaders in the movement soon found themselves Mus'ab
unable  to  keep  pace  with  its  rapid  spread. So  they  wrote to  mstruct
to  Mohammad  for  a  teacher,  able  to  recite  the  Kor'an,  and converts  at
instruct  inquirers  in  the  faith. The  young  disciple  Mus'ab,
who  had  lately  returned  from  exile  in  Abyssinia,  was  deputed
for that purpose. He lodged at Medina  with As'ad ibn
Zurara,  who  had  been  already  in  the  habit  of  gathering  the
converts together  for prayer and reading of  the  Kor'an.^

'  Mus'ab  will  be  remembered  as  the  youth  whose  pathetic  interview
with  his  mother  has  been  before  described.  In  course  of  time  others
were  sent  for  the  same  purpose,  and  among  them  the  blind  'Abdallah
ibn  Um  Mektum,  see  ante^  p.  65.

The  following  narrative  (though  of  doubtful  authority)  will  illustrate
the  manner  in  which  Islam  was  propagated  at  Medina  :  'As'ad  and
Mus'ab  visited  the  quarter  of  the  Aus,  and,  entering  one  of  their  gardens,
sat  down  by  a  well,  where  a  company  of  believers  gathered  round  them.
Now  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh  and  Oseid,  chief  men  of  the  tribe,  heard  of  the
gathering  at  the  well,  and  Sa'd  unwilling  himself  to  interfere  (being
related  to  As'ad)  bade  Oseid  go  and  disperse  them  Oseid  seized  his
weapons,  and  hurrying  to  the  spot,  abused  them.  What  brings  you  two
here  ajnongst  us,  he  said,  to  uiislead  our  youths  arid  silly  folk  ?  Begone,
if  ye  have  any  care  for  your  lives.  Mus'ab  disarmed  his  wrath  by
courteously  inviting  him  to  sit  down  and  listen.  Then  Oseid  stuck  his
spear  into  the  ground  and  seated  himself;  and  as  he  listened,  he  was
charmed  with  what  he  heard  and  forthwith  embraced  Islam.  And  he
said:  "there  is  another  beside  me,  even  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh,  whom  I  will
send  to  you  ;  if  you  can  gain  him  over,  there  will  not  be  one  in  his  tribe
left  unconverted."  So  he  departed  and  sent  Sa'd,  and  Mus'ab  persuaded
him  in  like  manner.  So  Sa'd  returned  to  his  tribe  and  swore  that  he
would  not  speak  to  man  or  woman  who  did  not  acknowledge  Mohammad.
So  great  was  his  influence  that  by  the  evening  every  one  of  his  clan  was
converted.' Ibn  Hisham,  p  291.

There  is  a  story  of  an  aged  chief  who,  like  others  at  Medina,  had  an


120  ISLAM  PLANTED  AT  MEDINA  [chap.  vi.

The  devotions  of  the  Aus  and  the  Khazraj  tribes  were  now
conducted  together  by  the  earnest  missionary  ;  for  even  in
such  a  matter  the  rival  clans  were  impatient  of  a  common
leader  from  amongst  themselves.  So  speedily,  without  let
or  hindrance,  did  Islam  grow  and  take  firm  root  at  Medina,
and  thus  unexpectedly  were  the  people  prepared  for  a
greater  demonstration  at  the  next  time  of  pilgrimage.^

image  in  his  house.  This  image  the  young  converts  used  to  cast  every
night  into  a  filthy  well,  and  the  old  man  as  regularly  cleansed  it ;  till,
one  day,  they  tied  it  to  a  dead  dog  and  cast  it  into  the  well ;  whereupon
he  abandoned  his  image  and  believed.

^  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  148  ;  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  289. [Ibn  Ishak  says  Mohammad
sent  Mus'ab  of  his  own  accord]


CHAPTER  VII

SPREAD OF ISLAM AT MEDINA. THE HIJRA, OR FLIGHT
TO THAT CITY

^TAT. 52-53. A.D. 621-622

The hopes of  Mohammad were  now  fixed  upon  Medina. The  mid-
Visions of the north flitted before his imagination and mghtjour-

°  ney  to

carried  him  onwards  to  the  Holy  Land.  It  was  thus  that  Jerusalem
the  famous  romance  of  the  heavenly  journey  was  enacted  in  ^"'^  Heaven
this  expectant  period.  Jerusalem  had  been  long  regarded
by  the  Prophet  with  the  utmost  veneration ;  and,  indeed,
until  his  breach  with  the  Jews  at  Medina,  the  Temple
remained  his  Kibla^  or  place  towards  which  at  each
stated  genuflexion  he  turned  to  pray.  Now,  even  in  his
dreams  his  thoughts  were  veering  northward.  The  musings
of  the  day  reappeared  in  the  slumbers  of  the  night.  He
dreamed  that  he  was  swiftly  carried  by  Gabriel  on  a
winged  steed  past  Medina  to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  where
a  conclave  of  the  ancient  Prophets  met  to  welcome  him.  His
excited  spirit  conjured  up  a  still  more  transcendent  scerie.
From  Jerusalem  he  mounted  upwards,  ascending  from  one
heaven  to  another,  till  at  last,  reaching  the  seventh,  he  found
himself  in  the  awful  presence  of  his  Maker,  and  was
dismissed  with  the  behest  that  his  people  were  to  prostrate
themselves  in  prayer  five  times  in  the  day.  When  he  awoke
next  morning  in  the  house  of  Abu  Talib,  the  vision  was  still
before  him  with  all  the  freshness  of  reality  ;  and  he  exclaimed
to  the  daughter  of  Abu  Talib  that  during  the  night  he  had
performed  his  devotions  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem.^  He
was  going  forth  to  make  the  vision  known,  when  she  seized
him  by  the  mantle,  and  conjured  him  not  thus  to  expose
^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  263  fl".  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  142  flF.

121


122


SPREAD  OF  ISLAM  AT  MEDINA


[chap,


The  vision
embellished
by  tradition


Only  notice
of  it  in  the
Kor'an

Sura  xviis  i


Mohammad

watches

struggle

between

Persia

and  Roman

empire


His  sym-
pathies
with  Hera-
clius  ;  fore-
tells victory
of  Greeks


himself  to  the  derision  of  the  unbelievers.  But  he  persisted.
As  the  story  spread  abroad,  unbelievers  scoffed,  and  believers
were  staggered  ;  some  are  even  said  to  have  gone  back.
But  Abu  Bekr,  who  supported  the  Prophet,  declared  his
implicit  belief  in  the  journey  as  a  simple  matter  of  fact ;  and
in  the  end  the  cause  suffered  no  material  harm.  Tradition
decks  out  the  tale  in  gorgeous  drapery ;  and,  upon  the  rock
over  which  the  Mosque  of  'Omar  in  Jerusalem  stands,  there  is
still  shown  the  print  of  the  Prophet's  foot  as  he  vaulted  from
it  upon  his  winged  steed.  It  is,  indeed,  a  congenial  theme
for  which  tradition  has  given  loose  rein  to  pious  and  excited
imagination.  But  the  only  mention  of  the  journey  in  the
Kor'an  is  in  the  following  verse : —

Praise  be  to  Him  who  by  night  carried  His  servant  from  the  sacred
Temple  at  Mecca  to  the  farther  Temple  the  environs  of  which  We  have
blessed,  that  We  might  show  him  some  of  Our  signs.  Verily  He  it  is
that  heareth  and  seeth.

The  political  events  in  the  north  had  long  engaged  the
attention  of  Mohammad.  The  prospect  of  finding  a  home  in
Medina,  and  moving  closer  to  the  Syrian  border,  quickened
his  interest  in  the  fortunes  of  the  Byzantine  empire.  For
several  years  the  arms  of  Persia  had  been  turned  successfully
against  the  Grecian  frontier.  The  Bedawi  tribes,  who  used
to  oscillate  between  one  dominion  and  the  other  according
to  the  fortune  of  war,  were  the  first  to  fall  into  the  hands  of
Persia.  Syria  was  ravaged ;  Jerusalem  sacked ;  Egypt  and
Asia  Minor  overrun.  The  enemy  advanced  upon  the
Bosphorus,  and  a  Persian  camp  was  pitched  above  ten  years
almost  within  sight  of  Constantinople.  About  the  time  of
the  first  Pledge  of  the  'Akaba,  A.D.  621,  when  the  fortunes  of
Byzantium  were  at  their  lowest  ebb,  Heraclius  was  roused
from  his  ignoble  slumber,  and  after  several  years  of  arduous
conflict,  rolled  back  the  invasion,  and  totally  discomfited  the
Persians.

In  this  struggle,  the  sympathies  and  hopes  of  Mohammad
were  on  the  Kaiser's  side.  Christianity  was  a  divine  faith
which  might  coalesce  with  Islam ;  but  the  fire-worship  and
superstitions  of  Persia  were  repugnant  to  his  views  It  was
while  the  career  of  Persian  conquest  was  yet  unchecked,  that
Mohammad,  in  the  30th  Sura,  uttered  this  sagacious
augury : —


ristianity


VII.]  RELATIONS  WITH  CHRISTIANITY  123

The  Greeks  have  been  smitten  Suraxxx.  i  £f.

In  the  neighbouring  coasts  ;

But,  after  their  defeat,  they  shall  again  be  victorious.
In  a  few  years. To  GOD  belongeth  the  matter  from  before,  and  after ;

and,  in  that  day,  the  Believers  shall  rejoice
In  the  aid  of  God.

He  aideth  whom  He  chooseth  ;  the  GLORIOUS,  the  Merciful.
It  is  the promise  of  GOD,  who  changeth  not  His  promise  ; but  the

greater  part  of  mankind  know  it  not.*

And  the  prophecy,  as  we  have  seen,  was  justified  by  the  event.

About  this  period,  with  his  increasing  interest  in  the  Roman  Relations
empire,  INIohammad  must  have  gained,  either  from  Christian  p!j
slaves  at  Mecca,^  the  neighbouring  fairs,  or  from  fragments
of  the  Gospels  copied  by  Waraka  or  others,  some  acquaint-
ance with  the  outlines  of  our  Saviour's  life.  As  will  appear
in  the  Siiras  cited  in  this  chapter,  he  never  showed  the
same  interest  in  the  Christian  as  in  the  Jewish  faith,  nor
indeed  had  he  the  same  means  of  learning  its  history  and
doctrines.  His  treatment  of  Christianity  is  mainly  confined
to  the  narration,  often  in  the  very  words  of  the  Evangelist,
but  in  the  ordinary  legendary  style,  of  a  few  passages
connected  with  the  birth  and  life  of  Jesus,  whom  he  acknow-
ledged as  the  last  and  greatest  of  the  Jewish  prophets,  but
whose  Sonship  he  strenuously  denied.  At  the  same  time)
his  attitude  towards  Christianity  was  just  as  favourable  as  it
was  towards  Judaism  ;  nor  was  his  intercourse  with  its
professors  at  any  period  embittered  by  such  causes  as  after-
wards led  to  hostilities  with  the  Jews.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  his  relations  with  the  Christian  faith  never  advanced
materially  beyond  the  point  at  which  we  find  them  now
stated  in  the  Kor'an  ;  and,  in  point  of  fact,  if  we  except  one
or  two  campaigns  against  distant  Christian  tribes,  and  the
reception  of  embassies  from  them,  he  came  throughout  his
life  into  little  personal  contact  with  the  professors  of  the
faith  of  Jesus.

1  The  word  'few,'  used  here,  ordinarily  signifies  from  3  to  10.  The
commentators  add  a  very  apt  story  in  illustration.  Abu  Bekr,  on  this
passage  appearing,  laid  a  wager  of  ten  camels  with  Obei  ibn  Khalaf,  that
the  Persians  would  be  beaten  within  three  years.  Mohammad  desired
him  to  extend  the  period  to  nine  years,  and  to  raise  the  stake.  This
Abu  Bekr  did,  and  in  due  time  won  one  hundred  camels  from  Obei's
heirs. Al-Beidawi,  loc.  cit.

•  As  Soheib  ;  see  above  p.  66.


124


SPREAD  OF  ISLAM  AT  MEDINA


[chap.


A  lull  at
Mecca


Sura  vi.
lo6ff.


Moham-
mad's con-
tinued assur-
ance of
success


Sura  xxi.
41,  42


There  was  now  a  lull  at  Mecca.  Mohammad  despaired,
by  the  simple  influence  of  preaching  and  persuasion,  of
further  progress  there.  His  eye  was  fixed  upon  Medina,
and  he  waited  patiently  until  succour  should  come  from
thence.  Meanwhile,  Islam  was  for  the  present  no  longer  to
be  aggressive.  And  Koreish,  congratulating  themselves  that
their  enemy  had  tried  his  worst  and  now  was  harmless,
relaxed  their  vigilance  and  opposition.  For  this  new  course
divine  authority  was  at  hand  : —

Follow  that  which  hath  been  revealed  unto  thee  from  thy  Lord  ; — there

is  no  God  but  he  ; — and  retire  from  the  idolaters.
If  God  had  so  desired,  they  had  not  followed  idolatry  ;  and  We  have  not

made  thee  a  keeper  over  them,  neither  art thou unto them a

guardian.
Revile  not  those  whom  they  invoke  besides  God,  lest  they  revile  God  in

enmity,  from  lack  of  knowledge.
Thus  have  We  rendered  attractive  unto  every  people  their  own  doings  ;

then  unto  the  Lord
Shall  be  their  return,  and  He  shall  declare  unto  them  that  which  they

have  wrought.^

But  with  this  cessation  of  aggressive  measures  there  was
no  wavering  of  principle,  nor  any  distrust  of  eventual  success.
A  calm  and  lofty  front  w^as  maintained  of  superiority,  and
even  of  defiance.  Eventual  success,  in  spite  of  present
discouragement,  was  clear  and  assured.  The  whole  tenour
of  the  Revelation  at  this  period  is  marked  by  quietness  and
confidence,  and  therein  for  the  present  lay  the  Prophet's
strength.  To  all  his  apostles  of  old  the  Lord  had  given  the
victory,  and  he  would  give  the  same  to  Mohammad  : —

We  shall  hurl  the  Truth  against  that  which  is  false  and  it  shall  shiver  it,

and lo,  the  False shall vanish  ; — Woe unto  you  for  that

which  ye  imagine !  * * *

Vengeance shall fall suddenly upon them. It shall confound them.

They  shall  not  be  able  to  oppose  it,  neither  shall  they  be

respited.
Verily,  Apostles  before  thee  have  been  mocked  ;  but  they  that  laughed

them  to  scorn  were  encompassed  by  the  vengeance  which

they  mocked  at. * * *

'  The  Opposition  begin  to  be  termed  '  the  Confederates '  (Sura  xi.),
and  they  are  thus  contrasted  with  the  Muslims:  'The  likeness  of  the
two  Parties  is  as  the  blind  and  the  deaf,  compared  with  him  that  hath
both  sight  and  hearing.  What  !  are  these  equal  in  resemblance  ?  Ah  1
do  ye  not  comprehend.'"


VII.]


CONFIDENT  ATTITUDE  OF  MOHAMMAD


125


The  unbelieving  people  said  unto  their  Apostles — We  will  surely  expel Sura  xiv.

you  from  our  land,  or  ye  shall  return  to  our  religion. Then i^ff-.  47i48

their  Lord  spake  by  revelation unto  them,  saying; — Verily

We  shall  destroy  the  tnijust.
And  We  shall  cause  you  to  inherit  the  land  after  them; — this  shall  be  for

him  that  feareth  My  appearing  and  feareth  My  threatening.
So  they  asked  assistance  of  the  Lord,  and  every  tyrant  and  rebellious

one  was  destroyed.  *  *  *

Verily,  they  have  devised evil devices  ; but  their devices  are  in  the

hands  of  God,  even  if  their  devices  could  cause  the  mountains

to  pass  away.
Wherefore  think  not  thou  that God will work at  variance with his

promise  which  He  made  unto  his  Apostles. Verily  the  Lord

is  mighty,  and  a  God  of  vengeance.

A  dearth  fell  upon  Mecca  ; — it  was  a  punishment  from
God  because  the  people  had  rejected  his  Messenger.  Relief
at  length  came ;  it  was  intended  to  try  whether  the  goodness
of  God  would  not  lead  them  to  repentance.  If  they  still
hardened  their  hearts,  a  more  fearful  fate  was  denounced,^
That  tenfold  vengeance  would  overtake  the  people  if  they
continued  to  reject  the  truth,  Mohammad believed surely.

^  There  are  no  very  distinct  traditions  regarding  this  visitation  ;  but
the  notices  of  it  in  the  Kor'an  are  so  clear  and  distinct  as  to  allow  no
doubt  that  some  afifliction  of  the  kind  did  occur,  and  was  attributed  by
Mohammad  to  the  divine  vengeance  : —

And  if  We  have  mercy  upon  them  and  withdraw  the  affliction  that  befell
them,  then  they  plunge  into  their  wickedness,  wandering  wildly.

And  verily  We  visited  them  with  affliction,  and  they  humbled  not  themselves
before  their  Lord,  nor  made  supplication  : —

Until,  when  We  open  unto  them  a  door  of  severe  punishment,  lo  !  they  are
in  despair  thereat.

This  punishment  the  commentators  refer  to  the  discomfiture  at  Bedr,
but  that  would  be  an  anachronism. Again  : —

And  when  We  made  the  people  to  taste  mercy,  after  affliction  befell  them. Sura  x.  22-
lo  !  they  devise  deceit  against  Our  Signs. SAY,  God  is  more  swift  in 24
stratagem  than  ye  ;  Verily  Our  Messengers  write  down  that  which  ye
devise.

It  is  He  that  maketh  you  travel  by  land  and  by  water,  so  that  when  ye  are  in
ships  and  sail  in  them  with  a  fair  breeze,  they  rejoice  thereat.

A  fierce  storm  overtaketh  them,  and  the  waves  come  upon  them  from  every
side,  and  they  think  that  verily  they  are  closed  in  thereby  ;  then  they
call  upon  God,  rendering  unto  Him  pure  service,  and  saying,  If  Thou
savest  lis  from  this,  we  shall  verily  be  amongst  the  grateful.

But  when  He  hath  saved  them,  behold  !  they  work  evil  in  the  earth  unright-
eouslj'.  Oh  ye  people,  verily  your  evil  working  is  against  your  own
souls,  &c.


Judgments
threatened
against
Mecca  :


Which  Mo-
hammad
might  or
might  not
behold


Sura  xxiii.
77-79


126


SPREAD  OF  ISLAM  AT  MEDINA


[chap.


Sura  xliii,
39-41


Sublime
spectacle
presented
by  Moham-
mad


Sura  xi.  122
Sura  XX.  135


Authority
assumed
over  fol-
lowers


He  might  not  live  to  see  it ; but  the decree  of  God  was
unchangeable : —

What !  canst  thou  make  the  deaf  to  hear,  or  guide  the  blind,  or  him  that

is  wandering  widely  ?
Wherefore, whether We  take thee away, verily We will pour our

vengeance  upon  them, —
Or,  whether  We  cause  thee  to  see  that  which  We  have  threatened  them

with,  verily  We  are  all  powerful  over  them.
Therefore  hold  fast  that  which  hath  been  revealed  unto  thee,  for  thou  art

in  the  straight  path.^

Mohammad  thus  holding  his  people  at  bay ;  waiting  in
the  still  expectation  of  victory ;  to  outward  appearance
defenceless,  and  with  his  little  band  as  it  were  in  the  lion's
mouth  ;  yet  trusting  in  His  almighty  power  whose  Messenger
he  believed  himself  to  be,  resolute  and  unmoved ;  presents  a
spectacle  of  sublimity  paralleled  only  by  such  scenes  in  the
Sacred  Records  as  that  of  the  prophet  of  Israel  when  he  com-
plained to  his  Master,  *  I,  even  I  only,  am  left'  Nay,  the
spectacle  is  in  one  point  of  view  even  more  amazing  ;  for  the
prophets  of  old  were  upheld  (as  we  may  suppose)  by  the  pre-
vailing consciousness  of  a  divine  inspiration,  and  strengthened
by  the  palpable  demonstrations  of  miraculous  power;  while
with  the  Arabian,  his  recollection  of  former  doubts,  and  con-
fessed inability  to  work  any  miracle,  may  at  times  have  cast
across  him  a  shadow  of  uncertainty.  It  is  this  which  brings
if  possible  into  still  bolder  prominence  the  marvellous  self-
possession  and  enthusiasm  which  sustained  Mohammad  on  his
course.  '  Say  unto  the  Unbelievers,'  such  was  the  reiterated
message  from  on  high,  '  Work  ye  in  your  place.  Wait  in
expectation  ;  We  too  in  expectancy  are  waiting!  And  again  :
'  Say,  Each  of  us  awaitetJi  the  issue ;  wait  therefore.  Here-
after ye  shall  surely  know  who  they  are  that  have  chosen  the
straight  path,  and  who  hath  been  guided  aright!

Mohammad's  bearing  towards  his  followers,  no  less  than
towards  his  opponents,  exhibits  the  assurance  of  being  the
vicegerent  of  God  and  the  exponent  of  His  will.  His
name is now  associated  with the Deity  in  the  symbol  of

1  There  are  many  other  passages  in  the  Suras  of  this  period  to  the
same  effect;  thus:  'Wherefore  persevere  patiently,  for  the  promise  of
God  is  true,  whether  We  cause  thee  to  see  some  part  of  that  wherewith
We  have  threatened  them,  or  cause  thee  first  to  die  ;  and  unto  Us  shall
they  return.' — Sura  xl.  77.


VII.]


EXPECTATION  OF  DIVINE  ASSISTANCE


127


faith  ;  ^  and  obedience  to  God  and  Ids  Apostle  becomes  the
watchword  of  Islam.  '  Whosoever  disobeyeth  GoD  AND  liis
Prophet,  for  him  is  prepared  the  fire  of  Hell ;  they  shall
remain  therein  for  ever  ! '  ^

The  confidence  in  his  inspiration  is  sometimes  ex-
pressed with  imprecations,  which  one  cannot  read  without  a

shudder: —

I  swear  by  that  which  ye  see,
And  by  that  which  ye  see  not,
That  this  is  verily  the  speech  of  an  honourable  Apostle  !
It  is  not  the  speech  of  a  Poet  ;  little  is  it  ye  believe  !
Neither  is  it  the  speech  of  a  Soothsayer ;  little  is  it  ye  reflect !

It  is  a  Revelation  from  the  Lord  of  creation.
And  if  he  (Mohammad)  had  said  concerning  Us  any  sayings  of  his  own,
Verily  We  had  caught  him  by  the  right  hand  ;
Then  had  We  cut  asunder  the  artery  of  his  neck,^
Neither  had  there  been  among  you  any  to  hinder  therefrom.
But  verily  it  is  an  Admonition  to  the  pious.
And  truly  We  know  that  there  are  amongst  you  those  who  belie  the

same  ;
But  it  shall  only  cause  sighing  unto  the  Unbelievers,

For  it  is  the  truth  ;— the  CERTAIN  !
Therefore  praise  the  name  of  thy  Lord, — the  GLORIOUS  !

*  'There  is  no  God  but  the  Lord,  and  Mohammad  is  His  Prophet.'
There  is  nothing,  however,  to  show  when  the  creed  assumed  this  precise
form.

^  Sura  Ixxii.  v.  24.  The  sequel  is  singular ;  God  sends  a  guard  to
attend  his  Prophet  to  see  that  the  message  is  duly  delivered,  as  if  there
were  reason  to  doubt  his  fidelity  in  this  respect : —

When  they  see  the  vengeance  they  were  threatened  with,  then  they shall

know  who  were  the  weaker  in  succour,  and  the  fewer  in  number.
Say  I know  not  whether  that  which ye  are  threatened  with be near, or

whether  my  Lord  shall  appoint  for  it  a  set  term.
He  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the  future,  and  He  unveileth  not  His  secrets

unto  any, —
Except  it  be  to  an  Apostle  that  pleaseth  Him  ;  and  He  maketh  a  guard  to

march  before  him,  and  behind  him  ;
That  He  may  know  that  they  have  delivered  the  messages  of  their  Lord.

In  further  illustration  of  the  text,  see  Sura  Ixiv.  v.  8:  'Wherefore
believe  in  GOD  and  his  Apostle,  and  the  light  which  We  have  sent
down.'  And  again  :  'And  obey  God  a?td  obey  the  Apostle; — but  if  ye
turn  back,  verily  our  Apostle  hath  only  to  deliver  his  message.'  Thence-
forward the  expression  becomes  common.

3  Commentators  observe  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  mode  of  execution
still  practised  in  the  East  ;  the  executioner  seizes  the  victim  by  the  right
hand,  while  with  a  sharp  sword  he  aims  a  blow  at  the  back  of  the  neck,
and  detaches  the  head  at  a  stroke.


Oaths  that
his  revela-
tion is  not
fabricated
Sura  Ixix.
SSflf.


128


SPREAD  OF  ISLAM  AT  MEDINA


[chap.


Straitened
means


Sura  XX.  v.
131  f.


Preparations
for  Second
Pledge  of
Al-'Akaba,
March,  A.D.
622


Mus'ab
reports
success  to
Mohammad


Arrange-
ments for
meeting  by
night  at
close  of
pilgrimage


it  would  seem  as  if  the  difficulties  of  the  Prophet  were
at  this  period  aggravated  by  straitened  means.  Though
supported,  no  doubt,  by  help  from  his  relatives  and  followers,
there  was  yet  ground  for  misgiving  and  anxiety.  The  divine
promise  reassures  him  in  such  terms  as  these : —

And  cast  not  thine  eyes  on  the  provision  We  have  made  for  divers
among  them,  the  show  of  this  present  life,  that  We  may  prove
them  thereby ;  for  the  provision  of  the  Lord  is  better  and  more
lasting.

And  command  thy  Family  to  observe  prayer,  and  persevere  therein  :  We
ask  thee  not  to  labour  for  a  provision  ;  We  will  provide  for  thee,  and
a  prosperous  issue  shall  attend  on  piety.

Thus  another  year  passed  away  in  comparative  tran-
quillity, and  the  month  of  pilgrimage,  when  the  Medina
converts  were  again  to  rally  around  the  Prophet,  drew  nigh.^
Messages  and  reports  of  the  amazing  success  of  Islam  had  no
doubt  reached  Mohammad ;  but  he  could  hardly  have  been
prepared  for  the  enthusiastic  numbers  ready  to  crowd  to  his
standard,  and  swear  allegiance  to  him  as  prophet  and  master.
But  the  occasion  was  critical,  and  it  was  necessary  to  proceed
with  caution.  Koreish,  if  aware  of  the  hostile  confederacy —
hostile  because  pledged  to  support  a  faction  in  their  com-
munity— would  have  good  ground  for  umbrage ;  the  sword
might  prematurely  be  unsheathed,  and  the  cause  of  Islam
endangered.  The  movement,  therefore,  was  conducted  with
the  utmost  secrecy.  Even  the  great  body  of  Medina  pilgrims,
in  whose  company  the  converts  travelled,  were  unaware  of
their  object.  Mus'ab,  the  teacher  sent  to  Medina,  who  accom-
panied the  pilgrim  party,  immediately  on  his  arrival  repaired
to  Mohammad  and  related  all  that  happened  at  his  new  scene
of  labour.  The  Prophet  rejoiced  greatly  when  he  heard  of
the  numbers  of  the  converts,  and  their  eagerness  in  the
service  of  Islam.

To  elude  the  scrutiny  of  the  citizens  the  meeting  between
Mohammad  and  his  new  adherents  was  to  be  by  night ;  and
that  the  strangers,  in  case  suspicion  were  aroused,  might  be  as
soon  as  possible  beyond  reach  of  their  enemies,  the  time  was
deferred  to  the  close  of  the  pilgrimage  when,  the  ceremonies
and  sacrifices  being  finished,  the  multitude  would  on  the
following  morning  disperse  to  their  homes.  The  spot  was  to
'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  293  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1217  fif.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  148  f.


VII.]


SECOND  PLEDGE  OF  AL-'AKABA


129


be  the  same  secluded  glen  of  Al-'Akaba,  outside  Mina,  where
the  men  of  Medina  had  met  Mohammad  before.  They  were
to  move  thither  cautiously,  after  all  had  retired  to  rest ; —
•waking  not  the  sleeper,  nor  tarrying  for  the  absent'

An  hour  or  two  before  midnight,  Mohammad,  attended
only  by  his  uncle  Al-'Abbas,  repaired  to  the  rendezvous,  the
first  of  the  party.  To  secure  the  greater  secrecy,  the  intended
meeting  had  been  kept  profoundly  hidden  even  from  his  own
followers  at  Mecca.^  Al-'Abbas,  the  wealthiest  of  the  sons  of
Abd  al-Muttalib,  was  weak  in  character,  and  ordinarily  sailed
with  wind  and  tide.  He  was  not  a  convert ;  but  near  rela-
tionship, and  the  close  community  of  interest  created  by  three
years'  confinement  with  Mohammad  and  his  followers  in  the
isolated  quarter  of  Abu  Talib,  rendered  him  sufficiently  trust-
worthy on  the  present  occasion.

They  had  not  long  to  wait.  Soon  the  converts  from  Me-
dina, singly  and  by  twos  and  threes,  were  descried  through
the  moonlight  moving  stealthily  along  the  stony  valley  and
barren  rocks  towards  the  spot.  They  were  73  in  all  (62  of
the  Khazraj,  1 1  of  the  Aus)  with  two  women,  and  included
the  twelve  converts  who  had  before  met  the  Prophet  there.
When  all  were  seated,  Al-'Abbas,  in  a  low  voice,  broke  silence
by  a  speech  something  to  this  effect : — Ye  men  of  the
Khazraj  !  -  This  my  kinsman  dwelleth  amongst  us  in
honour  and  in  safety.  His  clan  will  defend  him — both
those  that  are  converts,  and  those  that  still  hold  to  their
ancestral  faith ;  defend  him  to  the  last.  But  he  preferreth
to  seek  protection  from  you.  Wherefore,  ye  Khazrajites,
consider  the  matter  well,  and  count  the  cost.  If  ye  be  re-
solved, and  are  able  to  defend  him,  then  give  the  pledge.
But  if  you  doubt  your  ability,  at  once  abandon  the  design.'

Then  spoke  Al-Bara,  an  aged  chief:  'We  have  listened
to  thy  words.  Our  resolution  is  unshaken.  Our  lives  are  at
the  Prophet's  service. It  is  now  for  him  to  speak.'

Mohammad  began,  as  was  his  wont,  by  reciting  passages

'  Or  if  they  were  admitted  to  the  secret,  they  were  instructed  not  to
be  present,  the  less  to  excite  suspicion.  Even  Mus'ab  appears  not  to
have  accompanied  the  Medina  converts  ;  for  we  are  told  that  'there  was
no  one  with  Mohammad  besides  Al-'Abbils.'

-  The  people  of  Medina,  both  of  the  Aus  and  Khazraj  tribes,  used  to
be  addressed  collectively  as  Al-Khazraj.


Mohammad
and  Al-
'Abbas
proceed  at
midnight  to
the  spot


Joined  by
the  Medina
converts


Speech  of
Al-'Abbas  ;


and  of  Al-
Bara


Address  of
Mohammad


I30  SPREAD  OF  ISLAM  AT  MEDINA  [chap.

from  the  Kor'an ;  he  invited  all  present  to  the  service  of  God,
and  dwelt  upon  the  claims  and  blessings  of  Islam ;  then
coming  to  the  business  of  the  night,  he  ended  by  saying  that
he  should  be  content  if  the  strangers  pledged  themselves
to  defend  him  as  they  would  defend  their  wives  and  children.
At  once,  from  every  quarter,  arose  a  confused,  tumultuous
noise ;  it  was  the  eager  voices  of  the  '  Seventy '  testifying
their  readiness  to  take  the  pledge,  and  protesting  that  they
would  receive  and  defend  the  Prophet  even  at  the  cost  of  life
and  property.  Then  A1-' Abbas,  holding  his  nephew's  hand,
called  aloud :  '  Hush !  There  may  be  spies  abroad.  Let
your  men  of  years  stand  forth,  and  speak  on  your  behalf.  Of
a  truth,  we  are  fearful  for  your  safety  if  our  people  should
discover  us.  Then  when  you  have  plighted  your  faith  depart
silently  to  your  camp.'  So  their  chief  men  stood  forth.
Then  said  Al-Bara  :  '  Stretch  out  thy  hand,  O  Mohammad  ! '
He  stretched  it  out ;  and  Al-Bara  struck  his  hand  thereon,  as
the  manner  was  in  taking  oath  of  fealty.  The  Seventy  came
forward  one  by  one,  and  did  the  same.^  Then  Mohammad
Second  named  twelve  of  the  chief  men,  and  said  :  Moses  chose  from

APAkaba  amongst  Jiis  people  tzvelve  leaders.  Thus  shall  ye  be  the  leaders
and  sureties  for  the  rest,  even  as  the  apostles  of  fesus  were  ;  and
I  am  the  surety  for  my  people.  They  answered,  'Be  it  so.'^
At  this  moment  the  voice  of  one  crying  aloud,  a  straggler
perchance,  searching  for  his  company,  was  heard  at  hand.
Excited  fancy  conjured  up  a  Koreishite  if  not  an  infernal
spy.^ Mohammad  gave  command,  and  the  assembly  dispers-

^  The  women  repeated  only  the  words  of  the  pledge  taken  by  the
Twelve  in  the  former  year.  Mohammad  never  took  women  by  the  hand
on  such  an  occasion  ;  they  used  to  step  forward  and  recite  the  prescribed
words,  and  then  he  would  say,  '  Go  :  you  have  pledged  yourselves.'

Al-Bara,  who  bore  here  so  conspicuous  a  part,  died  the  following
month.  He  was  the  first  over  whose  grave  Mohammad  prayed  in  the
formula  usual  afterwards  :  O  Lord,  pardon  Him  !  Be  merciful  unto  him  !
Be  reconciled  unto  Jiim  !  and  verily  thou  art  reconciled.

2  Naklb,  '  Leader,'  is  the  term  which  ever  after  honourably  marked
the  Twelve.  Four  were  of  the  number  who  had  met  Mohammad  here
before.  Three  were  of  the  Aus  tribes  ;  the  rest,  Khazrajites.  Several
are  mentioned  as  able  to  zvrife  Arabic,  and  as  Kd/nil  (perfect),  i.e.  expert
in  writing,  archery,  and  swimming.

^  We  are  told  that  when  the  ceremony  was  ended,  the  devil  called
out  with  a  loud  voice  :  Ye  people  of  Mecca  !  Have  ye  no  concern  for
Mohammad  and  his  renegades  ? They  have  counselled  zuar  agai?ist  you.


VII.]  SUSPICIONS  OF  KOREISH  131

ing  hurried  back  to  their  several  halting  places.  And  so
ended  the  memorable  night  of  the  Second  pledge  of
THE  'Akaba.'

So large  a  gathering  could  not  be  held  close  by  Mina Koreish
without rumours reaching the Koreish enough to rouse  fu^'l^,"^?

°  •  °  the  Medina

suspicion.  It  was  notorious  that  great  numbers  at  Medina  chiefs
had  begun  to  embrace  the  doctrines  of  Mohammad.  The
clandestine  meeting  must  have  been  on  his  behalf;  and  as
such,  an  unwarrantable  interference  in  the  domestic  affairs
of  Mecca  ;  it  was  virtually  a  hostile  movement.  Accordingly,
next  morning  the  chief  men  of  the  Koreish  repaired  to  the
Medina  encampment,  stated  their  suspicions,  and  complained
of  unfriendly  conduct  at  the  hand  of  a  tribe  with  whom,  of
all  tribes  in  Arabia,  it  would  grieve  them  most  to  be  at  war.
The  converts  glanced  at  each  other,  and  held  their  peace.^
The  rest  of  the  pilgrims  from  Medina,  ignorant  of  their
comrades'  proceedings,  protested  that  the  people  of  Mecca
had  been  misinformed,  and  that  the  report  was  without
foundation.  Their  chief,  'Abdallah  ibn  Obei,  assured  the
visitors  that  none  of  his  people  would  have  ventured  on  such
a  step  without  consulting  him.  Koreish  were  satisfied,  and
took  their  leave.

And  again,  'When  we  had  pledged  ourselves  to  the  Prophet,  Satan
called  out  with  a  piercing  cry,  such  as  I  never  heard  before  :  Oh  ye  that
are  encamped  round  about !  Have  ye  tio  care  for  Mudhammam'  (the
'blamed,'  the  antithesis  of  Mohammad  the  'praised')  "" and  the  renegades
that  are  with  him  ?  They  have  resolved  on  war  with  you.  Then  said
Mohammad  :  "  That  is  the  demon  of  Al-'Akaba  ;  the  son  of  the  devil,
Hearest  thou  not,  enemy  of  God  ?  Verily  I  will  ease  me  of  thee  ! " '  So
also,  at  the  battle  of  Ohod,  the  voice  which  cried  '  Mohammad  is  fallen'
was  that  of  '  the  demon  of  Al-'Akaba,  namely,  the  devil,'

'  Ibn  Hisham,  pp,  196-200.

2  A  story  is  told  by  Ka'b,  one  of  the  Seventy,  that  at  this  moment,  to
divert  attention,  he  pointed  to  a  new  pair  of  shoes  which  a  Koreishite
chief,  had  on,  and  said  to  one  of  his  friends,  'Why  couldst  not  thou,  our
chief,  wear  a  pair  of  new  shoes  like  this  Koreishite  chief?'  The  latter,
taking  off  the  shoes,  threw  them  at  Ka'b,  saying  :  '  Put  them  on  thyself.'
His  friend  said:  'Tush!  give  back  the  shoes,'  Ka'b  refused;  the
Koreishite  chief  then  tried  to  snatch  them  from  him.  A  commotion
ensued,  which  was  just  what  Ka'b  desired,  as  it  served  to  cover  the
awkward  situation  of  the  Medina  converts.  Such  tales  of  service  to  the
cause  of  Islam  were  plentifully  fabricated  in  the  earliest  times,  and,
though  deserving  little  credit,  are  sometimes  useful  as  illustrating  the
course  of  events.


132


SPREAD  OF  ISLAM  AT  MEDINA


[chap.


They  pur-
sue the
Medina
caravan,


and  mal-
treat one  of
the  converts


Koreish,
enraged,
recommence
persecution  ;


and  thus
precipitate
departure
of  converls


Shortly  after,  the  vast  concourse  at  Mina  broke  up.  The
numerous  caravans  prepared  for  their  journey,  and  took  each
its  homeward  course.  The  Medina  party  had  already  set
out,  when  the  Koreish  having  inquired  into  the  midnight
assembly  (which  Mohammad  hardly  cared  to  keep  secret
now)  found,  to  their  confusion,  that  not  only  had  it  really
taken  place,  but  that  far  larger  numbers  than  they  suspected
had  pledged  themselves  to  the  defence  of  Mohammad.  Foiled
and  exasperated,  they  pursued  the  Medina  caravan  in  the
hope  that  they  might  lay  hands  on  some  of  the  delinquents  ;
but,  though  they  scoured  the  roads  leading  to  Medina,  they
fell  in  with  only  two.  Of  these  one  escaped.  The  other,
Sa'd  ibn  'Obada,  they  seized  and,  tying  his  hands  behind  his
back,  dragged  him  by  his  long  hair  back  to  Mecca.  There
he  would,  no  doubt,  have  suffered  further  maltreatment,  had
he  not  been  able  to  claim  protection  from  certain  Koreish-
ite  chiefs  to  whom  at  Medina  he  had  rendered  service.  He
was  released,  and  rejoined  the  caravan  just  as  his  friends  were
about  to  return  in  search  of  him.

It  soon  became  evident  that,  in  consequence  of  the  Pledge
of  the  'Akaba,  Mohammad  and  his  followers  contemplated
an  early  flight.  The  prospect  of  such  a  movement,  which
would  remove  their  opponents  entirely  out  of  reach,
and  plant  them  in  an  asylum  where  they  might  securely
work  out  their  machinations  and  as  opportunity  offered  take
an  ample  revenge,  at  first  kindled  the  wrath  of  Koreish.
They  renewed  their  persecution ;  and,  wherever  they  had  the
power,  sought  either  to  force  the  confessors  to  recant,  or  by
confinement  prevent  their  escape.^  Such  severities,  or  the
dread  of  them  (for  the  Muslims  were  conscious  that  they  had
now  seriously  compromised  their  loyalty  as  citizens  of  Mecca),
hastened the crisis. And,  indeed,  when Mohammad had

^  The  two  things  would  react  on  one  another  ;  the  persecution  hasten-
ing the  departure  of  the  converts,  and  each  fresh  departure  irritating
Koreish  to  greater  cruelty.  At-Tabari  says  :  'There  were  two  occasions
on  which  persecution  raged  the  hottest ;  frst^  the  period  preceding  the
emigration  to  Abyssinia  ;  second,  that  following  the  second  pledge  of
the  'Akaba.'  There  is  reason,  however,  to  suspect  that,  had  the  perse-
cution been  as  bad  as  is  spoken  of,  we  should  have  had  more  frequent
notices  of  it.  Yet,  excepting  the  imprisonment  or  surveillance  of  a  few
waverers,  we  have  no  detail  of  any  injuries  or  sufferings  inflicted  on  this
occasion  by  Koreish.


VII.]  THE  MUSLIMS  EMIGRATE  TO  MEDINA  133

once resolved upon a general emigration, there was no

advantage  from  a  protracted  residence  among  his  enemies.

It  was  therefore  but  a  few  days  after  the  '  Second  pledge  of  Mohammad

the  'Akaba,'  that  Mohammad  gave  command  to  his  followers, mand'to"''

saying :  Depart  ujito  Medina  ;  for  the  Lord  hath  verily  given emigrate

unto  you  brethren  in  that  city,  and  a  home  in  which  ye  may  find

refuge} So  they  made preparation,  chose  companions  for

the  journey,  and  set  out  in  parties  secretly. Such  as  had

the  means  rode  two  and  two  upon  camels ;  the  rest  walked

on  foot.

Persecution  and  artifice  caused  a  few  to  fall  away  from  Some  fall
the  faith.  An  example  will  suffice.  'Omar  had  arranged  a  ^^^^
rendezvous  with  'Aiyash,  son  of  Abu  Rabl'a,  and  a  friend,  at  Story  of
a  spot  in  the  environs  of  Mecca  whence  they  were  to  set  out  '^^°
for  Medina.  The  friend  was  held  back  by  his  family,  and
relapsed  for  a  time  into  idolatry.  '  Thus  I,  and  'Aiyash,'  says
'Omar,  '  started  alone,  and  journeyed  to  Koba,  a  suburb  of
Medina,  where  we  alighted,  and  were  hospitably  received  at
the  house  of  Rifa'a.  But  his  half-brothers  Abu  Jahl  and  Al-
Harith  ^  followed  'Aiyash  to  Medina,  and  told  him  that  his
mother  had  vowed  she  would  retire  beneath  no  shade,  nor
suffer  a  comb  or  any  oil  to  touch  her  hair,  until  she  saw  his
face  again.  Then  I  cautioned  him  (continues  'Omar),  saying  :
"  By  the  Lord  !  they  only  desire  to  tempt  thee  from  thy  faith.
Thy  mother  will  soon  relax  her  vow.  Beware,  'Aiyash !
return  not  nigh  to  Mecca."  But  he  replied  :  "  Nay,  I  will  not
recant.  But  I  have  property  at  Mecca.  I  will  go  and  fetch
it,  and  it  will  strengthen  me.  And  I  will  also  release  my
mother  from  her  vow."  Seeing  that  he  was  not  to  be
diverted  from  his  purpose,  I  gave  him  a  swift  camel  and
bade  him,  if  he  suspected  treachery,  to  save  himself  thereon.
So  when  the  party  alighted  at  a  certain  place,  his  companions

^  Mohammad,  we  are  told,  saw  in  a  dream  the  place  of  emigration,  'a
saline  plain,  with  palm  trees,  between  two  hills.'  He  waited  some  days,
uncertain  where  this  might  be,  and  then  went  forth  joyously  to  his
followers,  saying  :  '  Now  have  I  been  made  acquainted  with  the  place
appointed  for  your  emigration.  It  is  Yathrib.  Whoso  desireth  let  him
emigrate  thither.'  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  152.  Long  before  this,  however,  he  had
made  up  his  mind  where  he  was  going.  The  story  probably  grew  out  of
the  idea  that  Mohammad  must  have  had  a  special  and  divine  command
for  so  important  a  step  as  that  of  emigration  to  Medina.

"^  They  were  all  three  sons  of  Asma  of  Temim.


134


THE  HIJRA


[chap.


The  emi-
gration,
April  A.D.
622,  con-
tinues for
two  months


Koreish
paralysed
by  the
sudden
movement


seized  him  suddenly,  and  bound  him  with  cords  ;  and,  as  they
carried  him  into  Mecca  in  broad  daylight,  they  exclaimed :
Eveti  thus,  ye  men  of  Mecca,  should  ye  treat  your  foolish  ones  !
Tiien  they  kept  him  in  durance.'^

Two  or  three  weeks  after  the  Pledge  of  the  'Akaba,  that
is,  about  the  beginning  of  Moharram,  the  emigration  com-
menced. Medina  lies  some  180  miles  north  of  Mecca,  and
the  journey  is  accomplished  by  the  pilgrim  caravans  in  eleven
days,  or  if  pressed  for  time,  in  ten.^  Within  two  months
nearly  all  the  followers  of  Mohammad,  excepting  the  few
detained  in  confinement  or  unable  to  escape  from  slavery,
had  migrated  with  their  families  to  their  new  abode.  They
numbered  between  one  and  two  hundred  souls.^  They  were
welcomed  with  cordial  and  even  eager  hospitality  by  their
brethren  at  Medina,  who  vied  with  one  another  for  the
honour  of  receiving  them  into  their  homes,  and  supplying
their  domestic  wants.

Koreish  were  paralysed  by  a  movement  so  carefully
planned,  and  put  into  such  speedy  execution.  They  looked
on  in  amazement,  as  families  silently  disappeared,  and  house
after  house  was  abandoned.  One  or  two  quarters  of  the  city
were  entirely  deserted,  and  the  doors  of  the  dwelling-houses

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  319  f.  'Aiyash  under  such  treatment  relapsed  into
idolatry.  'Omar  says  that  until  Sura  xxxix.  54  was  revealed,  it  was
thought  that  no  apostate  could  be  saved.  When  that  passage  appeared,
he  copied  it  out  and  sent  it  to  'Aiyiish  at  Mecca  ;  'Aiyash  on  this  took
courage,  and  forthwith  mounted  his  camel  for  Medina.  The  verse  is  as
follows  :  '  Say  ; — O  my  servants  who  have  transgressed  against  your  own
souls,  despair  not  of  the  mercy  of  God  ;  for  God  forgiveth  sins  wholly :
verily  He  is  gracious  and  merciful.' — Ibn  Hisham,  p.  320.

^  BicrckJiardt.  The  Taiydra  or  '  Flying  Caravan '  goes  in  less  time.
'It  is  a  dromedary  caravan,  in  which  each  person  carries  only  his  saddle
bags.  It  usually  descends  (from  Medina)  by  the  road  called  El  Khabt,
and  makes  Mecca  on  the  fifth  day.'  The  stages  by  the  Nejd,  or  eastern
route,  travelled  by  Burton,  are  given  as  eleven,  and  the  distance  estimated
at  248  miles.

^  We  have  no  exact  statement  of  the  numbers  of  those  who  emigrated
before  Mohammad  himself  left  Mecca.  Eighteen  months  later,  at  the
battle  of  Bedr  (when  every  emigrant  but  a  very  few  unavoidably  detained
was  present),  Mohammad  had  314  fighting-men,  of  whom  eighty-three
were  emigrants  from  Mecca.  A  few  of  these  may  have  joined
Mohammad  after  he  reached  Medina  ;  and  we  shall  probably  not  err  in
making  the  whole  number  who  emigrated  at  first,  including  women  and
children,  about  150.


VII J  MOHAMMAD  LEFT  BEHIND  AT  MECCA  135

left  locked.^  There  was  here  a  determination  and  self-
sacrifice  on  which  Koreish  had  hardly  calculated.  But  even
if  they  had  foreseen  and  resolved  to  oppose  the  emigration,
it  would  have  been  difficult  to  prevent  it.  The  number  of
independent  clans  and  powerful  families  stood  in  the  way  of
combined  action.  Here  and  there  a  slave  or  helpless  de-
pendent might  be  intimidated  or  held  back  ;  but  in  no  other
case  was  there  the  right  to  interfere  with  private  choice  or
family  counsel ;  and  the  least  show  of  violence  might  have
roused  a  host  of  champions  to  avenge  the  insulted  honour  of
their  tribe.

At  last  Mohammad  and  Abu  Bekr  with  their  families, Mohammad,
including  'All,  now  a  youth  of  about  twenty  years  of  age,  ^^l'.?^-'^'^'
were the only  believers left (excepting those unwillingly left  behind
detained)  at  Mecca. Abu  Bekr  was  ambitious  of  being  the
companion  of  the  Prophet  in  his  flight ;  and  daily  urged  him
to  depart. But  Mohammad  told  him  that  'his  time  was  not
yet  come :  the  Lord  had  not  as  yet  given  him  the  command
to  emigrate.' Perhaps  he  was  deferring  his  departure  until  he
could  receive  assurance  from  Medina  that  the  arrangements
for  his  reception  were  secure,  and  that  his  adherents  there
were  not  only  ready,  but  able  in  the  face  of  any  opposition,
to  execute  their  engagement  for  his  defence.^ Or,  there  may
have  been  the  more  generous  desire  to  see  all  his  followers
safely  away  from  Mecca  before  he  himself  fled  for  refuge  to
Medina. Might  he  even  be  waiting  with  the  vague  surmise

^  'The  Beni  Ghanam  emigrated  in  a  body,  men,  women,  and  children,
and  left  their  houses  locked  :  not  a  soul  was  to  be  seen  in  the  quarters  of
the  Beni  Ghanam,  Abu'l-Bukeir,  and  Maz'un.'

'  'Otba,  Al-'Abbas,  and  Abu  Jahl  passed  by  the  dwelling-place  of  the
Beni  Jahsh,  and  the  doors  were  locked,  and  the  houses  deserted.  'Otba
sighed  heavily,  and  said  :  "  Every  house,  even  if  its  peace  be  lengthened,
at  the  last  a  bitter  wind  will  reach  it.  The  quarter  of  the  Beni  Jahsh  is
left  without  an  inhabitant !  This  is  the  work  of  our  pestilent  Nephew,
who  hath  dispersed  our  assemblies,  ruined  our  affairs,  and  made  a  split
amongst  us.'" — Ibn  Hisham,  p.  317.

2  During  the  two  months  elapsing  between  the  Pledge  of  the  'Akaba
and  Mohammad's  departure,  he  was  kept  informed  of  what  was  going  on
at  Medina.  During  this  interval,  some  of  the  Medina  converts  revisited
Mecca,  with  the  view,  no  doubt,  of  making  further  arrangements  with
Mohammad.  These  Medina  converts  had  thus  the  merit  of  being  not
only  'Ansar,'z>.  Helpers  at  Medina,  but  also  Refugees^  as  having  in  a
sense  also  emigrated  from  Mecca  when  they  returned  to  Medina.


136


THE  HIJRA


[chap.


Prepara-
tions of
Abu  Bekr


Council  of
Koreish


Their  deli-
berations


that  divine  retribution,  as  already  threatened,  was  about  to
descend  on  the  unbelieving  city,  in  which  peradventure  even
ten  righteous  men  could  not  now  be  found  ?  Meanwhile  Abu
Bekr  made  preparations  for  the  journey.  In  anticipation  of
the  emergency,  he  had  already  purchased  for  800  pieces  two
swift  camels,  which  were  now  tied  up  and  highly  fed  in  the
yard  of  his  house.  A  guide,  accustomed  to  the  devious
tracks  and  byways  of  the  Medina  route,  was  hired,  and  the
camels  were  committed  to  his  custody.^

Koreish  were  perplexed  at  the  course  Mohammad  was
taking.  They  had  expected  him  to  emigrate  with  his
people ;  and  perhaps  half  rejoiced  at  the  prospect  of  being
rid  of  their  enemy.  By  remaining  almost  solitary  behind,
he  seemed  by  his  very  loneliness  to  challenge  and  defy
attack.  What  might  the  motive  be  for  this  strange
procedure?  The  chief  men  assembled  to  deliberate  on
what  might  be  their  wisest  course.  Should  they  imprison
him  ?  his  followers  would  come  to  his  rescue.  Should  they
forcibly  expel  him  ?  he  might  agitate  his  cause  among  the
tribes  of  Arabia,  and  readily  lure  adherents  by  the  prospect
of  supremacy  at  Mecca.  Should  they  assassinate  him  ?  the
Beni  Hashim  would  exact  an  unrelenting  penalty  for  their
kinsman's  life.  But  what  if  representatives  from  every  house,
including  that  of  Hashim,  were  each  to  plunge  his  sword  into
the  Prophet — would  the  Hashimites  dare  to  wage  a  mortal
feud  with  the  whole  body  of  Koreish  thus  implicated  in  the
murder?  Even  then  there  would  remain  the  followers  at
Medina,  whose  revenge  on  account  of  their  Master's  blood
would  surely  be  fierce  and  ruthless.  Assassination  by  an
unknown  hand  on  the  road  to  Medina  might  prove  the  safest
course ;  but  there  the  chances  of  escape  would  preponderate.
At  last  they  resolved  that  a  deputation  should  proceed  to  the
house  of  Mohammad.

1  At-Tabari,  i.  1227  fif.  ;  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  323.  The  guide  was
'Abdallah  ibn  Arkat  [or  Al-Oreikit].  His  mother  was  a  Koreishite  ;  his
father  was  from  a  tribe  affiliated  to  Koreish.  He  was  still  an  idolater ;
and  Al-Wakidi  (anticipating  the  era  when  war  was  waged  against  all
idolaters)  adds,  'but  Mohammad  and  Abu  Bekr  had  given  him  quarter,
or  pledge  of  protection'  ;  as  if  he  had  required  any  protection  from  the
fugitives  whom  he  was  guiding  !  The  expression  illustrates  the  proleptic
way  in  which  subsequent  principles  and  events  were  anticipated,  insen-
sibly throwing  back  their  light  and  colour  upon  the  tissue  of  tradition.


VII.]  FLIGHT  OF  MOHAMMAD  137

What  was  the  decision  as  to  their  future  course  of  action, Chiefs  de-
what  the  object  even  of  the  present  deputation,  it  is  impos- ^vj'll^
sible  amid  the  marvels  of  tradition  to  conclude. There  is hammad
little  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  assassination,  although  we
are  told  that  such  was  determined  upon  at  the  instigation  of
Abu  Jahl,  supported  by  Satan,  who,  in  the  person  of  an  old
man  from Nejd  shrouded  in  a  mantle,  joined  the  council.^
Mohammad  himself  refers  in  the  Kor'an  to  the  designs  of  his
enemies  in  these  indecisive  terms  :  Aiid  call  to  mind  when  the Sura  viii.  30
Unbelievers  plotted  against  thee,  that  they  might  detain  thee,  or
slay  thee,  or  expel  thee. Yea,  they  plotted ;  but  God  plotted
likewise. And  God  is  the  best  of  plotters. Assuredly  had
assassination  been  the  sentence,  and  its  immediate  execution
ordered by  the  council,  Mohammad  would not have  been
slow to indicate the fact in  clearer language  than  these
alternative expressions. A resolution  so fatal would un-
questionably have  been  dwelt  upon  at  length  both  in  the
Kor'an  and  in  tradition,  and  have  been  produced  in  justifica-

1  The  following  is  the  narrative  : — Koreish,  irritated  at  the  warm
reception  of  the  converts  at  jNIedina,  held  a  council.  Satan,  in  the  shape
of  an  old  man  shrouded  in  a  cloak,  stood  at  the  door  saying  that  he  was
a  Sheikh  from  Nejd,  who  had  heard  of  their  weighty  consultation,  and
had  come  if  haply  he  might  help  them  to  a  right  decision  ;  so  they
invited  him  to  enter.  One  proposed  to  imprison,  another  to  expel,
Mohammad.  The  old  man  from  Nejd  warmly  opposed  both  sugges-
tions. Then  said  Abu  Jahl :  '  Let  us  choose  one  courageous  man  from
every  family  of  Koreish,  and  place  in  the  hands  of  each  a  sharp  sword,
then  let  the  whole  slay  him  with  the  stroke  of  one  man  ;  so  his  blood
will  be  divided  amongst  all  our  families,  and  the  relatives  of  Mohammad
will  not  know  how  to  avenge  it.'  The  old  man  of  Nejd  applauded  the
scheme,  saying  :  May  God  reward  this  man  ;  this  is  the  right  advice
and  none  other.'  So  they  separated,  having  agreed  upon  it.  Gabriel
forthwith  apprised  Mohammad  of  the  design,  who  arose  and  made  'All
lie  down  upon  his  bed.  The  murderous  party  came  at  dusk,  and  lay  in
wait  about  the  house.  Mohammad  went  forth,  and  casting  a  handful  of
dust  at  them,  recited  the  first  eight  verses  of  SOra  xxxvi.,  ending  with  the
words,  and  We  have  covered  them  so  that  they  shall  not  see.  Thus  he
departed  without  their  knowing  what  passed  ;  and  they  continued  to
watch,  some  say  till  morning,  thinking  that  the  figure  on  the  bed  was
Mohammad.  As  light  dawned,  they  found  out  their  mistake  and  saw
that  it  was  'AlT.  Others  say  they  watched  till  some  one  passed  and  told
them  that  Mohammad  had  left,  when  they  arose  in  confusion  and  shook
from  their  heads  the  dust  which  Mohammad  had  cast  upon  them. — Ibn
Hisham,  p.  324  f.


138


THE  HIJRA


[chap.


Mohammad
and  Abu
Bekr  escape
to  the  cave
Thaur


The  cave
referred  to
in  the
Kor'an


tion  of  subsequent  hostilities.  Had  such  been  the  decision,
it  imist  sooner  or  later  have  reached  the  ears  of  Mohammad,
and  so  have  found  its  way  into  the  Kor'an.

Whatever  the  object  of  the  visit,  Mohammad  received
previous  notice  of  it,  and  anticipated  the  danger  by  stealing
away  from  his  house.^  There  he  left  'All;  around  whom,
that  the  suspicions  of  neighbours  might  not  be  aroused,  he
threw  his  own  red  mantle,  and  left  him  lying  thus  upon  his
bed.  He  himself  went  straightway  to  the  house  of  Abu
Bekr,  and  after  a  short  consultation  matured  the  plan  for
immediate  flight.  Abu  Bekr  shed  tears  of  joy  ;  the  hour  for
emigration  had  at  last  arrived,  and  he  was  to  be  the  companion
of  the  Prophet's  journey.  After  a  i^"^  hasty  preparations,
among  which  Abu  Bekr  did  not  forget  to  secure  his  remain-
ing funds,  they  crept  in  the  shade  of  evening  through  a  back
window,  and  escaped  unobserved  from  the  southern  suburb.
Pursuing  their  way  south,  and  clambering  in  the  dark  up
the  bare  and  rugged  ascent,  they  reached  at  last  the  lofty
peak  of  mount  Thaur,  distant  about  an  hour  and  a  half
from  the  city,  and  took  refuge  in  a  cavern  near  its  summit.^
Here  they  rested  in  security,  for  the  attention  of  their
adversaries  would  first  be  fixed  upon  the  pathways  north
of  Mecca  on  the  Medina  route.

Several years after, Mohammad thus alludes in the

1  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  153  ff.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  328  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1236.  The  following  is  from
Burckhardt  : — '  Jebel  Thor.  About  an  hour  and  a  half  south  of  Mecca,
to  the  left  of  the  road  to  the  village  of  Hosseynye,  is  a  lofty  mountain  of
this  name,  higher  it  is  said  than  Djebel  Nur.  On  the  summit  of  it  is  a
cavern,  in  which  Mohammad  and  his  friend  Abu  Bekr  took  refuge  from
the  Mckkawys  before  he  fled  to  Medina.'  But  he  did  not  visit  the  spot,
nor  did  'All  Bey.

In  the  Begum  of  Bhopal's  Pilgrimage  to  Mecca  (1870)  the  mountain
is  described.  The  pathway  from  Mecca  is  'excessively  rugged  and
difficult,'  the  pilgrim  being  obliged  sometimes  to  crawl  over  the  great
rocks  on  his  hands  and  knees.  The  entrance  to  the  cave  is  still  pre-
served, in  what  is  believed  to  be  its  original  state  ;  and  the  pilgrim
acquires  merit  by  forcing  himself  with  difficulty,  as  the  Prophet  must
have  done,  through  the  aperture,  which  is,  'not  more  than  \\  span  in
breadth ' ;  but  a  wide  passage  has  been  opened  out  at  the  other  end  of
the  cave.  The  hills  are  wild  and  bare  ;  huge  masses  of  rock  lie  scattered
about ;  and  nothing  green  is  in  sight,  save  occasionally  wild  thorny
bushes,  such  as  the  Indian  'gookru'


VII.]


THE  CAVE


139


Kor'an to the position of  himself  and his friend in  the
cave  of  mount  Thaur  : —

If  ye  will  not  assist  the  Prophet,  verily  GOD  assisted  him  aforetime  Sura  ix.  40
when  the  Unbelievers  cast  him  forth,  in  the  company  of  a  Second  only  ;
when  they  two  were  in  the  cave  alone,  when  the  Prophet  said  unto  his
companion.  Be  fiot  cast  down,  for  verily  Cod  is  with  iis.  And  God
caused  to  descend  tranquillity^  upon  him,  and  strengthened  him  with
hosts  which  ye  saw  not,  and  made  the  word  of  the  Unbelievers  to  be
abased  ;  and  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  is  exalted,  for  GOD  is  mighty
and  wise.


The 'sole companion,'

Second  of  the  Two,  became  one  of  Abu  Bekr's  most  honoured ''.^^  Second
.  ,  i^  ,  ^  , , ,  .  .  of  the  two

titles.  - .  .


or in Arabic phraseology The  Abu  Bekr
)ne  of  Abu  Bekr's  most  honoured
Hassan,  the  contemporary  poet  of  Medina,  thus  sings


of  him

And  the  Second  of  the  two  in  the  glorious  Cave,  while  the  foes  were
searching  around,  and  they  two  had  ascended  the  mountain  ;

And  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord,  they  well  knew,  loved  him, — more  than  all
the  world  ;  he  held  no  one  equal  unto  him.-

Legends  cluster  around  the  cave. A  spider  wove  its  web Legends
across  the  entrance. Branches sprouted,  covering it  in  on 'egaidmg
every side. Wild pigeons settled on the trees to divert
attention,  and  so  forth. Whatever  may  have  been  the  real
peril,  Mohammad  and  his  companion  felt  it,  no  doubt,  to  be
a  time  of  jeopardy. Glancing  upwards  at  a  crevice  through Moham-
which  the  morning  light  began  to  break,  Abu  Bekr  whispered  : ^^'^'^  ^'"^^
'  What  if  one  were  to  look  through  the  chink,  and  see  us
underneath his very feet' '  TJiink not  tJius, Abu BekrP
said  the  Prophet ;  '  We  are  TWO,  BUT  GOD  IS  IN  THE  MIDST
A  THIRD.' 2

^  Seklnah,  the  'Shekinah'  of  the  Jews  ;  frequently  used  in  the  Kor'an
in  this  sense.

^  On  Mohammad  asking  Hassan  whether  he  had  composed  any
poetry  regarding  Abu  Bekr,  the  poet  answered  that  he  had,  and  at
Mohammad's  request  repeated  the  lines  in  the  text.  Mohammad  was
amused,  and  laughed  so  heartily  as  even  to  show  his  back  teeth.  'Thou
hast  spoken  truly,  O  Hassan,'  he  said. '  It  is  just  as  thou  hast  said.'

^  The  crowd  of  miracles  that  cluster  about  the  cave  are  so  well  known
as  hardly  to  need  repetition  here.  It  is  interesting,  however,  to  note  how
far  they  are  related  by  our  early  authorities.  Al-Wakidi  says  that  after
Mohammad  and  Abu  Lekr  entered,  a  spider  came  and  wove  her  webs
over  the  mouth  of  the  cave.  Koreish  hotly  searched  after  Mohammad
in  all  directions,  till  they  came  up  to  the  entrance.  When  they  looked,
they  said  :  Spiders'  webs  are  over  it  from  the  birth  of  Mohammad  j  and


140


THE  HIJRA


[chap.


Food  and
intelligence
conveyed
to  them


Search  after
Mohammad


Mohammad
and  Abu
Bekr

resolve  to
quit  the
cave


'Amir  ibn  Fuheira,  while  in  company  with  other  shepherds
of  Mecca  tending  his  master  Abu  Bekr's  flock,  stole  away
unobserved  every  evening  with  a  few  goats  to  the  cave
and  furnished  its  inmates  with  a  plentiful  supply  of  milk.
'Abdallah,  Abu  Bekr's  son,  in  the  same  manner  at  night
brought  them  food  cooked  by  his  sister  Asma.  It  was  his
business  also  to  watch  by  day  the  progress  of  events  and  of
opinion  at  Mecca,  and  to  report  the  result  at  night.

The  city  was  in  a  ferment  when  the  disappearance  of
Mohammad  was  first  noised  abroad.  The  chief  men  of
Koreish  went  to  his  house,  and  finding  'All  there,  asked
where  his  cousin  was.  '  I  have  no  knowledge  of  him,'  replied
'All ;  '  am  I  his  keeper  ?  Ye  bade  him  go,  and  he  hath  gone.'
Then  they  repaired  to  Abu  Bekr's  house  and  questioned  his
daughter  Asma.^  Failing  to  elicit  from  her  any  information,
they  sent  scouts  in  all  directions,  with  the  view  of  gaining  a
clue  to  the  track  and  destination  of  the  Prophet,  if  not  with
less  innocent  instructions.  But  the  precautions  of  Mohammad
and  Abu  Bekr  rendered  it  a  fruitless  search.  One  by  one  the
emissaries  returned  with  no  trace  of  the  fugitives ;  and  at
last  it  was  believed  that,  having  gained  a  fair  start,  they  had
outstripped  pursuit.  The  people  soon  reconciled  themselves
to  the  idea.  They  even  breathed  more  freely  now  that  their
troubler  was  gone. The  city  again  was  still.

On  the  third  night,  the  report  of  'Abdallah  satisfied  the

so  they  turned  back.  Again  :  'God  commanded  a  tree  and  a  spider  to
cover  the  Prophet,  and  two  wild  pigeons  to  perch  at  the  entrance  of  the
cave.  When  a  company  of  two  men  from  each  clan  of  Koreish,  armed
with  swords,  pursuing  the  Prophet,  were  now  close  to  him,  the  foremost
saw  the  pigeons,  and  returned  to  his  companions,  saying  that  he  was
sure  from  this  that  nobody  was  in  the  cave.  The  Prophet,  hearing  his
words,  blessed  the  pigeons,  and  made  them  sacred  ever  after  in  the  Holy
territory,  where  it  is  sacrilege  to  harm  them.

There  are  other  miraculous  stories,  but"  of  somewhat  later  growth,
regarding  Abu  Bekr  putting  his  hand  into  the  crevices  of  the  cave  to
remove  the  snakes  that  might  be  lurking  there,  and  being  unharmed  by
their  venomous  bites.

^  Asma  relates  that,  after  the  Prophet  had  gone,  a  company  of
Koreish,  with  Abu  Jahl,  came  to  her  house.  As  they  stood  at  the  door,
she  went  forth  to  them.  'Where  is  thy  father?'  said  they.  'Truly  I
know  not  where  he  is,'  she  replied.  Upon  which  Abu  Jahl,  who  was  a
bad  and  impudent  man,  slapped  her  on  the  face  with  such  force  that  one
of  her  ear-rings  dropped.' — Ibn  Hisham,  p.  329.


VII.]


THE  SEARCH


141


refugees  that  search  had  ceased,  and  busy  curiosity  relaxed.
The  opportunity  was  come.  They  could  slip  away  unobserved
now,  and  the  sooner  the  better.  Longer  delay  might  excite
suspicion,  and  the  visits  of  'Abdallah  and  Ibn  Fuheira  attract
attention  to  the  cave.  The  roads  were  clear ;  they  might
leave  at  once  fearless  of  pursuit,  and  travel  without  appre-
hension of  arrow  or  dagger  from  the  wayside  enemy.  'Ab-
dallah therefore  received  commission  to  have  all  things  ready
for  the  following  evening.  The  guide  was  instructed  to
wander  about  with  the  two  camels  near  the  summit  of  mount
Thaur.  Asma  prepared  food  for  the  journey,  and  in  the
dusk  brought  it  in  a  wallet  to  the  cave.  In  the  hurry  of
the  moment,  she  had  forgotten  the  thong  for  fastening  it.
So,  tearing  her  girdle  in  two,  with  one  strip  she  closed  the
wallet,  and  with  the  other  bound  it  to  the  camel's  saddle.
From  this  incident  Asma  is  honourably  known  in  Islam  as
'She  of  the  two  shreds.'^  Abu  Bekr,  not  forgetful  of  his
money,  had  safely  secreted  among  his  other  property  a  purse
of  between  five  and  six  thousand  pieces.

The  camels  were  now  ready.  Mohammad  mounted  the
swifter  of  the  two,  Al-Kaswa,  thenceforward  his  favourite,
with  the  guide  ;  and  Abu  Bekr  having  taken  his  servant  Ibn
Fuheira  behind  him  on  the  other,  they  started.  Descending
mount  Thaur,  and  leaving  the  lower  quarter  of  Mecca  a  little
to  the  right,  they  struck  off  by  a  track  considerably  to  the
left  of  the  common  road ;  and,  hurrying  westward,  soon
gained  the  vicinity  of  the  seashore  nearly  opposite  'Osfan.
The  day  of  the  flight  was  the  4th  Rabl'I.  of  the  first  year
of  the Hijra,^ or, by the calculations of M. Caussin de

*  There  is  a  curious  tradition  that  Abu  Bekr's  father,  Abu  Kohafa,
now  so  old  that  he  could  hardly  see,  visited  his  grand-daughters  (Asma
and  'A'isha)  after  Abu  Bekr  as  he  thought  had  departed,  to  condole
with  them  on  being  left  without  means,  and  bringing  money  with  him  to
help  them.  To  comfort  the  old  man,  Asma  placed  pebbles  in  a  recess
and,  covering  them  with  a  cloth,  put  his  hands  upon  them  to  make  him
believe  that  it  was  his  son's  money  which  he  had  left  for  their  support ;
so  the  old  man  went  away  happy. — Ibn  Hisham,  p.  230  f

Asma  was  the  mother  of  Ibn  az-Zubeir,  and  lived  to  be  over  100.  See
the  touching  scene  with  her  son  before  he  was  killed  in  battle,  A.H.  "]■},. —
The  Caliphate,  p.  340.

^  Hijra,  'emigration.'  Though  reiernng  par  erce/lence  to  the  flight
of  the  Prophet,  it  is  also  applicable  to  all  his  followers  who  emigrated  to
Medina  pr/or  to the captiwe  of  Mecca; and they  are  hence called


Preparations
for  the
journey


They  start
for  Medina
June  20,
A.D.  622  ;


142


LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA


[chap.


And  safely

escape

pursuit


Tidings
reach  Mecca
of  their
flight


'All  quits
for  Medina


Families  of
Mohammad
and  Abu
Bekr  un-
molested at
Mecca


Perceval,  June  20,  A.D.  622;  and  the  53rd  year  of  the
Prophet's  life.

By  daybreak  they  reached  a  Bedawi  encampment,  where
an  Arab  widow  sat  at  her  tent-door  with  viands  spread  out
for  any  chance  traveller  that  might  pass  that  way.  Fatigued
and  thirsty,  for  it  was  now  the  hottest  season  of  the  year,
they  refreshed  themselves  with  the  food  and  draughts  of
milk  offered  by  the  lady.  During  the  heat  of  the  day,  they
rested  at  Kodeid.  In  the  evening,  being  now  as  they  deemed
at  a  safe  enough  distance,  they  fell  into  the  common  road.
But  they  had  not  gone  far  when  they  met  one  of  the  mounted
scouts  returning  from  his  search.  Suraka  (for  that  was  his
name),  seeing  that  he  had  small  chance  single-handed  of
success  against  his  four  opponents,  offered  no  opposition,
but  on  the  contrary  pledged  his  word  that,  if  permitted  to
depart  in  peace,  he  would  not  reveal  that  he  had  met  them.
The  party  proceeded. The  Prophet  of  Arabia  was  safe.^

The  first  tidings  that  reached  Mecca  of  the  course  actually
taken  by  Mohammad  were  brought,  two  or  three  days  after
his  flight,  by  a  traveller  from  the  Bedawi  camp  at  which  he
had  rested.  It  was  now  certain,  from  his  passing  there,  that
he  was  bound  for  Medina.

'Ali  remained  three  days  at  Mecca  after  the  departure  of
Mohammad,  appearing  every  day  in  public,  for  the  purpose
of  restoring  the  property  placed  by  various  persons  in  the
Prophet's  trust.  He  met  with  no  opposition  or  annoyance,
and  then  leisurely  took  his  departure  for  Medina.  The
families  of  Mohammad  and  of  Abu  Bekr  were  equally  un-
molested. Zeinab  continued  for  a  time  to  dwell  at  Mecca
with  her  unconverted  husband.  Rokeiya  had  already  gone
with  'Othman  to  Medina.  The  Prophet's  other  two  daughters,
Um  Kulthum  and  Fatima,  with  his  wife  Sauda,  were  for
some weeks left behind  at Mecca.^ 'A'isha  his  bride,  yet

Muhdjirin^  i.e.  the  Emigrants,  or  Refugees.  We  have  seen  that  they  com-
menced to  emigrate  from  the  beginning  of  Moharram  (the  first  month  of
the  Era  as  subsequently  settled  in  'Omar's  Caliphate)  two  months  before.

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  231  f.

2  Um  Kulthum  had  been  married  to  one  of  the  sons  of  Abu  Lahab,
but  was  now  living  in  her  father's  house.  Zeinab's  husband,  Abu'l-'As,
was  still  an  unbeliever,  and  is  said  to  have  kept  her  back  at  Mecca  in
confinement.  But  subsequent  events  show  that  there  was  a  strong
mutual  attachment.


VII.]


SURAS  DURING  THIS  PERIOD


143


a  child,  with  the  rest  of  Abu  Bekr's  family  and  several  other
women,  likewise  remained  in  Mecca  for  a  time.

Mohammad  and  Abu  Bekr  trusted  their  respective  clans  Forbear-
to  protect  their  families  from  insult.  But  no  insult  or  annoy-  j"'^^  P[
ance  was  offered  by  Koreish,  nor  was  any  attempt  made
to  detain  them  ;  although  it  was  not  unreasonable  that  they
should  have  been  detained  as  hostages  against  any  offensive
movement  from  Medina,  Hence  we  may,  perhaps,  be  led
to  doubt  the  intensity  of  the  hatred  and  cruelty  which  the
strong  colouring  of  tradition  at  this  period  attributes  to
Koreish.

Thus ends the first great stage of  the  Prophet's  life.
The  next  scene  opens  at  Medina.


Relation  of  Islam  to  Christianity.  Teaching  of
Mohammad  during  the  last  three  Years  at
Mecca. Effect  produced  by  His  Preaching

During  the  last  three  years  of  Mohammad's  residence  at
Mecca  about  thirty  new  Suras  appeared.  Some  of  these  are
very  long,  extending  over  as  many  as  fifteen  to  twenty
pages ;  and,  being  in  part  composite,  contain  many  later
passages  subsequently  added  to  them  at  Medina.  Before
proceeding  to  a  brief  description  of  these  Suras  and  the
teaching  they  contain,  I  propose  to  pause  for  a  little  and
describe  the  relation  of  Islam  to  Christianity.

It  has  been  already  said  that  in  the  chapters  revealed
before  the  tenth  year  of  the  Prophet's  ministry  we  find  few
notices  of  the  Gospels  and  the  Christian  faith.  In  the  Suras,
however,  of  the  following  three  years,  frequent  mention  of
Christianity  begins  to  appear.  Indeed,  the  approach  now
made  by  Mohammad  never  afterwards  became  closer,  nor
did  his  acquaintance  with  it  enlarge,  or  his  views  materially
alter.  It  may,  therefore,  be  not  inappropriate  here  to
review,  from  first  to  last,  the  relation  of  Islam  to  Christianity.

Though  Christians  and  the  Messiah  are  frequently
referred  to  throughout  the  Kor'an  by  name,  yet  there  are
but  few  sketches  at  any  length  either  of  the  substance  or
doctrines  of  their  Scriptures ;  so  {qw,  indeed,  that  it  will  be
possible  (and  I  doubt  not  to  the  reader  interesting)  to
enumerate  them  all  and  give  extracts  of  their  strange  and


Suras  re-
vealed dur-
ing last  three
years  at
Mecca


Relation  of
Islam  to
Christianity


Notices  of
Christianity
in  Kor'an
few  and
scattered


144  LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA  [chap.

Earliest  often  fabulous  details.  The  following,  which  is  the  fullest
the^G^s  el  ^"*^  earliest  account  of  the  Gospel  narrative,  was  given  by
narrative Mohammad  shortly  after  his  return  from  At-Ta'if From  its

subject the  Sura  is  entitled  Alaryani  or  Mary,  and  opens

thus : —

Siira  xix.  I  fF.  A  Commemoration  of  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  his  servant  Zacharias  ; —
When  he  called  upon  his  Lord  with  a  secret  invocation.
He  said  ; — O  Lord  ! as  for  me,  my  bones  are  decrepit,  and  my  head

white  with  hoar  hair.
And  I  have  never  prayed  unto  thee,  O  Lord  !  unheard.
Verily,  I  fear  my  kinsmen  after  me  ;  and  my  wife  is  barren.
Wherefore  grant  unto  me  from  thyself  a  successor  ;
Who  shall  be  my  heir,  and  an  heir  of  the  family  of  Jacob  ;  and  make

him,  O  Lord  !  well  pleasing.
O  Zacharias  ! We  bring  thee  good  tidings  of  a  son,  whose  name  shall

be  John  ;
We  have  not  made  any  to  be  called  by  that  name  before.
He  said  ; — O  Lord  !  whence  shall  there  be  a  son  unto  me,  since  my  wife

is  barren,  and  I  truly  have  reached  the  imbecility  of  old  age  ?
The  Angel  said  : — So  shall  it  be. Thus  saith  thy  Lord, — It  is  easy  unto

me  ;  for  verily  I  created  thee  heretofore  when  thou  wast  nothing.
He  said  ; — Lord  !  give  me  a  sign, The  Angel  said  ; — This  is  thy  sign;

thou  shalt  not  speak  unto  any  for  three  nights,  though  sound  in

health.
And  he  went  forth  unto  his  people  from  the  chamber,  and  he  motioned

unto  them  that  they  should  praise  God  morning  and  evening.
O  John  !  '  Take  the  Book  (of  the  Law)  with  power  ;  and  We  gave  him

wisdom  as  a  child,
And  compassion  from  us,  and  purity  ;  and  he  was  virtuous,  and  dutiful

unto  his  parents  ;  he  was  not  overbearing  nor  rebellious.
Peace  be  on  him  the  day  he  was  born,  and  the  day  he  shall  die,  and  the

day  he  shall  be  raised  to  life  !
And  in  the  Book  make  mention  of  Mary,  when  she  withdrew  from  her

people  into  an  eastern  place  ;
And  took  a  curtain  withal  to  hide  herself  from  them.
And  We  sent  unto  her  OUR  Spirit,  and  he  appeared  unto  her  a  perfect

man,
She  said  ; — I  seek  refuge  in  the  Merciful  from  thee,  if  thou  fearest  God  !
He  said  ; — Nay,  verily,  I  am  a  messenger  of  thy  Lord  sent  to  give  unto

thee  a  virtuous  son.
She  said  ; — How  shall  there  be  to  me  a  son,  and  a  man  hath  not  touched

me,  and  I  am  not  unchaste.
He  said  ; — So  shall  it  be. Thus  saith  thy  Lord  ; — It  is  easy  with  me  ;

and  we  shall  make  him  a  sign  unto  mankind,  and  a  mercy  from

us,  for  it  is  a  thing  decreed.
And  she  conceived  him,  and  withdrew  with  him  {in  the  womb)  unto  a

distant  place.


VII.]


CHRISTIAN  ELEMENTS


145


And  the  pains  of  labour  came  upon  her  by  the  trunk  of  a  palm  tree  ;
She  said, — Would  that  I  had  died  before  this,  and  been  forgotten  out  of

mind  !
And there  cried  one  from  below  her  ; — Grieve  not  ! — verily  thy  Lord

hath  provided  beneath  thee  a  fountain  : —
And  shake  unto  thee  the  root  of  the  palm  tree  ;  it  will  drop  upon  thee

ripe  dates,  ready  plucked.
Wherefore  eat  and  drink,  and  be  comforted  ; and if  thou seest any

man.
Say, — Verily  I  have  vowed  unto  the  Merciful  a  fast,  and  I  will  not  speak

to  any  man  this  day.
And  she  came  with  the  child  unto  her  people,  carrying  him. They  said  ;

0  Mary  !  verily  thou  hast  done  a  strange  thing  :
O  sister  of  Aaron  !  thy  father  was  not  a  wicked  man,  nor  was  thy  mother

unchaste.
And  she  motioned  to  the  child. They  said  ; — How  shall  we  speak  with

him  that  is  an  infant  in  the  cradle?
He  {the  child)  said  ;  Verily  I  am  the  servant  of  God  ;  He  hath  given  me

the  Book,  and  made  me  a  Prophet  ;
And  made  me  blessed  wheresoever  I  may  be,  and  hath  commanded  me

{to  observe)  prayer  and  almsgiving  while  I  remain  alive  ;
And  made  me  dutiful  to  my  mother,  and  not  overbearing  nor  wretched  : —
Peace  be  on  me  the  day  I  was  born,  and  the  day  I  shall  die,  and  the  day

1  shall  be  raised  alive  !
This  is  Jesus,  the  Word  of  truth,  concerning  whom  they  are  in  doubt.
It  is  not  for  God  to  take  unto  Him  a  Son  : — glory  be  to  Him  !
When  He  hath  decreed  a  matter,  He  only  saith  unto it Be,  and it

shall  be.

The  births  of  John  and  of  Jesus  are  once  again  related,  as
well  as  the  birth  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  in  a  passage  (Sijra  iii.
31  ff.)  delivered  at  Medina  only  a  few  years  before  the  death
of  Mohammad,  on  the  occasion  of  an  embassy  from  the
Christian  tribe  of  Nejran.

Of  the  life  of  Christ  the  statements  are  altogether  poor
and  scant.  The  object  of  His  mission  to  the  Jews  was  to
confirm  their  Scriptures,  to  modify  and  lighten  some  of  the
burdens  of  the  Mosaical  law,  and  to  recall  them  to  the
service  of  God. His  miracles  are  thus  described  : —

God  shall  say  ;— O  Jesus  !  Son  of  Mary!  call  to  mind  my  grace  Siua  v.  109  ff.
given  to  thee  and  to  thy  Mother,  when  I  strengthened  thee  with  the
Holy  Spirit,  that  thou  shouldest  speak  with  men  in  the  cradle,  and  in
after  life  ; — and  when  I  taught  thee  the  Scripture  and  Wisdom,  and  the
Law  and  the  Gospel ;— and  when  thou  formedst  of  clay  like  unto  the
figure  of  a  bird  by  My  permission  ; — and  thou  blewest  thereupon  and  it
became  a  bird  by  My  permission  ;  and  thou  didst  heal  the  blind  and  the
leper  by  My  permission  ; — and  when  thou  didst  raise  the  dead  by  My

K


Another
detailed
account  of
Christ's
birth


Statements
regarding^
the  life  of
Christ


146  LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA  [chap.

permission;^  and  when  I  held  back  the  children  of  Israel  from  thee
at  the  time  thou  shewedst  unto  them  evident  signs,  and  the  unbelievers
among  them  said,  Verily  this  is  nought  but  manifest  sorcery.  .  .  .

When  the  Apostles  of  Jesus  said,— O  Jesus,  Son  of  Mary  1  is  thy
Lord  able  to  cause  a  Table  to  descend  upon  us  from  Heaven  ?  He  said, —
Fear  God  ;  if  ye  be  faithful.  They  said, — We  desire  that  we  may  eat
therefrom,  and  that  our  hearts  be  set  at  ease,  and  that  we  may  know  that
thou  verily  hast  spoken  unto  us  the  truth,  and  that  we  may  be  witnesses
thereof.  Then  spake  jESUS,  Son  of  Mary, — O  God  our  Lord !  send
down  unto  us  a  Table  from  Heaven,  that  it  may  be  unto  us  a  Feast  day^
unto  the  first  of  us  and  unto  the  last  of  us,  and  a  sign  from  Thee  ;  and
nourish  us,  for  Thou  art  the  best  of  nourishers.  And  God  said, — Verily
I  will  send  it  down  unto  you  ;  and  whoever  after  that  shall  disbelieve
amongst  you  ;  surely  I  will  torment  him  with  a  torment,  the  like  of  which
I  shall  not  torment  any  other  creature  with.

And  when  God  shall  say, — O  Jesus,  Son  of  Mary  !  didst  thou  speak
unto  mankind  saying, — Take  me  and  my  mother  for  two  Gods  besides
the  Lord  ?  He  shall  say, — Glory  be  to  Thee  !  it  is  not  for  me  to  say  that
which  I  know  to  be  not  the  Truth  ;  if  I  had  said  that,  verily  Thou
wouldest  have  known  it.  Thou  knowest  that  which  is  in  me,  but  I  know
not  what  is  in  Thee  ;  verily  Thou  art  the  Knower  of  secrets.  I  spake
not  unto  them  aught  but  what  Thou  commandedst  me,  saying — Worship
God,  my  Lord  and  your  Lord.  .  .  .

Allusion  to This  passage  is  remarkable  as  affording  in  the  supernatural
the  Lords ^^ble  which  descended  from  heaven,  a  possible  allusion,  the

bupper  _

only  one  traceable  in  the  Kor'an,  to  the  Lord's  Supper. The

tale  is  probably  founded  on  some  misapprehended  tradition

Jesus  not regarding '  the  Table  of  the  Lord.'  ^ It  only  remains  to  add  that

crucified, jesus  escaped  the  machinations  of  his  enemies,  and  was  taken

but  ascended  ''  .,,....,

to  Heaven up  alive  to  heaven. In  a  passage  aimed  at  his  Jewish  enemies,
Mohammad  thus  upbraids  their  rebellious  forefathers  : —

Sura  iv.  •  •  •  For  their  unbelief ;  and  for  that  they  have  spoken  against  Mary

155  ff-  a  grievous  calumny  ;  and  have  said, —  Verily  we  have  slain  the  Messiah,

^  These  miracles  are  repeated  in  Sura  iii.  43,  where  Jesus  is  repre-
sented as  adding  :  'And  I  will  tell  unto  you  what  ye  eat,  and  that  which
ye  store  in  your  houses,'  i.e.  as  a  proof  of  his  knowledge  of  the  invisible.

2  Or  '  Hd^  i.e.  a  religious  festival  recurring  periodically,  referring
apparently  to  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper  as  a  feast  to  be  per-
petually observed.

^  The  prolific  fancy  of  the  Traditionists  and  Commentators  has
created  a  host  of  miraculous  accompaniments  to  this  table  : — fruit  from
the  trees  of  Paradise,  bread,  meat,  with  fish  which,  though  broiled,  were
still  alive,  and  which  for  the  convenience  of  the  guests  threw  aside  their
scales  and  bones  !  The  poor,  the  lame,  and  the  wretched,  were  invited
to  the  feast,  which  lasted  forty  days.  The  commentators  probably  con-
fused the  Lord's  Supper  with  the  feeding  by  Jesus  of  the  multitudes.


VII.]


APOCRYPHAL  STORIES


147


Jesus,  Son  of  Mary,  the  Apostle  of  God.  And  they  slew  him  not,
neither  did  they  crucify  him,  but  he  was  simulated  (in  the  person  of
another)  unto  them.  And  verily  they  that  have  differed  about  him,  are
in  doubt  concerning  this  thing.  They  have  no  knowledge  regarding  it,
but  follow  only  a  conjecture.  And  they  slew  him  not,  certainly.  But
God  raised  him  up  unto  Himself;  and  God  is  the  GLORIOUS,  the  wise  !
And  of  the  People  of  the  Book  shall  every  one  believe  in  him  before  his
death,  and  in  the  day  of  Judgment  he  will  be  a  witness  against  them.^

In  addressing  the  idolaters  of  Mecca,  Mohammad
appealed  to  the  ministry  and  preaching  of  Jesus  and  His
rejection  by  His  people,  as  he  was  wont  to  appeal  to  the
history  of  other  prophets,  in  support  of  his  mission.  His
adversaries  retorted  that,  if  Jesus,  who  appeared  in  human
form,  was  worshipped  by  his  followers,  there  could  be  nothing
absurd  in  their  praying  through  images,  the  representatives
of  heavenly  powers,  to  God. The  reply  was  revealed  thus  : —

When  Jesus,  Son  of  Mary,  was  proposed  as  an  example,  lo,  thy  people

shouted  at  thee.
And  said.  What !  Are  our  own  gods  better,  or  he  ?
They  have  proposed  this  unto  thee  only  as  a  cause  of  dispute  ;
Yea,  they  are  a  contentious  people  !
Verily  he  was  no  other  than  a  servant,  to  whom  We  were  gracious,  and

made  him  an  example  unto  the  children  of  Israel : —
(And  if  We  pleased  We  could  make  from  amongst  yourselves  Angels  to

succeed  you  upon  earth  :)
And  verily  he  shall  be  for  a  sign  of  the  last  hour. Wherefore  doubt  not

thereof,  and  follow  Me  ;  this  is  the  right  way.
And  let  not  Satan  mislead  you,  for  he  is  your  manifest  enemy.

This  was  in  fact  the  only  position  which  Mohammad  could
consistently  fall  back  upon.  Some  terms  of  veneration,
in  use  among  Christians,  are  indeed  applied  to  Jesus,  as  '  the
Word  of  God,'  and  *  His  Spirit  which  he  breathed  into
Mary.'  But  the  divine  Sonship  is  steadfastly  denied.  The
worship  of  Jesus  by  the  Christians  is  placed  in  the  same
category  as  the  supposed  worship  of  Ezra  by  the  Jews ;  and,
in  one  place,  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  expressly
reprobated. It  is  a  Medina  SOra  : —

Ye  people  of  the  Book  !  Commit  not  extravagances  in  your  religion  ;
and  speak  not  of  God  aught  but  the  truth. For verily the Messiah,

^  'The  People  of  the  Book,'  i.e.  Jews  as  well  as  Christians.  There  is
a  passage  (Sura  iii.  52)  which  would  seem  to  imply  the  death  of  Jesus
when  on  earth,  but  it  is  generally  explained  otherwise  by  the  com-
mentators. Cf.  also  SOra  xix.  34  above,  p.  145.


If  Jesus  was
worshipped,
why  not
deities  of
Mecca?


Moham-
mad's reply
that  Jesus
was  but  a
servant.
Sura  xliii.
57  ff.


Denies
divine  Son-
ship  of
Jesus ;  and
Trinity
denied


Sura  i
169  f.


148


LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA


[chap.


Sources  of
Christian
information
imperfect
and  defec-
tive


Christianity
had  little
real  influ-
ence on
Islam  ;


Yet  theo-
retically
stood  equal
if  not
superior  to
Judaism


Jesus,  Son  of  Mary,  is  an  Apostle  of  God,  and  His  Word  which  he
placed  in  Mary,  and  a  Spirit  from  him.  Wherefore  believe  in  God,  and
in  the  Apostles  ;  and  say  not,  There  are  Three.  Refrain  :  it  will  be
better  for  you.  Verily  the  Lord  is  one  God.  Glory  be  to  Him  !  far  be  it
from  Him,  that  there  should  be  to  Him  a  Son.  To  Him  belongeth
whatsoever  is  in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  earth  ;  and  He  is  a  sufficient
patron.  The  Messiah  disdaineth  not  to  be  a  servant  of  God  ;  neither
the  Cherubim  that  draw  nigh  unto  Him.

It  may  well  be  doubted  whether  Mohammad  ever  had
the  means  of  knowing  the  real  doctrines  of  Christianity.
The  few  passing  observations  regarding  our  faith  to  be  found
in  the  Kor'an  commenced  at  a  period  when  his  system  was
already,  in  great  part,  matured  ;  and  they  were  founded  on
information  meagre,  fabulous,  and  crude.  The  whole  of  his
historical  knowledge^  (for  whatever  he  knew  it  was  his
practice  to  embody  in  his  Revelation)  is  contained  in  the
few  extracts  now  before  the  reader ;  and  this,  apocryphal
and  scanty  in  itself — especially  so  when  compared  with  his
familiar  knowledge  of  Jewish  Scripture  and  tradition — shows
that  the  sources  from  which  he  derived  his  Christian
information  were  singularly  barren  and  defective.  The  rite
of  baptism  is  not  even  alluded  to ;  and,  if  there  be  an
allusion  to  the  Eucharist,  we  have  seen  it  to  be  disfigured,
and  well  nigh  lost  in  fable.  The  doctrine  of  redemption
through  the  death  of  Christ  was  apparently  unknown  (for  if
it  had  been  known  and  rejected,  it  would  doubtless,  like
other  alleged  errors,  have  been  combated  in  the  ICor'an),  and
his  very  crucifixion  denied.  We  do  not  find  a  single
ceremony  or  doctrine  of  Islam  in  any  degree  moulded,  or
even  tinged,  by  the  peculiar  tenets  of  Christianity  ;  while,  on
the  contrary,  Judaism  has  given  its  colour  to  the  whole
system,  and  lent  to  it  the  shape  and  type,  if  not  the  actual
substance,  of  many  ordinances.  But  although  Christianity
is  thus  so  remote  from  Islam  as  to,  have  had  practically  no

1  The  only  trace  of  acquaintance  with  the  period  subsequent  to  the
Ascension  and  the  spread  of  Christianity  is  the  story  (Sura  xxxvi.  12  ff.)
of  the  three  Apostles  (one  of  whom  is  supposed  to  have  been  Peter)  who
went  to  Antioch,  and  of  a  convert  suffering  martyrdom  there.  The  tale
of  the  seven  Sleepers,  who,  with  their  dog,  slumbered  309  years,  and
then  awakening  found  to  their  astonishment  the  whole  idolatrous  world
become  Christian,  can  hardly  come  under  this  head.  It  will  be  found,
with  abundance  of  childish  romance,  in  Sura  xviii.  Both  Suras  belong
to  the  late  Meccan  period.


VII.]  INFLUENCE  OF  CHRISTIANITY  SLIGHT  149

influence  in  the  formation  of  its  creed  and  ritual,  yet  in  the
theory  of  Mohammad's  system  it  occupies  a  place  equal,  if  not
superior,  to  that  of  Judaism.  To  understand  this  we  must
take  a  brief  review  of  the  development  of  the  system  itself.

At  the  outset of  his  ministry  Mohammad  professed  no  Growth  of
distinct  relation  with  any  previous  religion,  exxept  perhaps '^^°^,^™-
with  the  purer  element  of  Arabian  worship  said  to  have  been teaching
derived  from  Abraham,  though  now  grievously  overlaid  with
idolatry  and superstition. His mission was to recall the
Arabs  to  the  service  of  the  true  God  and  belief  in  '  the  day
of  reckoning.'

As  time went  on,  he gained  some scant acquaintance Koran  at
with the Scriptures of  the Jews and Christians,  and the ^^\^^  ^
religion founded  thereon. The  new  revelation for Arabia simply  the
was  now  announced  as  concurrent  with  the  previous  '  Books.' of  prev^us
The  Kor'an  was  described  as  being  mainly  an  attestation,  in Scriptures
the  Arabic  tongue  and  intended  for  the  people  of  Mecca  and
its neighbourhood, of  the preceding Scriptures. It was
strictly  auxiliary  in  its  object  and  local  in  its  action. From
the  attacks  of  his  opponents,  Mohammad  took  shelter  under
the  authority  of  the  sacred  writings  of  the  Jews  and  Christians
— an authority admitted in some measure even by his
adversaries. When his own work was condemned as a
'  forgery  '  or  '  antiquated  tale,'  the  most  common  and  most
effective  retort  was : — '  Nay,  but  it  is  a  confirmation  of  the
preceding  Revelation,  and  a  warning in simple Arabic  to
the  people  of  the  land.' The  number  and  the  solemnity  of
such asservations secured the confidence or at least the
neutrality,  of  both  Jews  and  Christians  (xlvi.  ii,  etc.).

But the teaching of  Mohammad could not  stop  here. Butgradu-
Was he not an  Apostle,  equally  inspired with  his  prede-  fg{,pg7ior"
cessors  ? Was  he  not  foretold  as  the  last  of  the  prophets,  by and  super-
Moses  in  the  Pentateuch,  and  in  the  Gospel  by  Jesus  ?  and f^^^^^^^^
if  so,  would  not  the  catholic  faith  as  now  moulded  by  him
remain  permanent  to  the  end  of  time? These  conclusions
were  fast  ripening  in  the  mind  of  Mohammad  ; and  their
effect  was  to  make  the  Kor'an  rise  superior  in  authority  over
both  the  Old  Testament  and the  New. Not  that  he  ever
held it to be superior  in kind  to  either. All  three — the
Kor'an,  the  Law,  and  the  Gospel — are  spoken  of  indifferently
as 'the Word of  God,'  and  the  belief  in  them  inculcated


I50


LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA


[chap.


As  the  equally  on  pain  of  everlasting  punishment.^ But  the  Kor'an

latfon'^T^" ^^^  latest  revelation  ; and,  in  so far  as  it  pleased  the

God's  will Almighty to  modify  His  preceding  commands,  it  must  be
paramount.


I.  Old

Testament
and  Gospel
enjoined  on
Jews  and
Christians
respectively


Siira  v.  72


Sura  V.  47  ff.


In  this  latter  phase  again  there  are  two  stages.
Mohammad  did  not  at  once  substitute  his  own  Revelation
for  the  previous  Scriptures.  The  Jew  was  still  to  follow  the
Law  ;  and  in  addition  he  was  to  believe  also  in  the  New
Testament  and  in  the  mission  of  Jesus.  The  Christian  was
to  hold  fast  by  his  Gospel.  But  both  Jew  and  Christian
were  to  admit,  as  co-ordinate  with  their  own  Prophets  and
Scriptures,  the  apostleship  of  Mohammad  and  the  authority
of  the  Kor'an.  The  necessity,  indeed,  of  conforming  to
their  respective  Revelations  is  urged  upon  Jews  and
Christians  in  the  strongest  terms.  The  Jews  of  Medina  are
repeatedly  summoned  'to  judge  by  the  Book,'  that  is  by  the
Old  Testament ;  and  are  warned  against  the  danger  of
accepting  a  part  only  of  God's  Word,  and  rejecting  a  part.
The  following  passages  inculcate  a  similar  duty  on  both  Jews
and  Christians  : —

Say,  Oh,  ye  people  of  the  Book  !  ye  do  not  stand  upon  any  sure
ground  until  ye  set  up  both  the  Law  ^  and  the  Gospel,  as  well  as  that
which  hath  been  (now)  sent  down  unto  you  from  your  Lord  {i.e.  the
Kor'an).

And  how  will  they  (the  Jews  of  Medina)  make  thee  their  judge,  since
they  have  already  by  them  the  Law,  wherein  is  the  command  of  God,
and  have  not  obeyed  it !  They  will  surely  turn  their  backs  after  that ;
and  they  are  not  believers.

Verily  We  have  sent  down  the  Old  Testament,  wherein  are  direction

^  The  New  Testament  is  called  in  the  Kor'an  /;z;7/(Evangelium),  and
described  as  a  revelation  given  by  God  to  Jesus.  It  is  evident  that  by
'the  Gospel'  Mohammad  meant  the  sacred  Scriptures  in  common  use
amongst  the  Christians  of  the  day.  He  may  have  supposed  that  these
Scriptures  were  '  given '  to  Jesus  ;  or  intended  only  that  the  doctrines  of
the  Gospel  were  revealed  by  God  to  Jesus,  and  by  him  taught  to  the
Apostles  who  afterwards  recorded  them.  However  this  may  be,  the
fact  is  in  nowise  affected,  that  Mohammad,  when  he  speaks  of  'the
Gospel '  and  '  the  Book,'  means  the  canon  of  Scripture  at  the  time  in  use
among  the  people  of  the  Book,  the  perusal  and  observance  of  which  is
strictly  and  unconditionally  enjoined  upon  the  Christians  of  the  day,

^  '  The  Taurat,'  which,  as  used  in  the  Kor'an,  means  either  the  Penta-
teuch or  the  entire  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament.  According  to  the
context  here,  the  latter  is  intended.


VII.]  THE  LAW  AND  GOSPEL  CONFIRMED  151

and  light.  The  Prophets  that  professed  the  true  faith  judged  the  Jews
thereby  :  and  the  Doctors  and  Priests  did  likewise,  in  accordance  with
the  Book  of  God  committed  to  their  charge  ;  and  they  were  witnesses
thereof.  Wherefore  fear  not  men,  but  fear  me  ;  and  sell  not  the  signs
of  God  for  a  small  price.  And  whosoever  doth  not  judge  by  that
WHICH  God  hath  revealed,  verily  they  are  the  unbelievers
{Kdjirlti).  And  We  have  written  therein  for  them  ; — Verily  life  for  life,
and  eye  for  eye,  and  nose  for  nose,  and  ear  for  ear,  tooth  for  tooth,  and
for  wounding  retaliation  :  and  he  that  remitteth  the  same  as  alms,  it  is
an  atonement  for  him.  And  whosoever  judgeth  not  by  that
WHICH  God  hath  revealed,  they  are  the  transgressors.

And  We  caused  Jesus,  the  Son  of  Mary,  to  follow  in  their  footsteps,
attesting  the  Scripture,  viz.,  the  Law  which  preceded  him.  And  We
gave  him  the  Gospel  wherein  are  guidance  and  light,  attesting  the  Law
given  before  it,  a  direction  and  an  admonition  to  the  pious  : — and  that
the  people  of  the  Gospel  (Christians)  might  judge  according  to  that
which  God  hath  revealed  therein.  And  whosoever  doth  not  judge
according  to  that  which  God  hath  revealed,  they  are  the

WICKED  ones.

And  We  have  revealed  unto  thee  the  Book  of  the  Kor'an  in  truth,
attesting  the  Scripture  which  precedeth  it ;  and  a  custodian  {or  witness)
thereof.  Wherefore  judge  between  them  in  accordance  with  what  God
hath  revealed,  and  follow  not  their  vain  desires  away  from  that  which
hath  been  given  unto  thee.

To  every  one  have  We  given  a  law  and  a  way.  And  if  God  had
pleased,  He  had  made  you  all  one  People.  But  {He  hath  done  otherivlse)
that  he  might  try  you  in  that  which  He  hath  severally  given  unto  you.
Wherefore  press  forward  in  good  works.  Unto  God  shall  ye  all  return,
and  He  will  declare  unto  you  that  concerning  which  ye  disagree.

Judge  therefore  between  them  according  to  what  God  hath  revealed,
and  follow  not  their  desires,  and  beware  of  them  lest  they  tempt  thee
aside  from  a  part  of  that  which  God  hath  revealed  unto  thee.

Thus  the  former  revelations  were  to  be  believed  in  collec-
tively as  the  Word  of  God  by  all  the  faithful  of  whatever
sect.  The  Old  and  New  Testaments  were  further  to  be
followed  implicitly,  the  former  by  the  Jews,  the  latter  by  the
Christians,  and  both  were  to  be  observed  by  Mohammad
himself  when  determining  their  respective  disputes.  In
contested  and  doubtful  points,  the  Kor'an  was  to  be  the
conclusive  oracle.

In  conformity  with  this expansive  system,  we  find  that Grand

at a  period  long  anterior  to the Hijra, Mohammad pro- catholic

1 1 • 1 T' - i 1 • 1  ■  f^'*'^ ;— the

pounded  m  the  Koran  the  doctrine  that  to  every  people  a faith  of

prophet had  been  sent,  so  that  a  grand  catholic  faith  had

pervaded all ages and revelations, — a faith which, in its


Abraham


152


LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA


[chap.


Perverted
in  the
course  of
ages


Mohammad
the  final
Restorer


Sura  xlii.
II  ff.


purest  form,  had  been  held  by  the  patriarch  Abraham.  This
primitive  religion,  varying  at  each  dispensation  only  in
accidental  rites,  comprised,  as  its  essential  features,  belief  in
the  one  true  God,  rejection  of  idolatry  and  of  the  worship  of
mediators  as  *  sharers '  in  the  power  and  glory  of  the  Deity,
and  implicit  surrender  of  the  will  to  God.  Such  surrender  is
termed  '  Islam ' ;  and  hence  Abraham  is  called  '  the  first  of
Muslims.'  This  grand  fact  it  was  now  the  mission  of
Mohammad  to  reaffirm.  Each  successive  dispensation  had
been  abused  by  its  votaries,  who  in  the  course  of  time  had
turned  aside  from  its  catholic  groundwork.  They  had
magnified  or  misinterpreted  rites  intended  to  be  but  ancillary
and  external ;  by  perverting  doctrines,  they  had  turned  the
gift  into  a  curse.  Amidst  the  contending  factions,  truth
might  be  discovered  by  the  earnest  inquirer,  but  by  steps
now  difficult  and  uncertain.  The  Jew  denounced  the
Christian,  and  the  Christian  the  Jew.  Some  worshipped  not
only  Jesus  but  his  mother  also  ;  others  held  both  to  be  mere
creatures.  From  the  labyrinth  of  confusion  and  error  it
pleased  the  Almighty  once  again  to  deliver  mankind.
Mohammad  was  the  Apostle  of  this  grand  and  final  mission,
and,  amid  the  clash  of  opposing  authorities,  his  judgment
was  to  be  heard  unquestioned  and  supreme.  Thus  in  a
passage  revealed  at  Mecca  : —

He  hath  ordained  unto  you  the  religion  which  he  commanded  unto
Noah  ;  and  which  We  have  revealed  unto  thee,  and  which  We  com-
manded Abraham  and  Moses  and  Jesus  ;  saying,  Set  up  the  faith  and
fall  not  into  dissension.  .  .  .

And  they  fell  not  into  dissension  until  after  the  knowledge  (of  divine
revelation)  had  come  imto  them,  out  of  enmity  among  themselves  ;  and
if  the  Word  from  thy  Lord  had  not  gone  forth  (respiting  them)  unto  a
set  time,  the  matter  had  been  decided  between  them.  And  verily  they
that  have  inherited  the  Scriptures  after  them  are  in  a  perplexing  doubt
regarding  the  same.

Wherefore  call  them  thereto  {i.e.  unto  the  catholic  Faith)  and  be
steadfast  as  thou  hast  been  commanded,  and  follow  not  their  desires  ;
and  say, — I  believe  in  all  the  Scriptures  which  God  hath  revealed  ;  and
I  am  commanded  to  do  justice  between  you.  God  is  our  Lord  and  your
Lord.  To  us  will  be  reckoned  our  works,  and  to  you  your  works.  There
is  no  ground  of  difference  or  contention  between  us  and  you.


Thus  in  the  growth  of  Mohammad's  opinions  there  was  a
preliminary  stage in  which  previous  religions  were  on  an


VII. ]


THE  RELIGION  OF  ABRAHAM


153


equal  footing  with  Islam,  if  only  purged  of  their  perversions.
But  in  the  final  development  of  his  creed,  Mohammad  makes
the  Kor'an  rise  triumphant  over  both  the  Law  and  the
Gospel,  and  casts  them  unheeded  into  the  shade.  This,
however,  was  not  the  result  of  any  express  teaching,  but
rather  the  necessary  though  tacit  outcome  of  his  system.
The  impression  which  would  attribute  to  Mohammad  either
formal  cancelment  of  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Scriptures,  or
imputations  against  their  genuineness  and  authority,  is
without  foundation.  No  expression  regarding  either  the
Jewish  or  Christian  Scriptures  ever  escaped  the  lips  of
Mohammad  other  than  of  implicit  reverence.^  It  was  the
opposition  of  the  Jews,  and  the  martial  supremacy  of  Islam,
that  imperceptibly  led  to  the  exclusive  authority  of
Mohammad  and  the  Kor'an.  The  change  by  which  the
Prophet  dispensed  with  previous  Revelations  was  made  in
silence.  In  the  concluding,  as  in  the  earliest  days  of  his
mission,  Mohammad  hardly  ever  refers  to  the  former
Scriptures,  whether  Jewish  or  Christian.  His  scheme  was
now  complete,  and  rested  upon  other  pillars.  The  steps  by
which  he  had  ascended  were  left  far  beneath,  forgotten  and
uncared  for.  In  his  later  years  Islam  diverged  rapidly  from
all  sympathy  with  the  Bible.  An  appeal  to  previous
Revelation  would  now  have  proved  embarrassing,  and  silence
was  natural.  Whatever  effect  the  doctrines  of  Christianity
properly  understood  might  have  had  on  Mohammad  while
yet  inquiring  and  moulding  for  himself  a  creed,  it  is  evident
that  long  before  the  final  settlement  of  Islam  his  system  had
become  crystallised  into  a  form  which  it  was  impossible  for
any  new  influences  materially  to  alter.  Argument  now  was
out  of  place.  Mohammad  was  the  Prophet  of  God,  and  his
word  was  law.  Opposing  doctrine  must  vanish  before  the
divine  command.  The  exclusive  and  intolerant  position
finally  assumed  by  Islam  is  sufficiently  manifest  in  the  ban

^  In  a  treatise  by  the  Author,  entitled  The  Testimony  bor?ie  by  the
Coran  to  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Scriptures  (published  by  the  S.P.C.  K.)
it  is  shown  that  unequivocal  testimony  is  borne  by  the  Kor'iln  to  the
Jewish  and  Christian  Scriptures  as  current  in  the  time  of  Mohammad  ;
that  the  evidence  extends  equally  to  their  genuineness  and  authority ;
and  that  there  is  not  a  hint  anywhere  throughout  the  Kor'an  of  their
cancelment  or  interpolation. [But  cf.  iv.  48  and  parallel  passages.]


II.  Kor'an
entirely
supersedes
previous
Revelation  ;


Which
towards
the  close  of
his  career
is  hardly
alluded  to


Islam
eventually
diverges
from  the
Bible


Jewish  and

Christian

religions

allowed

only  on

sufferance


154


LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA


[chap.


issued  at  the  Farewell  pilgrimage  against  Jews  and  Christians,
who  were  for  ever  debarred  the  sacred  rites  and  holy  pre-
cincts of  the  Ka'ba ;  and  by  the  divine  command  to  war
against  them  until,  in  confession  of  the  supremacy  of  Islam,
they  should  consent  to  the  payment  of  tribute.


Knowledge
whence
derived  ?

Misleading
teaching
as  to  cruci-
fixion


Connection
of  Moham-
mad's
teaching
with  Gnos-
ticism


From  whence,  we  may  now  inquire,  did  Mohammad  gain
such  a  meagre  and  deceptive  view  of  Christianity?

A  significant  feature  in  the  teaching  of  the  Kor'an  is  that
Jesus  was  not  crucified ;  but  one  resembling  Jesus,  and
mistaken  by  the  Jews  for  him.  This  is  alleged  not  in
contradiction  of  the  Christians,  but  in  opposition  to  the  Jews,
who  gloried  in  the  assertion  that  Jesus  had  been  put  to
death  by  them.  Hence  it  would  almost  seem  that  Mohammad
believed  his  teaching  on  this  head  to  accord  with  that  of  the
Church ;  and  that  he  was  ignorant  of  the  fundamental
doctrine  of  the  Christian  faith,  the  death  of  Christ,  and
redemption  through  it.  The  singular  correspondence  between
the  allusions  to  the  crucifixion  in  the  Kor'an  and  the  wild
speculations  of  certain  early  heretics  has  led  some  to  conjec-
ture that  Mohammad  derived  his  notions  from  a  Gnostic
source.  But  Gnosticism  had  disappeared  from  Egypt  before
the  sixth  century,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that
it  had  at  any  time  gained  a  footing  in  Arabia.  Besides,  there
is  no  affinity  between  the  supernaturalism  of  the  Gnostics
and  Docetas,  and  the  rationalism  of  the  Kor'an.  According
to  the  former,  the  Deity  must  be  removed  far  from  the  gross
contact  of  evil  matter :  and  the  aeon  Christ,  which  alighted
upon  Jesus  at  his  baptism,  must  ascend  to  its  native  regions
before  the  crucifixion.  With  Mohammad  (apart  from  some
passages  implying  a  higher  origin),  Jesus  Christ  was  a  mere
man,  wonderfully  born  indeed,  but  still  an  ordinary  man  ;
a  servant  of  the  Almighty,  as  others  had  been  before  him.
But  although  there  is  no  ground  for  believing  that  Gnostic
doctrines  were  taught  to  Mohammad,  yet  some  of  the
strange  fancies  of  those  heretics  preserved  in  Syrian
tradition  may  have  come  to  the  ears  of  his  Jewish  converts,
and  have  been  by  them  adopted  as  a  likely  and  convenient
mode  of  reconciling  both  Jews  and  Christians  to  the  new
religion.  The  Israelite  would  have  less  antipathy  to  the
catholic  faith  of  Islam  and  the  recognition  of  the  mission  of


VII.]


THE  CRUCIFIXION


155


Jesus,  if  allowed  to  believe  that  Christians  as  well  as  Jews
had  been  in  error ;  that  his  people  had  not,  in  fact,  put
Jesus  the  promised  Mohammad  to  a  shameful  death ;  but
that,  like  Enoch  and  Elijah,  he  had  been  received  up  into  the
heaven.  'Christ  a-iicijicd'  \w2ls  still,  as  in  the  days  of  Paul,
'a  stumbling-block'  to  the  Jews.  But  thus  the  stumbling-
block  might  be  removed ;  and,  without  offence  to  his
national  pride,  the  Jew  might  confess  his  belief  in  a  weak
and  mutilated  Gospel.  It  was  a  compromise  that  might
readily  approve  itself  to  a  Jewish  mind  already  unsettled  by
the  prophetic  claims  of  Mohammad.

By  some  again  it  has  been  attempted  to  trace  the
Christian  element  in  the  Kor'an  to  certain  apocryphal
gospels  supposed  to  have  been  within  the  reach  of
Mohammad.  But,  though  some  few  of  its  details  do  coincide
with  these  spurious  writings,  its  statements  as  a  rule  in  no
wise  correspond.^  Whereas  had  there  been  a  ready  access  to
such  books,  we  cannot  doubt  that  Mohammad  would  (as  in
the  case  of  Jewish  history  and  legend)  have  borrowed  largely
from  them.  Others  believed  that  Mohammad  acquired  his
knowledge  from  no  written  source,  but  from  Christian
tradition  in  the  peninsula.  As  his  sole  source  of  information,
however,  the  indigenous  tradition  of  Arabia  was  altogether
insufficient  for  the  purpose.  There  is  no  ground  for  believing
that  either  at  Mecca  or  Medina  there  existed  anything  of  the
kind  from  which  could  have  been  framed  a  narrative  agreeing,
as  that  of  the  Kor'an  does  in  many  particulars  and  even  in
some  of  its  expressions,  with  the  Gospels  both  genuine  and
apocryphal,  while  in  others  it  follows  if  not  outstrips  the
popular  legend.

But  tradition,  quite  sufficient  for  this  end,  survived  in  the
southern  confines  of  Syria,  and  from  thence  no  doubt  reached
Mohammad  through  some  Jewish  medium.  The  general
outline  of  Christian  story,  as  we  find  it  in  the  Kor'an,  having


Denial  of
crucifixion
a  compro-
mise be-
tween Jews
and  Chris-
tians


Apocr}'-
phal  gospels
not  accessible
to  Mofiam-
mad


Christian
tradition  in
Arabia  in-
sufficient


Syrian  tradi-
tion likeliest
source  of
Moliam-
mad's
knowledije


^  The  '  Gospel  of  Barnabas '  is  of  course  excepted,  because  it  is  the
modern  work  of  a  Christian  convert  to  Islam.  [An  English  translation  of
this  Gospel  accompanied  by  the  Italian  text  has  been  published  by  L.
and  L.  Ragg,  Oxford,  1907.  This  undertaking  was  due  to  the  representa-
tions of  Dr  J.  W.  Youngson,  a  missionary  to  Mohammadans  in  India.
An  Arabic  version  has  also  appeared  in  Egypt  in  1907,  for  the  use  of
Muslims. Cf.  Expository  Times,  vol.  xix.,  p.  263  ft'.]


156


LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA


[chap.


Trinity
of  the

Kor'an  ;  and
the  Virgin
Mary


Holy  Ghost
unknown  to
Mohammad
as  person
in  the
Trinity


a  few  salient  points  in  accordance  with  the  Gospel  and  the
rest  filled  up  with  fabulous  matter,  is  just  such  as  we  may
expect  an  inquiring  Jew  to  learn  from  the  traditions  current
amongst  the  lower  classes  in  the  Holy  Land.  Something
may  have  been  learned  from  the  Christian  slaves  of  Mecca ;
but  these  had  generally  been  carried  off  in  boyhood,  and
would  remember  little  more  than  a  few  Scriptural  histories
with  perhaps  some  fragments  of  their  creed.  Either  the  Jew,
or  the  Christian  may  also  have  heard  the  opening  of  the
Gospel  of  Luke,  and  communicated  to  Mohammad  the  story
of  the  births  of  John  and  Jesus,  as  we  find  them  in  the
Kor'an.  It  is  also  possible  that  some  one  may  have  repeated
to  Mohammad  from  memory,  or  read  to  him  from  a  manu-
script, the  narrative  in  the  Gospel  containing  these  details  ; —
but  this  is  mere  conjecture.^

It  is  not  very  apparent,  from  the  few  indistinct  notices  in
the  Kor'an,  what  Mohammad  believed  the  Christian  doctrine
of  the  Trinity  to  be.  In  a  passage  already  quoted,  Christians
are  reprobated  for  '  taking  Jesus  and  his  Mother  for  two  Gods
besides  the  Lord.'  It  is  hence  concluded  that  the  Trinity  of
the  Kor'an  is  that  of  the  Father,  Mary,  and  Jesus.  Such
may  have  been  the  case,  but  it  is  not  certain.  The  service  of
Mary  had  long  been  carried  to  the  pitch  nearly  of  divine
worship  ;  the  '  Orthodox  '  party  persecuted  those  who  would
not  accord  her  the  title  '  Mother  of  God ' ;  and  Mohammad
may  have  censured  the  Christians  for  thus  virtually  taking
'  Jesus  and  his  Mother  for  two  Gods,'  possibly  without  any
advertence  to  the  Trinity.  On  the  other  hand,  the  assertion
that  Mohammad  believed  Mary  to  be  held  by  the  Christians
as  divine  is  supported  by  the  absence  of  any  recognition  of
the  Holy  Ghost  as  a  person  in  the  Trinity.  The  only  passage
in  which  the  Trinity  is  specifically  mentioned  makes  no
allusion  whatever  to  the  Holy  Ghost ;  nor  are  the  expressions
'the  Spirit,'  and  'the  Holy  Spirit,'  which  occur  frequently  in
the  Kor'an,  used  by  Mohammad  as  if  in  the  Christian  creed
they  signified  a  divine  person  ;  for,  as  already  shown,  they
usually  mean  Gabriel,  the  messenger  of  God's  revelations  to
Mohammad. A  confusion  of Gabriel  with  the  Holy  Spirit

^  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  an  Arabic  translation  of  the  Scriptures,
or  any  part  of  them,  was  ever  within  Mohammad's  reach,  notwithstand-
ing the  traditions  regarding  Waraka  having  copied  from  them.


VII  ]


THE  VIRGIN  MARY


157


Jewish  and
Christian
prophecies
and  expec-
tations


may  possibly  have  arisen  in  the  Prophet's  mind  from  Gabriel
having  been  the  medium  of  the  Annunciation,  while
Christians  at  the  same  time  hold  that  Jesus  was  conceived  by
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  phrase  is  also  repeatedly
used  in  a  more  general  sense  as  signifying  the  Spirit  that
gives  life  and  inspiration.  It  was  the  divine  '  Spirit '  breathed
into  the  clay  which  imparted  life  to  Adam ;  and  Jesus,
who  like  Adam  had  no  earthly  father,  is  also  spoken  of  as
'the  Spirit  from  God'  breathed  into  Mary.  So  also  when
it  is  said  that  God  ^ strcngtheticd Jesus  with  the  Holy  Spirit'
we  may  perhaps  trace  the  use  of  current  Christian  speech,
not  inconsistent  with  Jewish  ideas.^

The  assurance  with  which  Mohammad  appeals  to  Jews
and  Christians  as  both  in  expectation  of  a  promised  prophet
whom,  if  they  would  put  aside  their  prejudices,  they  must  at
once  recognise  in  himself '  even  as  they  recognised  their  own
sons,'  is  very  singular,  and  must  surely  have  been  counte-
nanced by  converts  from  both  religions.  Two  different  and
indeed  incompatible  expectations  were  adroitly  combined
into  a  cumulative  proof  of  his  own  mission.  The  Jewish
anticipation  of  their  Messiah,  and  the  perfectly  distinct
anticipation  by  the  Christians  of  the  second  advent  of
Christ,  were  thus  fused  into  a  common  argument  for  a
coming  prophet  expected  by  both  Jews  and  Christians  and
foretold  in  all  the  Scriptures  ; — which  expected  personage  was
the  Prophet  himself.  That  the  promise  of  the  Paraclete  was
capable  of  perversion  we  see  in  the  heresy  of  Montanus ;  and
it  is  probable  that  a  garbled  version  of  the  same  promise
communicated  to  Mohammad  may  have  given  rise  to  the
following  passage : —

And  call  to  mind  when  Jesus,  Son  of  Mary,  said  :— Oh  Children Sura  Ixi.  6
of  Israel ;  Verily,  I  am  an  apostle  of  God  unto  you,  attesting  the  Book
of  the  Law  revealed  before  me,  and  giving  good  tidings  of  a  prophet
that  shall  come  after  me,  whose  name  is  Ahmed.^

The  prophecy  of  Moses  to  the  Israelites,  that  '  God  will And  of  the
raise  up  unto  thee  a  prophet  from  the  midst  of  thee,  of  thy
brethren^  like  unto  me,'  may  also  plausibly  have  been  adduced

'  Compare  Psalm  li.  12  :  '  Uphold  me  with  thy  free  spirit.'
2  Ahmed  is from the same root as Mohajiwiad^ signifying 'the
Praised. See  John  xvi.  7,  where  vapaKXriTos  may  in  some  imperfect  or
garbled  translation  have  been  rendered  by  the  equivalent  of  ntpiKXvTos.


Promise
of  the
Paraclete ;


Messiah
perverted


LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA


[chap.


Mohammad
the  Prophet
looked  for
by  both
people


Meccaiis
taunt  him
with  being
prompted
by  others


by  some  perverted  Jew  in  favour  of  the  Arabian  prophet,
and  other  predictions  referring  to  the  Messiah  were  doubtless
forced  into  a  similar  service.  That  he  was  the  Prophet
promised  to  both  Jews  and  Christians  lay  indeed  at  the  root
of  the  catholic  system  so  strongly  inculcated  by  Mohammad
in  the  middle  stage  of  his  course.  He  persuaded  himself
that  it  was  so :  and  the  assumption,  once  admitted,  retained
possession  of  his  mind.

From  these  remarks  we  may  conclude  that,  while  some
information  regarding  Christianity  may  have  been  drawn
from  Christian  slaves  or  Arabs,  Mohammad  gained  his  chief
knowledge  of  Christianity  from  Syria,  through  the  same
Jewish  medium  which,  at  an  earlier  period,  furnished  the
more  copious  details  of  Jewish  history.  His  adversaries  at
Mecca  did  not  conceal  their  suspicion  that  the  prompting
from  which  the  Scriptural  and  legendary  tales  proceeded  was
not  solely  that  of  a  supernatural  inspiration.  They  imputed
to  him  the  aid  of  strangers  : —

From  whence  shall  there  be  an  Admonition  for  them  ;  for,  verily,  there

hath  come  unto  them  an  evident  Apostle  ; —
Then  they  turn  from  him  and  say, — One  taught  by  others,  a  Madman  !
And  the  Unbelievers  say  ; Verily  this  is  a  fraud  which  he  hath  fabricated^

and other  people  have  assisted  him  therein. But  they  say  that

which  is  unjust  and  false. * * *
They  say  ;  These  are  Fables  of  the  ancients  which  he  hath  had  written

doivn;  which  are  dictated  unto  him  morning  and  evening.
Say  :  He  hath  revealed  it  who  knoweth  that  which  is  hidden  in  Heaven

and  in  Earth. He  is  forgiving  and  merciful. * * *
Sura  xvi.  105  And  again  : Verily  WE know that  they  say, — Surely a  certain  man

teacheth  him. But  the  tongue  of  him  whom  they  hint  at  is  foreign,

while  this  Revelation  is  in  the  tongue  of  simple  Arabic.


Sura  xliv
12  ff.


Sura  XXV
6f.


Promptings
of  ignorant
Jews  trans-
formed into
'divine
Kor'an '


Style  of
Kor'an


Whatever  the  rough  material,  its  passage  through  the
alembic  of  '  simple  Arabic '  converted  it,  to  the  Muslim  eye,
into  a  gem  of  unearthly  water.  The  recitations  of  some
credulous  and  ill-informed  Jew  reappeared  as  the  inspirations
of  the  Almighty  dictated  by  Gabriel,  the  noblest  of  his
heavenly  messengers.  The  wild  legend  and  the  garbled
Scripture  story  of  yesterday  comes  forth  on  the  morrow  as  a
portion  of  the  divine  and  eternal  Kor'an.

Teaching  of  Mohammad  during his  last  three  years at
Mecca. — The  Kor'an  continues  during  the  last  three  years  of


VII.]  STYLE  OF  LATER  MECCAN  SURAS  159

Mohammad's  residence  at  Mecca  to  be  made  up,  as  before,  durin?  this
of  arguments  in  refutation  of  the  errors  and  cavillings  of  P-"^'^
his  fellow-citizens ;  of  the  proofs  of  God's  omnipotence,
omniscience,  and  unity ;  of  vivid  picturings  of  the  judgment
day  and  of  heaven  and  hell ;  and  of  legendary  and  Spiritual
stories.  The  later  Suras  contain  repeated  allusions  to  the
approaching  emigration.  The  great  verities  of  a  minute  and
over-ruling  providence  and  final  retribution  are  sometimes
illustrated  by  passages  of  grand  imagery  and  true  poetry.
The  bold  impersonation  of  THUNDER  in  the  following
quotation  may  be  taken  as  a  sample  : —

Verily  God  changeth  not  his  dealings  with  a  People,  until  they  change Sfira  xiii.
that  which  is  in  their  souls. And  when  God  willeth  evil  unto  a  People, ^^ *
there  is  none  that  can  turn  it  away,  nor  have  they  any  protector  besides
Him.

It  is  He  that  showeth  you  the  Lightning  to  inspire  fear  and  hope,
and  raiseth  the  heavy  clouds.  The  Thunder  doth  celebrate  His
praise  ;  and  the  Angels  also,  from  awe  of  Him.  And  He  sendeth  forth
His  bolts;  and  shivereth  therewith  whom  He  pleaseth,  while  they  are
wrangling  about  God  : — for  He  is  terrible  in  might !

He  alone  is  rightly  invoked.  And  those  whom  they  invoke  beside
Him,  they  answer  them  not  at  all,  otherwise  than  as  one  stretching  forth
both  hands  unto  the  water  that  it  may  reach  his  mouth,  and  it  reacheth
it  not.  So  is  the  invocation  of  the  unbelievers  founded  only  in  error.
And  to  God  boweth  down  in  worship  whatsoever  is  in  the  Heavens,  and
in  the  Earth,  voluntarily  or  by  force  ;  and  their  shadows  likewise  in  the
morning  and  in  the  evening.^

Say: — Who  is  the  Lord  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  earth?  Say —
GOD.  Say  : — Wherefore,  then,  do  ye  take  besides  Him  guardians  who
have  no  power  to  do  even  their  ownselves  a  benefit  nor  an  injury  ?  Say  :
— What !  Are  the  blind  and  the  seeing  equal !  What !  is  the  darkness
equal  with  the  light?  Or  do  they  give  unto  God  partners  that  create
like  unto  His  creation,  so  that  the  creation  (of  both)  should  appear  alike
in  their  eyes  ?  Say  : — GOD  is  the  Creator  of  all  things.  He  is  the  One  ;
the  Avenger  !

He  bringeth  down  from  on  high  the  rain,  and  the  valleys  flow,  each
according  to  its  measure  ;  and  the  flood  beareth  the  swelling  froth.
And  from  that  which  men  melt  in  the  furnace  to  make  ornaments  or
vessels  withal,  there  ariseth  a  scum,  the  like  thereof.  Thus  doth  God
compare  the  truth  with  falsehood.  As  for  the  scum  it  passeth  away  like
the  froth  :  but  that  which  benefiteth  mankind  remaineth  on  the  Earth.

Thus  doth  God  put  forth  similitudes.

^  A  conceit  Mohammad  was  fond  of  The  shadows  perform  obeisance
to  God,  being  long  and  prostrate  in  the  morning,  upright  during  the
day,  and  again  elongated  in  prostration  in  the  evening.


i6o


LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA


[chap.


Positive
precepts


Superstitions
denounced


But  Meccan
pilgrimage
and  rites
maintained

Siira  xxii.
27  ff.


The  positive  precepts  of  this  period  are  still  very  limited.
The  five  times  of  prayer  are  said  to  have  been  enjoined  by
God  at  the  period  of  the  Prophet's  ascent  to  heaven  one  or
two  years  before  the  Hijra.  The  flesh  of  animals  was  per-
mitted for  food  if  killed '  in  the  name  of  the  Lord'  ^  but  the
blood,  and  that  which  dieth  of  itself,  and  the  flesh  of  swine,
were  strictly  prohibited.^  While  some  superstitions  were
denounced,  and  the  practice  of  compassing  the  Ka'ba  naked
was  proscribed  as  a  device  of  Satan,^  the  rites  of  pilgrimage
were  now  enjoined  as  of  divine  authority  and  in  themselves
propitious  to  piety.  It  is  probable  that  the  Jews  strongly
objected  to  this  new  feature  of  the  reformed  faith,  and  we
accordingly  find  a  laboured  defence  of  it : —

And  call  to  remembrance  when  We  gave  unto  Abraham  the  site  of
the  Temple  (at  Mecca) ;  saying, — Associate  not  in  worship  anything
with  Me,  and  purify  My  house  for  them  that  compass  it,  and  for  them
that  stand  up  and  bow  down  to  pray.

And  proclaim  unto  Mankind  a  pilgrimage,  that  they  may  come  unto
thee  on  foot,  and  upon  every  lean  camel,*  flocking  from  every  distant
road : — that  they  may  testify  to  the  benefits  they  have  received,  and
commemorate  the  name  of  God,  on  the  appointed  days,  over  the  brute
beasts  which  We  have  given  them  for  a  provision  : — Wherefore  eat
thereof  and  feed  the  needy  and  the  poor.  Then  let  them  stop  the
neglect  of  their  persons,^  fulfil  their  vows,  and  compass  the  ancient
House.

This  do.  And  he  that  honoureth  the  sacred  ordinances  of  God  it  is
well  for  him  with  his  Lord.  The  flesh  of  cattle  is  lawful  unto  you
excepting  that  which  hath  been  read  unto  you.  Wherefore  abstain  from
the  pollutions  of  idols,  and  abstain  from  false  speech,  following  the
catholic  faith  respecting  God,  not  associating  any  with  Him  ;  for  he  that
associateth  any  with  God  is  like  that  which  falleth  from  the  heavens,

^  The  reason  was  the  same  as  that  which  led  to  the  Apostolical
admonition  to  abstain  from  '  pollutions  of  idols,'  and  '  meats  offered  to
idols,'  and  points  to  the  Arab  practice  of  slaying  their  animals  as  a
sacrifice  to,  or  in  the  name  of,  their  deities.

2  The  influence  of  Jewish  habit  and  precept  is  here  manifest.  It  is
possible  that  some  of  the  pieces  quoted  above  as  Meccan  may  have
been  in  reality  of  later  date  ;  they  may  have  been  given  forth  at  Medina
after  the  emigration,  and  relegated  to  passages  of  corresponding  tenor
in  Meccan  Suras.

3  Sura  vii.  29.  This  was  connected  with  the  Horns :  see  Introduction,
p.  cxviii.

*  Lean  and  famished  from  the  long  journey.

°  I.e.  they  might  now  again  pare  their  nails,  shave  their  heads,  &c.,
and  resume  their  ordinary  dress. See  Introduction,  p.  ci.


VII.]  THE  PILGRIMAGE  t6i

and  the  birds  snatch  it  away,  or  the  wind  bloweth  it  into  a  distant
place.

Hearken  : — whosoever  honoureth  the  Sacrifices  of  God,  verily  they
proceed  from  piety  of  the  heart.  From  them  (the  victims)  ye  derive
benefits  until  the  appointed  time  :  then  they  are  brought  for  sacrifice
unto  the  ancient  House.

And  unto  every  People  have  We  appointed  rites,  that  they  may  com-
memorate the  name  of  GOD  over  the  brute  beasts  with  which  He  hath
provided  them.  And  your  GOD  is  One  God  ;  wherefore  submit  thyself
unto  him  and  bear  good  tidings  unto  the  humble  : — Unto  those  whose
hearts,  when  God  is  mentioned,  tremble  thereat ; — and  unto  those  that
patiently  bear  what  befalleth  them  and  observe  prayer,  and  spend  in
alms  of  that  We  have  provided  them  with.

And  the  Victims  have  We  made  unto  you  as  ordinances  of  God.
From  them  ye  receive  benefit.  Commemorate  therefore  the  name  of
God  over  them  as  they  stand  disposed  in  a  line,  and  when  they  fall  slain
upon  their  sides,  eat  thereof,  and  give  unto  the  poor,  both  to  him  that  is
silent  and  him  that  beggeth.  Thus  have  We  given  thee  dominion  over
them  that  ye  may  be  thankful.  Their  flesh  is  not  accepted  of  God,  nor
yet  their  blood  :  but  your  piety  is  accepted  of  Him.

Few  and  simple  as  were  the  precepts  of  Mohammad  up  to Effect  pro-
thi's time,  his  teaching  had  wrought a marvellous and a fjiching'of
mighty  work. Never  since  the  days  when  primitive  Chris- Mohammad
tianity  startled  the  world  from  its  sleep  and  waged  mortal
combat  with  heathenism,  had  men  seen  the  like  arousing  of
spiritual  life,  and  faith  that  suffered  sacrifice  and  took  joyfully
the  spoiling  of  goods  for  conscience'  sake.

From  time  beyond  memory,  Mecca  and  the  whole  penin- Previous
sula  had  been  steeped  in  spiritual  torpor. The  slight  and for'pid^tate
transient  influences  of  Judaism,  Christianity,  or  philosophical of  Mecca
inquiry,  upon  the  Arab  mind  had  been  but  as  the  ruffling
here  and  there  of  the  surface  of  a  quiet  lake  ;  all  remained
still  and  motionless  below. The  people  were  sunk  in  supersti-
tion, cruelty,  and  vice. It  was  a  common  practice  for  the  eldest
son  to  take  to  wife  his  father's  widows,  whom  he  inherited
with  the  rest  of  the  estate. Pride  and  poverty  had  introduced
among  them  (as  they  have  among  the  Hindoos)  the  crime  of
female  infanticide.^ Their  religion  was  a  gross  idolatry  ;  and
their  faith  the  dark superstitious dread of  unseen  beings
whose  goodwill  they  sought  to propitiate and whose dis-
pleasure to  avert,  rather  than  the  belief  in  an  over-ruling

1  It  is  stringently  proscribed  in  the  Kor'an  (Ixxxi.  8,  &c.),  and  dfs
appeared  with  the  progress  of  Islam.

L


1 6:


LAST  THREE  YEARS  AT  MECCA


[chap.


Effect  pro-
duced on
converts  by
Moham-
mad's
ministry  at
Mecca


Their  sacri-
fices and
abandon-
ment of
home


Providence.  The  Life  to  come  and  Retribution  of  good  and
evil  as  motives  of  action  were  practically  unknown.

Thirteen  years  before  the  Hijra,  Mecca  lay  lifeless  in  this
debased  state.  What  a  change  had  those  thirteen  years  now
produced  !  A  band  of  several  hundred  persons  had  rejected
idolatry,  adopted  the  worship  of  One  God,  and  surrendered
themselves  implicitly  to  the  guidance  of  what  they  believed  a
Revelation  from  Him  ;  praying  to  the  Almighty  with  fre-
quency and  fervour,  looking  for  pardon  through  His  mercy,
and  striving  to  follow  after  good  works,  almsgiving,  purity,
and  justice.  They  now  lived  under  a  constant  sense  of  the
omnipotent  power  of  God,  and  of  His  providential  care  over
the  minutest  of  their  concerns.  In  all  the  gifts  of  nature,  in
every  relation  of  life,  at  each  turn  of  their  affairs,  individual
or  public,  they  saw  His  hand.  And,  above  all,  the  new
existence  in  which  they  exulted  was  regarded  as  the  mark  of
His  especial  grace  ;  while  the  unbelief  of  their  blinded  fellow-
citizens  was  the  hardening  stamp  of  reprobation.  Moham-
mad was  the  minister  of  life  to  them,  the  source  under  God
of  their  new-born  hopes  ;  and  to  him  they  yielded  an  implicit
submission.

In  so  short  a  period  Mecca  had,  from  this  wonderful
movement,  been  rent  into  two  factions  which,  unmindful  of
the  old  landmarks  of  tribe  and  family,  arrayed  themselves  in
deadly  opposition  one  against  the  other.  The  Believers  bore
persecution  with  a  patient  and  tolerant  spirit.  And  though
it  was  their  wisdom  so  to  do,  the  credit  of  a  magnanimous
forbearance  may  be  freely  accorded.  One  hundred  men  and
women,  rather  than  abjure  their  precious  faith,  had  abandoned
home  and  sought  refuge,  till  the  storm  should  be  overpast,  in
Abyssinian  exile.  And  now  again  a  still  larger  number,
with  the  Prophet  himself,  were  emigrating  from  their  fondly
loved  city  with  its  sacred  Temple,  to  them  the  holiest  spot  on
earth,  and  fleeing  to  Medina.  There,  the  same  marvellous
charm  had  within  two  or  three  years  been  preparing  for  them
a  brotherhood  ready  to  defend  the  Prophet  and  his  followers
with  their  blood.  Jewish  truth  had  long  sounded  in  the
ears  of  the  men  of  Medina ;  but  it  was  not  until  they  heard
the  spirit-stirring  strains  of  the  Arabian  prophet  that  they
too  awoke  from  their  slumber,  and  sprang  suddenly  into  a  new
and  earnest  life.


VII.]  CHANGE  WROUGHT  THERE  163

The  virtues  of  his  people  may  be  described  in  the  words Description
of  Mohammad  himself:—  f  ^''  f?'"

lowers  py

The  servants  of  the  Merciful  are  they  that  walk  upon  the  earth  softly  ; ' '
and,  when  the  ignorant  speak  unto  them,  they  reply,  Peace  !  Sura  xxv.

They that spend  the  night  worshipping  their  Lord,  prostrate  and •^
standing  ; —

And  who  say, — '  O  our  Lord  !  turn  away  from  us  the  torment  of
hell ;  verily,  from  the  torment  thereof  there  is  no  release.  Surely  it  is
an  evil  abode  and  resting  place  ! '

Those  that  when  they  spend  are  neither  profuse  nor  niggardly,  but
take  a  middle  course  ; —

Those  that  invoke  not  with  God  any  other  god  ;  and  slay  not  a  soul
that  God  hath  forbidden,  otherwise  than  by  right ;  and  commit  not
fornication  ;

(For  he  who  doeth  this  is  involved  in  sin, — his  torment  shall  be
doubled  unto  him  in  the  day  of  judgment ;  therein  ignominiously  shall
he  remain  for  ever, — Excepting  him  that  shall  repent  and  believe  and
perform  righteous  works  ;  as  for  them  God  shall  change  their  evil  things
into  good  things  ;  and  God  is  forgiving  and  merciful.  And  whoever
repenteth  and  doeth  good  works,  verily,  he  turneth  unto  God  with  a  true
repentance):  —

They  who  bear  not  witness  to  that  which  is  false  ;  and  when  they
pass  by  vain  sport,  they  pass  it  by  with  dignity  : —

They  who,  when  admonished  by  the  Revelations  of  the  Lord,  fall  not
down  as  if  deaf  and  blind  ; —

Who  say,  'O  our  Lord.  Grant  us  of  our  wives  and  children  such  as
shall  be  a  comfort  unto  us,  and  make  us  examples  unto  the  pious  ! '

These  shall  be  rewarded  hereafter  with  lofty  mansions,  for  that  they
persevered ;  and  they  shall  be  accosted  therein  with  welcome  and
salutation  : —

For  ever  therein  : — a  fair  abode  and  resting  place  1


I


i


PART  SECOND
MOHAMMAD  AT  MEDINA

CHAPTER  VIII

ARRIVAL AT MEDINA. BUILDING OF THE MOSQUE

A.H.  I.— June  A.D.  622  to  January  A.D.  623

At  the  close  of  last  chapter  we  left  Mohammad  and  Abu Flight  of
Bekr,  on  the  second  day  of  their  escape  from  the  cave,  already ^nd'Ab™
beyond  the  reach  of  pursuit,  and  rapidly  wending  their  way Bekr
towards  Medina. Leaving  devious  paths,  they  had  now  taken
the  common  road  to  Syria  which  runs  near  the  shore  of  the
Red  Sea. On  the  morning  of  the  third  day  a  small  caravan
was  observed  in  the  distance. The apprehensions of  the
fugitives  were  soon  allayed,  for  Abu  Bekr  recognised  at  the
head  of  the  caravan his  cousin Talha  returning  from the They  meet
north. Warm  was  the  greeting,  and loud  the  congratula-  ^g^V'^
tions. Talha  opened  his  stores,  and,  producing  two  changes
of  fine  white  Syrian  raiment,  bestowed  them  on  the  Prophet
and  on  his  kinsman  also. The  present  was  welcome  to  the
soiled  and  weary  travellers  ;  yet  more  welcome  was  the  assur-
ance that  Talha  had  left  the  Muslims  at Medina  in  eager
expectation  of  their  Prophet. So  Mohammad  and  Abu  Bekr
proceeded  on  their  journey  with  lighter  hearts  and  quickened
pace  ;  while  the  merchant  resumed  his  way  to  Mecca. There
Talha  disposed  of  his  venture  ;  and  so  little  were  Koreish
even  now  disposed  to  molest  the  believers,  that,  after  quietly
adjusting  his  affairs,  he  set  out  unopposed  some  little  time
afterwards  for  Medina,  with  the  families  of  Mohammad  and
Abu  Bekr.

After  travelling  some  way  farther  by  the  common  road,
Mohammad and his  companion struck off  at Bedr  to  the

165


1 66


ARRIVAL  AT  MEDINA


[chap


Progress

towards
Medina


They  ap-
proach the
citv


Medina
and  its  en-
virons


right,  thus  taking  the  eastern  route,  which  passes  through
Medina  to  the  north.  The  valleys  which  they  crossed,  the
defiles  and  steeps  they  ascended,  and  the  spots  on  which  the
fugitive  Prophet  performed  his  devotions,  have  all  been
preserved  in  tradition  by  the  pious  zeal  of  his  followers.^
When  now  within  two  days  of  Medina,  one  of  the  camels,
worn  out  by  the  rapid  travelling,  was  unable  to  proceed.  A
chief  of  the  tribe  residing  in  the  neighbourhood  supplied  a
fresh  camel  in  its  stead,  and  also  furnished  a  guide.

At  length,  on  the  morning  of  Monda}-,  eight  days  after
quitting  Mecca,  the  little  party  crossed  the  valley  of  the
'Aklk  in  the  mountain  tract  some  five  miles  S.W.  of  Medina.^
The  heat  was  intense ;  for  the  summer  sun,  now  approaching
the  meridian,  beat  fiercely  on  the  bare  ridges  and  stony
defiles,  the  desolation  hardly  relieved  by  an  occasional  clump
of  wild  acacia.  Climbing  the  opposite  ascent,  they  reached
the  crest  of  the  mountain.  Here  a  scene  opened  on  them
which  contrasted  strangely  with  the  dark  frowning  peaks  and
naked  rocks,  in  the  midst  of  which  for  hours  they  had  been
toiling.  It  was  the  ancient  Yathrib,  ^/-Medina — '  tJie  city,'
as  by  pre-eminence  it  was  now  to  be  called — surrounded  by
verdant  gardens  and  groves  of  the  graceful  palm.  What
thoughts  must  have  crowded  on  the  mind  of  the  Prophet  and


^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  332  f. ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  157.

^  The  Wadi  al-'Aklk  has  a  north-westerly  direction,  and  discharges
its  waters  into  Al-Ghaba,  the  basin  in  which  collects  the  drainage  of  the
Medina  plain.  Burton  describes  the  mountains  on  this  side  as  you
approach  Medina,  as  composed  of  'inhospitable  rocks,  pinnacle-shaped,
of  granite  below,  and  in  the  upper  parts,  fine  limestone' ;  but  about  the
Wadi  al-'Aklk  the  surface  is  'black  scoriaceous  basalt.'  According  to
Burckhardtj  'all  the  rocky  places 'about  Medina,  'as  well  as  the  lower
ridge  of  the  northern  mountainous  chain,  are  covered  by  a  layer  of
volcanic  rock  ;  it  is  of  a  bluish-black  colour,  very  porous,  yet  heavy  and
hard,  not  glazed  like  Schlacken,  and  contains  frequently  small  white
substances  in  its  pores  of  the  size  of  a  pin's  head,  which  I  never  found
crystallised.  The  plain  has  a  completely  black  colour  from  this  rock,
and  the  pieces  with  which  it  is  overspread.  I  met  with  no  lava,  although
the  nature  of  the  ground  seemed  strongly  to  indicate  the  neighbourhood  of
a  volcano.'  Burckhardt  adds  that  lava  from  a  volcanic  outburst,  A.D.  654,
passed  not  far  from  Medina,  on  the  east ;  but  he  attributes  the  volcanic
substances  about  the  town  and  the  valley  'Aklk  to  some  earlier  eruption.

Medina  is  due  north  of  Mecca,  but,  as  the  shore  bends  somewhat  to
the  west,  it  is  by  so  much  further  from  the  sea — about  100  miles.


Vlll]  MOHAMMAD  ARRIVES  AT  KOBA  167

his  faithful  friend  as  they  gazed  on  tiie  prospect  below  them  !
Widespread  is  the  view  from  the  heights  on  which  they
stood,  and  well  fitted  to  stir  the  heart  of  any  traveller.  The
vast  plain  of  Nejd  stretches  away  towards  the  south-east  as
far  as  the  eye  can  reach ;  while  the  eastern  horizon  is
bounded  by  a  low  line  of  dark  hills.  To  the  north  the
prospect  is  arrested,  at  the  distance  of  a  few  miles,  by  the
granite  masses  of  Ohod,  a  spur  of  the  great  central  chain.
A  well-defined  watercourse,  flowing  from  the  south-east  under
the  nearest  side  of  Medina,  is  lost  among  the  north-eastern
hills,  the  cliffs  of  which  approach  and  even  touch  the  city  on
the  north.  To  the  right,  Jebel  'A'ir,  a  range  nearly  cor-
responding in  distance  and  height  with  that  of  Ohod,  projects
into  the  plain  and  bounds  it  on  the  south-west.  Closely
embracing  the  city  and  in  contrast  with  the  rugged  rocks  on
which  our  travellers  stand,  are  the  orchards  of  palm-trees  for
which  from  time  immemorial  Medina  has  been  famous.  One
sheet  of  gardens,  the  loveliest  and  most  verdant  spot  in  all
the  plain,  extends  uninterruptedly  to  Koba,  a  suburb  little
more  than  two  miles  to  the  south.  Around  the  city  in  every
direction  date-trees  and  green  fields  meet  the  eye,  inter-
spersed here  and  there  with  the  substantial  houses  and
fortified  hamlets  of  the  Jewish  tribes,  and  the  suburban
residences  of  the  Beni  Aus  and  Khazraj.  The  tender
reminiscence  of  childhood,  when  he  visited  Medina  with  his
mother,  was  perhaps  the  first  thought  to  cross  the  mind  of
Mohammad.  But  more  pressing  considerations  were  now  at
hand.  How  would  he  be  received  ?  Were  his  adherents
powerful  enough  to  secure  for  him  an  harmonious  welcome?
Or  would  either  of  the  contending  factions,  by  whom  that
peaceful  plain  had  been  so  often  stained  with  blood,  be  roused
against  him  ?  Before  putting  the  friendship  of  the  city  to  the
test,  it  would  be  prudent  to  retire  to  one  of  the  suburbs,  and
Koba  lay  invitingly  before  them.  '  Lead  us,'  said  Mohammad  Mohammad
to  the  guide, '  straight  to  the  Beni  'Amr  at  Koba,  and  draw  not  ^^^!^  ^^'^
yet  nigh  unto  Medina.'  So,  leaving  the  path  to  Medina  on  the
left,  they  descended  at  once  into  the  plain  and  made  for  Koba.^

For  several  days  the  city  had  been  in  expectation  of  its People  of
illustrious visitor. Tidings  had  been  received of  Moham- '^^^'^'"^

o  • _ watch  for

mad's  disappearance  from Mecca ;  but  no  one  knew  of  his his  coming
^  At-Tabari,  i.  1242.


i68


ARRIVAL  AT  MEDINA


[chap.


He  arrives
1 2th  Rabi'  I
AH.  I.
June  28,
A.D.  622


Is  joyfully
received


Lodges
with

Kulthum
at  Koba


three  days'  withdrawal  to  the  cave.  He  ought  before  now  to
have  arrived,  even  with  the  delay  of  a  devious  route.  Every
morning  a  company  of  Medina  converts  and  refugees  from
Mecca  had  for  some  days  gone  forth  a  mile  or  two  on  the
Mecca  road,  and  posted  themselves  on  the  first  rocky  ridge
to  the  west.  There  they  watched  till  the  heat  of  the  ascend-
ing sun  drove  them  from  the  unsheltered  spot  to  their  homes.
On  this  day  they  had  gone  out  as  usual  and  after  a  fruitless
watch  had  retired  to  the  city,  when  a  Jew,  catching  a  glimpse
of  the  three  travellers  wending  their  way  to  Koba,  shouted
from  the  top  of  his  house :  '  Ho  1  ye  Beni  Keila !  ^  he  has
come  !  he  whom  ye  have  been  looking  for  has  come  ! '  Every
one  now  hurried  forth  from  the  city  to  Koba.  A  shout  of  joy
arose  from  the  Beni  'Amr  (the  Ausite  tribe  inhabiting  Koba)
when  they  found  that  Mohammad  had  come  amongst  them.
The  wearied  travellers,  amidst  the  greeting  of  old  friends  and
smile  of  strange  faces,  alighted  and  sat  down  under  the
shadow  of  a  tree.^  It  was  Monday,  June  28,  A.D.  622.  The
journey  had  been  accomplished  in  eight  days.  The  ordinary
time  is  eleven.^

The  joyful  news  spread  speedily  over  the  city.  The  very
children  in  the  streets  cried  out  with  delight :  '  Here  is  the
Prophet!  He  is  come !  He  is  come!'  The  converts  from
all  quarters  flocked  to  Mohammad  and  made  obeisance  to
him.  He  received  them  courteously,  and  said  :  '  Ye  People !
show  your  joy  by  giving  your  neighbours  the  salutation  of
peace  ;  send  portions  to  the  poor ;  bind  close  the  ties  of  kins-
manship ;  and  offer  up  your  prayers  whilst  others  sleep.
Thus  shall  ye  enter  Paradise  in  peace.'  It  was  shortly
arranged  that  Mohammad  should  for  the  present  lodge  at

*  Keila,  mother  of  the  two  patriarchs  of  the  Beni  Aus  and  Khazraj.

2  This  quarter  was  called  'A/Iya,  or  upper  Medina,  from  its  more
elevated  position,  and  included  Koba  and  some  other  hamlets  with  the
Jewish  settlements  of  the  Beni  Koreiza  and  the  Nadir.  When  Moham-
mad was  seated  on  Abu  Bekr's  camel,  few  knew  which  was  the  Prophet,
till  the  sun's  rays  fell  upon  him,  and  then  Abu  Bekr  rose  to  place  him  in
the  shade.  Out  of  this,  probably,  has  grown  the  tradition  that  the
people  of  Medina  recognised  the  Prophet  from  his  body  casting  no
shadow.  Abu  Bekr  was  known  to  some  of  the  citizens,  as  he  used  to
pass  through  Medina  on  his  mercantile  trips  to  Syria.  Ibn  Hisham,
p.  334  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1243.

•*  It  can  be  travelled  by  swift  dromedaries  in  five.


VIII. ]


MOHAMMAD  LEAVES  KOBA


169


Koba  with  Kulthum,  a  hospitable  chief,  who  had  already
received  many  of  the  emigrants  on  their  first  arrival.  A
great  part  of  every  day  was  also  spent  in  the  house  of  Sa'd,
son  of  Khaithama,  one  of  the  Ausite  '  Leaders.'  There
Mohammad  received  such  persons  as  wished  to  see  him,  and
conferred  with  his  friends  on  the  state  of  feeling  in  Medina.^
Abu  Bekr  was  entertained  by  Kharija,  another  chief,  in  the
adjoining  suburb  of  the  Sunh,  He  showed  his  gratitude  by
marrying  the  daughter  of  his  host,  and  permanently  took  up
his  residence  with  the  family.^

A  day  or  two  after,  'All,  who,  as  we  have  seen,  remained
only  three  days  at  Mecca  after  the  disappearance  of
Mohammad,  reached  Medina  and  was  accommodated  by
Kulthum  in  the  same  house  with  the  Prophet.  It  was  soon
determined  that  Mohammad  might  with  safety  enter  Medina.
The  welcome  he  had  already  received  was  warm,  and  to  all
appearance  unanimous  and  sincere.  Elements  of  disaffection
might  be  slumbering  among  the  Jews  and  other  unconverted
citizens ;  but  they  were  unnoticed  amid  the  universal  joy
and  the  first  impulses  of  generous  hospitality.  Mohammad,
therefore,  stopped  only  four  days  at  Koba,  from  Monday  till
Friday.  During  this  period,  he  laid  the  foundations  of  a
mosque  at  Koba,  which  at  a  later  period  was  honoured  in
the  Koran  with  the  name  of  the  '  Mosque  of  godly  fear.'^

On  the  morning  of  Friday,  Mohammad  mounted  his
favourite  camel  Al-Kaswa,  with  Abu  Bekr  seated  behind
him,  and  surrounded  by  a  crowd  of  followers  proceeded
towards  the  city.  He  halted  at  a  place  of  prayer  in  the
vale  of  the  Beni  Salim,  a  Khazrajite  tribe,  and  there  per-
formed his first Friday service with about a hundred

*  Sa'd  being  a  bachelor,  the  unmarried  refugees  were  accommodated
in  great  numbers  in  his  house,  so  that  it  went  by  the  name  of  the
'bachelors' hostelry.' At-Tabari,  i.  1243.

^  That  is  to  say,  his  wife  remained  at  her  father's  house,  and  he  used
to  visit  her  there  when  it  was  her  turn  to  enjoy  his  society,  for  he  had
other  wives.  Kharija  was  joined  in  brotherhood  (a  practice  e.xplained
below,  p.  174)  to  Abu  Bekr,

^  Sura  ix.  109.  Mohammad  enlarged  it  after  the  Kibla  was  changed,
and  advanced  its  foundations  and  walls  'to  their  present  position.'  With
his  followers  he  aided  in  the  pious  work  by  carrying  the  materials.  He
used  to  visit  it  every  Saturday,  and  attached  to  the  saying  of  prayers
therein  the  merit  of  the  ''Omra  or  Lesser  pilgrimage  ;  cf.  p.  447  n


Abu  Bekr

lodges  at
the  Sunh


'All  joins
Mohammad


Mohammad
remains
four  days
at  Koba


Departure
for  Medina


Performs
public  ser-
vice by  the
way


I70  ARRIVAL  AT  MEDINA  [chap.

Muslims ;  the  spot  is  still  shown  to  pilgrims,  and  is  marked
by  a  building  called  in  memory  of  the  event  the  Masjid  al-
jum^a^  or  '  the  Friday  mosque.'  ^  On  this  occasion  he  added
an  address  composed  chiefly  of  religious  exhortation  and
eulogy  of  the  new  faith.  Friday  was  thenceforward  set  apart
for  the  weekly  celebration  of  public  worship.
Entry  into  When  the  service  was  finished,  Mohammad  resumed  his

the  city  progress.  He  had  sent  a  message  to  the  Beni  an-Najjar,  his
relatives  through  Selma,  mother  of  Abd  al-Muttalib,  to  escort
him  into  the  city.  But  there  was  no  need  of  special  invita-
tion. The  tribes  and  families  of  Medina  came  streaming
forth,  and  vied  one  with  another  in  showing  honour  to  their
noble  visitor.  It  was  indeed  a  triumphal  procession.  Around
the  camels  of  Mohammad  and  his  immediate  followers,  rode
the  chief  men  of  the  city  clad  in  their  best  raiment  and  in
glittering  armour.  The  cavalcade  pursued  its  way  through
the  gardens  and  palm-groves  of  the  southern  suburb ;  and
as  it  now  threaded  the  streets  of  the  city,  the  heart  of
Mohammad  was  gladdened  by  the  incessant  call  from  one
and  another  as  they  flocked  around  :  '  Alight  here,  O  Prophet !
We  have  abundance  with  us,  means  of  defence  and  weapons
and  room.  Abide  with  us.'  So  urgent  was  the  appeal  that
sometimes  they  seized  hold  of  Al-Kaswa's  halter.  Mohammad
answered  them  courteously  and  kindly :  '  The  decision,'  he
said, 'rests  with  the  camel;  make  way  for  her;  let  her  go
free.'  It  was  a  stroke  of  policy.  His  residence  would  be
hallowed  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  as  selected  supernaturally  ;
while  the  jealousy  which  otherwise  might  arise  from  the
quarter  of  one  tribe  being  preferred  to  that  of  another  would
thus  receive  decisive  check.
His  camel  Onwards  Al-Kaswa  moved,  with slackened  halter ;  and,

halts  at  an leaving the larger portion of  the  citv  to  the  left,  entered

open  yard  °  . , ,  • ,  i i -r-v'' •  -nt ••-  rr-i

the  eastern  quarter  mhabited  by  the  Beni  an-Najjar.  There
finding  a  large  and  open  courtyard  with  a  few  date-trees,
she  halted  and  sat  down.^ The  house  of  Abu Eiyub  was

*  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  335.

2  To  invest  the  incident  with  a  supernatural  air,  it  is  added  that
Mohammad  having  left  the  halter  quite  loose,  Al-Kaswa  got  up  again
and  went  a  little  way  forward ;  perceiving  her  error,  she  returned
straightway  to  the  selfsame  spot,  knelt  down,  and,  placing  her  head  and
neck  on  the  ground,  refused  to  stir.


VIII.] SITE  OF  MOSQUE  AND  DWELLING-HOUSE  171

close  at  hand. Mohammad  and  Abu  Bekr,  alighting,  inquired
who the owner was. Abu Eiyub stepped forward and Mohammad
invited  them  to  enter. Mohammad  became  his  guest,  and Abu^Elyub's
occupied the lower  storey  of  his  house  for seven  months, house;
until  the  Mosque  and  his  own  apartments  were  ready. Abu
Eiyub  offered  to  resign  the  upper  storey  in  which  his  family
lived,  but Mohammad preferred  the  lower as  being  more
accessible  to  his  visitors.^

When  Mohammad  had  alighted,  Abu  Eiyub  lost  no  time  And  is
in  carrying  into  his  house  the  saddle  and  other  property  of  hos^^fttbl
the  travellers ;  while  As'ad  ibn  Zurara,  a  neighbour,  seized
Al-Kaswa's  halter  and  conducted  her  to  his  courtyard,  where
he  kept  her  for  the  Prophet.  Dishes  of  choice  viands,  bread
and  meat,  butter  and  milk,  presently  arrived  from  various
houses ;  and  this  hospitality  was  kept  up  daily  so  long  as
the  Prophet  resided  in  the  house.

The  first  concern  of  Mohammad  was  to  secure  the  plot  Purchases
of  land  on  which  Al-Kaswa  halted.  It  was  a  neglected  ^^^  ^^'^'^
spot :  on  one  side  was  a  scanty  grove  of  date-trees ;  the
other,  covered  here  and  there  with  thorny  shrubs,  had  been
used  partly  as  a  burial-ground  and  partly  as  a  yard  for
tying  camels  up.  It  belonged  to  two  orphan  boys  under
the  guardianship  of  As'ad,  who  had  rudely  constructed  a
place  of  worship  there,  and  had  already  held  service  within
its  roofless  walls.  The  Prophet  called  the  two  lads  before
him,  and  desired  to  purchase  this  piece  of  ground  from  them
that  he  might  build  a  mosque  upon  it.  They  replied  :  '  Nay,
but  we  will  make  a  free  gift  of  it  to  thee.'  Mohammad
would  not  accept  the  land  in  gift;  and  so  the  price  was
fixed  at  ten  golden  pieces,  which  Abu  Bekr  by  desire  of
Mohammad  paid  over  to  the  orphans.

Arrangements for the  construction of  a  great  Mosque Prepares
upon  the  spot,  with  two  houses  adjoining — one  for  his  wife  ^^^"'^'^
Sauda, the other for his intended bride, the precocious and  habita-
maiden  'A'isha — were  forthwith  set  on  foot. The  date-trees ^'°"

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  335  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1258  f.  Abu  Eiyub  used  to
tell  that  he  and  his  wife  accidentally  broke  a  water-pot  in  the  upper  storey,
and,  having  wiped  up  the  water  as  best  they  could  with  their  clothes,
hurried  down  to  Mohammad's  apartment  in  alarm  lest  any  of  it  should
have  dropped  on  him.  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  338  Abu  Eiyub  was  killed  at
Constantinople,  A.H.  52


172  ARRIVAL  AT  MEDINA  [chap.

and  thorny  bushes  were  cut  down.  The  graves  were  dug
up,  and  the  bones  elsewhere  deposited.  The  uneven  ground
v/as  carefully  levelled,  and  the  lubbish  cleared  away.  A
spring,  oozing  in  the  vicinity,  rendered  the  site  damp ;  it
was  blocked  up  and  drained,  and  at  length  quite  dis-
appeared. Bricks  were  prepared,  and  other  materials
collected.^
Is  joined  Having taken up  his  residence  in  Abu  Eiyub's house,

£n?r  from Mohammad bethought him of  his  family,  and  despatched
Mecca;  his  adopted  son  Zeid  with  a  slave  named  Abu  Rafi'^  on  two

camels,  with  a  purse  of  500  dirhems,  to  fetch  them  from
Mecca.  They  met  with  no  difficulty  or  opposition,  and
returned  with  Sauda,  the  Prophet's  wife,  and  his  daughters
Fatima  and  Um  Kulthum,  The  latter  had  been  married
into  the  family  of  Abu  Lahab,  but,  being  separated  from
her  husband,  had  for  some  time  been  living  in  her  father's
house.  Zeinab,  the  eldest  daughter,  remained  at  Mecca
with  her  husband  Abu'l-'As.  Rokeiya,  the  second,  had
already  emigrated  to  Medina  with  her  husband  'Othman.
Zeid  brought  with  him  his  own  wife  Um  Aiman  (Baraka)
And  by  and  their  son  Osama.  Accompanying  the  party  were
Abu  Bekr's  'A'isha  and  her  mother,  Um  Ruman,  with  other  members
of  the  family  of  Abu  Bekr,  who  had  no  doubt  supplied  the
purse  to  Zeid.  They  were  conducted  by  Abu  Bekr's  son
and  Talha.^  The  family  of  Abu  Bekr,  including  'A'isha,  was
Sauda,  accommodated  in  a  neighbouring  house. Sauda  must  have

Mohammad's  jiyg^j  ^jj.^  Mohammad  in  the  house  of  Abu  Eiyub ;  from
the  time  of  her  marriage  with  Mohammad,  shortly  after  the
death  of  Khadija,  she  had  been  for  three  or  four  years
his  only  wife.*

'  The  courtyard  in  the  time  of  Ibn  Jubeir  contained  fifteen  date-trees;
they  are  now  (according  to  Burton)  reduced  to  a  dozen  in  a  railed-in  and
watered  space,  called  'Fatima's  garden';  it  also  contains  the  remains
of  a  venerable  lote-tree. The  '  Prophet's  well '  is  hard  by.

^  Ibn  Koteiba,  p.  71.  He  had  been  the  servant  of  Mohammad's
uncle  Al-'Abbas,  and  was  given  by  him  to  Mohammad,  who  freed  him  on
his  bringing  tidings  of  the  conversion  of  Al-'Abbas.

^  Talha,  as  we  have  seen,  met  the  Prophet  on  his  way  to  Medina.
He  married  Um  Kulthum,  daughter  of  his  cousin  Abu  Bekr  ;  and  with
him  he  always  seems  to  have  been  on  terms  of  close  intimacy.

^  Fatima  probably  lived  with  Sauda.  Eighteen  months  afterwards
she  was  married  to  'All.


VIII.]  CLIMATE  OF  MEDINA  173

The  climate  of  Medina  contrasts  strongly  with  that  of  Unwhole-
Mecca.  In  summer,  the  days  are  intensely  hot  (a  more  o^'^jj'n'^^^*^
endurable  and  less  sultry  heat,  however,  than  that  of
Mecca) ;  but  the  nights  are  cool  and  often  chilly.  The  cold
in  winter  is  for  the  latitude  severe,  especially  after  rain,
which  falls  heavily  in  occasional  but  not  long-continued
showers ;  and  even  in  summer  these  are  not  infrequent.
Continuous  rain  always  deluges  the  adjacent  country.
The  drainage  is  sluggish,  and  after  a  storm  the  water
forms  a  widespread  lake  in  the  open  space  between  the
city  and  the  southern  suburb.  The  humid  exhalations
from  this  and  other  stagnant  pools,  and  perhaps  also  the
luxuriant  vegetation  in  the  neighbourhood,  render  the
stranger  liable  to  attacks  of  intermittent  fever,  which  is
often  followed  by  swellings  and  tumours  in  the  legs  and
stomach,  and  is  sometimes  fatal.  The  climate  is  altogether
unfavourable.^

Accustomed  to  the  dry  air  and  parched  soil  of  Mecca  Refugees
the  Refugees  were  sorely  tried  by  the  dampness  of  the  Medina^^ever
Medina  summer  and  the  rigour  of  its  winter.  Mohammad
himself  escaped,  but  most  of  his  followers  were  pros-
trated by  fever.  Abu  Bekr  and  his  household  suffered
greatly.  'A'isha  once  related  to  Mohammad  how  they
all  wandered  in  their  speech  when  struck  down  by  the
fever,  and  how  they  longed  to  return  to  their  home  at
Mecca;  on  which  Mohammad,  looking  upwards,  prayed:
'  O  Lord  1 make  Medina  dear  unto  us,  even  as Mecca,  or

^  The  cold  in  winter  is  severe  ;  ice  and  snow  are  not  unknown  in  the
adjoining  hills.  This  is  natural  if,  as  Burton  says,  the  city  be  6,000  feet
above  the  sea  ;  but  this  estimate  is  surely  exaggerated.  The  height,
however,  must  be  great,  as  the  rise  of  the  mountains  is  rapid  and
continuous  from  the  seashore  on  the  western  side,  and  the  descent
insignificant  on  the  eastern.  The  city  is  much  exposed  to  storms.  We
learn  from  Burton  that  '  chilly  and  violent  winds  from  the  eastern  deserts
are  much  dreaded  ;  and  though  Ohod  screens  the  town  on  the  N.  and
N.E.,  a  gap  in  the  mountains  to  the  N.W.  fills  the  air  at  times  with  rain
and  comfortless  blasts.  The  rains  begin  in  October,  and  last  with
considerable  intervals  through  the  winter  ;  the  clouds,  gathered  by  the
hill  tops  and  the  trees  near  the  town,  discharge  themselves  with  violence  ;
and  at  the  equinoxes,  thunderstorms  are  common.  At  such  times  the
Barr  el  Munakhah,  or  the  open  space  between  the  town  and  the  suburbs,
is  a  sheet  of  water,  and  the  land  about  the  S.  and  S.E.  wall  of  the
aubourg  a  lake.'^i.  172


174  BUILDING  OF  THE  MOSQUE  [chap.

even  dearer. Bless  its  produce,  and  banish  far  from  it  the
pestilence ! '  ^
'Brother-  To  raise  the  spirits  of  his  followers  thus  home-sick  and

hood' hQ-  suffering,  and  draw  them  into  nearer  relations  with  the
Re7ugees  Medina  converts,  Mohammad  established  a  new  fraternity
and  Citizens  between  the  Refugees  and  Citizens.  'Become  brethren
every  two  and  two  of  you,'  he  said ;  and  he  set  the  example
by  taking  'All,  or  as  others  say  'Othman,  for  his  brother.
Accordingly  each  of  the  Refugees  selected  one  of  the  Citizens
as  his  brother.  The  bond  was  of  the  closest  description,  and
involved  not  only  a  special  devotion  to  each  other's  interests
in  the  persons  thus  associated,  but  in  case  of  death  the
'  brother '  inherited  the  property  of  the  deceased.  From
forty  to  fifty  Refugees  were  thus  united  to  as  many  Citizens
of  Medina.  This  peculiar  custom  lasted  for  about  a  year
and  a  half,  when  Mohammad,  finding  it  after  the  victory  of
Bedr  to  be  no  longer  necessary  for  the  encouragement  of  his
followers,  and  probably  attended  with  some  inconvenience
and  unpopularity  as  overriding  the  ties  of  nature,  abolished
the  bond  and  suffered  inheritance  to  take  its  usual  course.^
'Abd  ar-  The following incident  shows  at  once  the  familiar  and

Rahman  friendly  footing  on  which  the  strangers  were  received  by  the
Citizens,  and  something  also  of  their  manner  of  life.  'Abd
ar-Rahman,  on  his  first  reaching  Medina,  was  lodged  by
Sa'd  ibn  ar-RabI',  a  convert  of  Medina,  to  whom  Mohammad
had  united  him  in  brotherhood.  As  they  sat  at  meat  S'ad
thus  addressed  his  guest :  '  My  brother !  I  have  abundance
of  wealth ;  I  will  divide  with  thee  a  portion.  And  behold
my  two  wives !  choose  which  of  them  thou  likest  best,  and
I  will  divorce  her  that  thou  mayest  take  her  to  thyself
to  wife.'  And  'Abd  ar-Rahman  replied  :  '  The  Lord  bless
thee,  my  brother,  in  thy  family  and  in  thy  property ! '  So
he  married  one  of  the  wives  of  Sa'd.  Mohammad,  meeting
him  with  the  nuptial  attire  of  saffron  upon  him,  said  :  '  How
is  this  ? '  'Abd  ar-Rahman  replied  :  '  I  have  married  me
a  wife from amongst the people of Medina.' '  For  what

1  So  prevalent  was  the  fever  that  at  one  time  Mohammad  was  almost
the  only  person  at  prayers  able  to  stand  up  ;  but  he  said,  '  the  prayer  of
one  who  sits  is  worth  only  half  the  prayer  of  him  that  stands'  ;  so  they
all  made  efforts  to  stand.

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  344  ff.


VIIT.]  ITS  SITE  175

dower?'  'For  a  small  gold  piece  the  size  of  a  date  stone.'
'  And  why,'  replied  Mohammad,  '  not  a  goat  ?  '  ^

During the  first  half-year  of  Mohammad's  residence  at Building
Medina his own attention and that of  his  followers  was XV^^

Mosque  ;

mainly  occupied  by  the  construction  of  the  Mosque  and  of
houses  for  themselves.^  In  the  erection  of  the  Mosque  all
united  with  enthusiasm.  Their  zeal  was  stimulated  by  the
Prophet,  who  himself  took  an  active  share  in  the  work,  and
joined  in  the  song  which  the  labourers  chanted  with  loud
and  cheerful  voice,  as  they  bore  along  their  burdens : —

O  Lord  !  there  is  no  joy  but  the  joy  of  Futurity.

O  Lord  !  have  mercy  upon  the  Citizens  and  the  Refugees  ! "

The  site  (on  the  southern  portion  of  the  ground  which  he
had  just  purchased)  is  the  same  as  that  now  occupied  by  the
great  Mosque  and  its  spacious  court ;  but  the  style  and
dimensions  were  naturally  less  ambitious.  It  was  built  four-
square, each  side  being  one  hundred  cubits  or  somewhat  less
in  length.*  The  foundations  to  three  cubits  above  the  ground
were  of  stone,  the  rest  of  the  wall  of  brick. The  roof  was

'  The  story  is  meant  to  illustrate  the  poverty  of  'Abd  ar-Rahman
when  he  reached  Medina,  as  contrasted  with  his  vast  wealth  in  after
days.  'At  his  death  he  left  gold  in  such  quantities  that  it  was  cut  with
hatchets  till  the  people's  hands  bled.'  He  had  1,000  camels,  3,000  sheep,
and  100  horses.  He  had  issue  by  sixteen  wives,  besides  children  by
concubines. Each  of  his  four  widows  inherited  100,000  dinars.

The  Prophet  warned  him  once  against  his  penuriousness  :  '  Oh  son  of
'Aufl  Verily  thou  art  amongst  the  rich,  and  thou  shalt  not  enter
Paradise  but  with  great  difficulty.  Lend  therefore  to  thy  Lord,  so  that
He  may  loosen  thy  steps.'  And  he  departed  by  Mohammad's  advice  to
give  away  all  his  property.  But  the  Prophet  sent  for  him  again,  and
told  him  by  Gabriel's  desire  that  it  would  suffice  if  he  used  hospitality
and  gave  alms.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  337  ff.

*  The  couplet  ran  thus  :

Aliahumma  la  'aisha  ilia  'aisha  '1-akhira,
Allahumraa  'rhami'l-Ansar  w'1-Muhajira.

Mohammad  joining  in  the  chorus  would  transpose  the  last  words  into  al-
Miihajira  w^al-Ansdr,  thus  losing  the  rhyme.  Having  been  taunted  at
Mecca  with  being  a  mere  rhapsodist,  he  affected  to  have  no  ear  for
poetry,  and  tradition  gives  this  as  an  instance.  The  fine  rhythm  of  the
Kor'an  was  thus  held  to  be  all  the  stronger  evidence  of  divine  origin.

■*  According  to  some  authorities  the  breadth  was  only  sixty  or  seventy
cubits.


176  BUILDING  OF  THE  MOSQUE  [chap.

supported  by  trunks  of  palm-trees  and  covered  over  with
branches  and  rafters  of  the  same  material.  The  Kibla,  or
quarter  whither  the  faithful  directed  their  faces  when  they
prayed,  was  towards  Jerusalem.  While  leading  the  public
prayers  Mohammad  stood  close  to  the  northern  wall  looking
in  that  direction ;  his  back  was  thus  turned  upon  the
congregation,  who  facing  similarly  fell  into  rows  behind  him.
When  the  prayers  were  ended,  he  turned  himself  round  to  the
people,  and,  if  there  was  occasion  for  an  address,  made  it  then.
To  the  south,  opposite  the  Kibla,  was  a  doorway  for  general
entrance.^  Another  opened  on  the  west,  called  Bab  Rahma^
the  Gate  of  Mercy,  a  name  it  still  retains.  A  third  gate,  on
the  eastern  side,  was  reserved  for  the  use  of  Mohammad ;
south  of  this  entrance,  and  forming  part  of  the  eastern  wall  of
the  Mosque  itself,  were  the  apartments  destined  for  the
And  apart-  Prophet's  wives.  The  house  of  'A'isha  was  at  the  extreme
Pr^ophet's  S-^'  corner,  the  road  into  the  Mosque  passing  behind  it.
wives  That  of  Sauda  was  next ;  and  beyond  it  were  the  apartments

of  Rokeiya  and  her  husband  'Othman,  and  of  the  two  other
daughters  of  Mohammad.  In  later  years,  as  Mohammad
added  to  the  number  of  his  wives,  he  provided  each  with  a
room  or  house,  on  the  same  side  of  the  Mosque.  From  these
he  had  private  entrances  into  the  Mosque,  used  only  by  him-
self. The  eastern  gate  still  bears  in  its  name  Bab  an-Nisd
('  Women's  porch ')  the  memory  of  these  arrangements.  To
the  north  of  the  Mosque  the  ground  was  open,  and  on  that
side  a  place  was  appropriated  for  the  poorer  followers  of
Mohammad  who  had  no  other  home.  They  slept  in  the
Mosque,  and  had  within  its  courts  a  sheltered  bench  or  pave-
ment. Mohammad  used  to  send  them  portions  from  his
table  ;  and  others  followed  his  example.  But  in  a  few  years
victory  and  the  spoil  of  war  caused  poverty  and  distress  to
disappear,  and  '  the  men  of  the  bench  *  survived  in  memory
alone.  To  be  near  the  Prophet,  his  chief  Companions  by
degrees  erected  houses  for  themselves  in  the  vicinity,  some  of
which  adjoined  upon  its  court  and  had  doors  opening  directly
on  it.

The  Mosque, It  is  to  the north of  the Mosque,  as  thus erected by
how  used

^  This  was  probably  closed  when  the  Kibla  was  turned  towards  the

south. It  corresponded  with  the  doorway  afterwards  opened  out  to  the

north.


VIII.]


ITS  DESIGN


T77


Mohammad,  that  subsequent  additions  have  been  mainly
made.  The  present  magnificent  buildings  occupy  probably
three  or  four  times  the  area  of  the  primitive  temple.  Asked
why  he  did  not  build  a  more  substantial  roof  to  the  House  of
Prayer,  he  made  answer  thus:  'The  thatching  is  as  the
thatching  of  Moses,  rafters  and  branches  ;  verily  man's  estate
is  more  fleeting  even  than  this.'  But  though  rude  in  material,
and  insignificant  in  dimensions,  the  Mosque  of  Mohammad  is
glorious  in  the  history  of  Islam.  Here  the  Prophet  and  his
Companions  spent  most  of  their  time  :  here  the  daily  service,
with  its  oft-recurring  prayers  was  first  publicly  established  :
and  here  the  great  congregation  assembled  every  Friday,
listening  with  reverence  and  awe  to  messages  from  Heaven.
Here  the  Prophet  planned  his  victories ;  here  he  received
embassies  from  vanquished  and  contrite  tribes ;  and  from
hence  issued  edicts  which  struck  terror  amongst  the  rebellious
to  the  very  outskirts  of  the  Peninsula.  Hard  by,  in  the
apartment  of'A'isha,  he  yielded  up  the  ghost;  and  there,
side  by  side  with  his  first  two  Successors,  he  lies  entombed.

The  simple  building,  with  its  slender  arches  and  tapering  Type  of
supports,  laid  the  type  for  Saracen  architecture.  It  is  the
model  after  which  buildings  for  prayer  throughout  the  Muslim
world  (finding  their  ideal  at  Agra  in  the  exquisite  Motee
Masjid)  have  been  everywhere  constructed.  The  graceful
minaret  and  dome,  such  as  we  find  them  in  the  Taj  Mehal,
may  perhaps  be  traced  to  the  same  original.  Certainly,  if  these
are  the  legitimate  developments  of  the  Medina  mosque,  Art
owes  some  of  its  most  signal  triumphs  to  this  humble  germ.^

The  Mosque  and  its  adjoining  houses  were  finished  within
seven  months  from  Mohammad's  arrival,  and  by  the  winter
Sauda  was  established  in  her  new  abode.  Shortly  after  the
Prophet  celebrated  his  marriage  with  'A'isha  at  her  father's
house  in  the  suburb  of  the  Sunh,  and  then  brought  her  to  the
bridal  home,  alongside  that  of  her  'sister'  Sauda.  'A'isha
was  Mohammad's  only  virgin  bride  ;  all  his  other  wives  had
been  married  before  they  came  to  him  ;  and  'A'isha,  though

1  The  idea  is  Sprenger's.  He  thinks  it  probable  that  only  the  inner
part  of  the  temple  (that  namely  next  the  northern  wall,  and  which  formed
the  'bachelors'  bench,'  or  hostelry),  was  originally  roofed  over ;  and  that
the  rest,  or  about  two-thirds  of  the  area,  as  in  modern  mosques,  was  open
to  the  heavens.

M


Saracenic
architect  ur


Houses  of
Sauda  and
'A'isha


Marriage

with

'A'ibha


178


BUILDING  OF  THE  MOSQUE


[chap,  viil


Change
wrought  in
Moham-
mad's
domestic
life


'A'isha's
influence
over  him


Polygamy
creates
divergence
from  Chris-
tianity


three  years  affianced,  was  still  a  girl  only  ten  years  of  age.
But  her  accomplishments  both  of  body  and  mind  must  have
developed  rapidly.  Slim  and  graceful,  her  ready  wit  and  arch
vivacity  set  off  attractions  of  no  ordinary  charm.

Thus,  at  the  age  of  fifty-three,  a  new  phase  commenced  in
the  life  of  Mohammad.  Hitherto,  limiting  himself  to  a  single
wife,  he  had  shunned  the  indulgences,  with  the  cares  and
discord,  of  polygamy.  The  unity  of  his  family  was  now
broken,  never  again  to  be  restored.  Thenceforward  his  love
was  to  be  shared  by  a  plurality  of  wives,  and  his  days  spent
alternately  between  their  several  houses  ;  for  Mohammad  had
no  separate  apartment  of  his  own.

For  some  time  we  may  suppose  that  the  girl  of  ten  or
eleven  years  would  require  at  the  hands  of  Mohammad  the
solicitude  of  a  father,  rather  than  the  devotion  of  a  husband.
He  conformed  to  the  childish  ideas  of  his  bride,  who  carried
her  playthings  with  her  to  her  new  abode;  and  at  times  even
joined  in  her  nursery  games.  As  time  went  on  she  enthralled
the  heart  of  Mohammad ;  and,  though  exposed  while  still  a
girl  to  the  rivalry  of  many  beautiful  women,  she  maintained
her  supremacy  in  the  Prophet's  harem  to  the  end.

By  uniting  himself  to  a  second  wife  Mohammad  made  a
serious  movement  away  from  Christianity,  by  the  tenets  and
practice  of  which  he  must  have  known  that  polygamy  was
forbidden.  Christianity,  however,  had  little  influence  over  his
life  ;  and  the  step  was  not  repugnant  to  Judaism,  the  authority
of  which  he  still  recognised,  and  which  in  the  example  of
many  illustrious  kings  and  prophets  would  afford  powerful
support  to  his  procedure.  But,  whatever  the  bearing  of  this
second  marriage,  it  was  planned  by  Mohammad  in  a  cool  and
unimpassioned  moment  three  years  before  at  Mecca.  And  it
may  be  doubted  whether  the  propriety  of  interfering  with  the
license  of  Arabian  practice,  and  enforcing  between  the  sexes
the  stringent  limitations  of  Christianity,  was  at  any  time  even
debated  in  his  mind.


[To  face  p.  17S.


CHAPTER IX

STATE OF PARTIES AT MEDINA. FIRST TWO YEARS OF
MOHAMMAD'S RESIDENCE THERE

A.H.  II. — A.D.  623

As  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Citizens  gradually  subsided,  various Parties  at
sentiments  began  to  be  entertained  towards  their  visitor  by Medina
different sections of  the  community ; and there arose in
consequence  a  new  disposition  of  parties  in  the  city. Let  us
glance  for  a  moment  at  each  of  these.

The  disciples  of  Mohammad  who forsaking  house  and i.  Muha-
home  had  preceded  or  now  followed  him  into  exile,  were  called  ^l''J,'^\  °'' .

^  ' _ _  Refugees

by  the  title,  soon  to  become  illustrious,  of  MUHAJIRIN,  or
Refugees.  They  are  already  known  to  the  reader  as  a
devoted  band,  forward  to  acknowledge  Mohammad  not  only
as  their  prophet  but  now  also  as  their  chief  and  leader.
Upon  them  he  could  depend  to  the  uttermost.^

Next  come  the  converts  of  Medina. Bound  to  Mohammad 11.  Ansar,
by  fewer  ties  of  blood  or  fellowship,  they  did  not  yield  to  the or  converts
Refugees  in  loyalty  to  his  person,  or  in  enthusiasm  for  the
faith. They had made less outward sacrifice ; but their
pledge  at  the  'Akaba  had  involved  them  in  serious  risks,  as

^  Muhdjir  (participle  of  the  same  root  as  Jiijrd)  signifies  one  who  has
emigrated,  or  fled  from  his  home,  for  the  faith.  Among  the  'Refugees'
are  reckoned  not  only  those  who  having  quitted  Mecca  were  now  at
Medina,  but  also  all  who  subsequently  joined  Mohammad  (whether  from
Mecca,  Abyssinia,  or  elsewhere)  up  to  the  conquest  of  Mecca  A.H.  viil.
The  roll  of  the  Refugees  then  closed  ;  for  Mecca  itself  being  converted,
the  merit  of  emigrating  from  it  ceased.


i8o


FIRST  TWO  YEARS  AT  MEDINA


[chap.


Enmity  of
the  Aus
and  Khazraj
suppressed
by  Islam


Converts  at
Medina

numerous


Abu  'Amir
and  fol-
lowers go
off  to  Mecca


well  at  home,  should  their  fellow-citizens  resent  or  disown  the
engagement,  as  from  the  men  of  Mecca.  In  short,  they  had
compromised  themselves  almost  as  deeply  as  the  Refugees.
Bound  by  their  oath  only  to  defend  Mohammad  in  case  of
attack,  they  soon  practically  identified  themselves  with  the
Refugees  in  offensive  measures  against  his  enemies  at  Mecca.
Hence  they  were  styled  Ansar,  '  Helpers'  or  'Allies.'  But
as  in  process  of  time  Medina  was  entirely  converted,  and  as
Mohammad  found  other  auxiliaries  amongst  the  Arab  tribes,
it  will  be  more  convenient  to  speak  of  them  simply  as  Citizens
or  men  of  Medina.^

The  ancient  feuds  of  the  Aus  and  Khazraj  were  almost
forgotten  among  the  converts  from  those  tribes.  Acceptance
of  the  faith  required  that  as  Muslims  they  should  acknowledge
not  only  the  spiritual  but  also  the  temporal  authority  of
Mohammad,  and,  holding  subordinate  every  distinction  of
race  and  kindred,  regard  each  other  as  brethren.  Having
surrendered  to  his  will  and  government,  little  room  was  left
for  tribal  rivalry.  Still,  the  memory  of  long-standing  jealousy
and  strife  was  not  always  suppressed  by  the  lessons  of
religion  ;  and  believer  was  sometimes  arrayed  against  believer
in  unseemly  if  not  dangerous  contention.  We  have  no
precise  data  for  calculating  the  proportion  of  the  inhabi-
tants thus  actively  ranged  on  the  side  of  Mohammad.
The  75  adherents  who  pledged  themselves  at  the  'Akaba
were  but  the  representatives  of  a  larger  body  even  then
existing  at  Medina ;  and  the  cause  of  Islam  had  since
that  time  been  daily  gaining  ground.  We  may  conclude
that  the  professed  converts  at  this  time  numbered  several
hundreds.

There  was  at  Medina  one  Abu  'Amir,  who  had  travelled
in  Syria  and  other  countries,  and  from  his  secluded  habits
was  called  the  hermit.  This  man  professed  to  be  a
teacher  in  religion ;  and  he  challenged  Mohammad  with
having  superadded  doctrines  of  his  own  to  the  '  Faith  of
Abraham.'  Offended  at  the  popularity  of  the  new  religion
and  sympathising  rather  with  the  people  who  had  cast
forth  the  upstart Prophet,  Abu  'Amir,  with about twenty

^  Before  Mohammad's  death,  the  two  terms  Ansdr  and  Citizens
became  convertible  ;  that  is  to  say,  all  the  citizens  of  Medina  were
ostensibly  converted  and  so  became  Ansdr.


am-


IX.] MOHAMMAD'S  RELATIONS  WITH  UNBELIEVERS i8i

followers,  retired  to  Mecca.^ Eventually  he  died  an  exile  in
Syria.2

The  body  of  unconverted inhabitants  were  at  the first Moh
neutral,  or  at  least  outwardly  passive. There  was  no  active "^^u^-,
opposition,  nor,  as  at  Mecca,  any  open  denial  of  Mohammad's  recognised
supernatural  claims  ;  neither  was  his  temporal  authority  over  °^"  ^?
his adherents questioned. The constitution of society herents
enabled  him  to  exercise  absolute  and  unquestioned  control
over his own people, without for the present arrogating
jurisdiction over  others. But  although there  was  nowhere  idolatry
apparent  hostility,  and  the  whole  body  of  the  citizens,  un- ^?'^  ^*^^i'^'


cism  su


believers  as  well  as  converts,  held  themselves  bound  in  honour  pressed
to  fulfil  the  pledge  of  protecting  the  Exile,  yet  it  was  not
long  before  an  undercurrent  of  jealousy  and  discontent
amongst  a  large  and  influential  part  of  the  community  set  in
against  him.  We  have  seen  that  'Abdallah  ibn  Obei,  chief
of  the  Khazrajites  and  the  most  powerful  citizen  in  Medina,
was  already  aspiring  to  the  sovereign  power  when  his  hopes
were blighted by the arrival of Mohammad.^ Around

^  When  Mohammad  denied  his  imputations  against  Islam,  Abu
'Amir  abused  him  as  'a  poor  solitary  outcast.'  'Nay,'  replied  the
Prophet,  '  that  will  be  thine  own  fate,  thou  liar  ! '  He  took  a  prominent
part  with  fifty  followers  against  Mohammad  in  the  battle  of  Ohod,  in
which  his  own  son  Hanzala,  a  devoted  Muslim,  was  killed  fighting  on
the  other  side.  After  the  conquest  of  Mecca,  he  retired  to  At-Ta'if.
When  At-Ta'if  gave  in  its  adhesion  to  Mohammad,  he  proceeded  to
Syria;  and  there  died  (in  fulfilment  of  the  Prophet's  curse)  'a  solitary
wretched  outcast.'  He  seems  to  have  been  an  ascetic,  and  is  described
by  Sprenger  as  the  leader  of  a  party  who  adhered  to  the  Jews  as
Proselytes  of  the  Gate.

2  At-Tabari,  i.  1399  ;  Ibn  Hisham,  pp.  411,  561.

3  Vide  p.  115  f.  The  following  incident  is  related  of  him  :  One  day
Mohammad  saddled  his  ass  and  went  forth  to  inquire  after  Sa'd  ibn
*Obada,  who  was  sick.  By  the  way  he  passed  'Abdallah  sitting  with  a
circle  of  his  followers  under  the  shade  of  his  house.  Mohammad's
courtesy  would  not  permit  him  to  pass  without  speaking  ;  so  he  alighted,
and  saluted  him  and  sat  a  little  while  beside  him  reciting  some  portion
of  the  Kor'an,  and  inviting  him  to  the  faith.  'Abdallah  listened  quietly
till  he  ended  ;  then  he  said  :  '  Nothing  could  be  better  than  this  dis-
course of  thine,  if  it  were  true.  Now,  therefore,  do  thou  sit  at  home  in
thine  own  house,  and  whosoever  cometh  to  thee  preach  thus  unto  him,
and  he  that  cometh  not  unto  thee  refrain  from  troubling  him  with  that
which  he  dislikes.'  Mohammad  went  on  his  way  to  the  house  of  Sa'd,
downcast  at  what  'Abdallah,  the  enemy  of  God,  had  said  unto  him.
Sa'd,  perceiving  him  dispirited,  inquired  the  cause. Mohammad  told


i83  FIRST  TWO  YEARS  AT  MEDINA  [chap.

'Abdallah  rallied  a  numerous  party  sceptical  of  the  Prophet's
claims  and  unfriendly  to  the  extension  of  his  rule  ;  but  these
were  unable  to  check  the  mysterious  influence  of  the
Stranger,  or  stem  the  tide  of  his  popularity.  The  circle  of
his  adherents  steadily  expanded,  and  soon  embraced  nominally
the  whole  city.  Idolatry  disappeared,  and  scepticism,  over-
matched, was  forced  to  hide  its  head.
IIT.  The  Real  belief  in  Mohammad  was  not,  however,  always  of

Disaffecte  o^y^^  rapid  growth.  Doubts  and  jealousies  possessed  the
hearts  of  many ;  and  in  private,  and  at  convenient  distance,
found  free  expression.  They  had  foolishly  espoused  an
Exile's  cause  which  would  make  them  run  the  gauntlet  of  all
Arabia  ;  and  for  what  return  ?  Only  to  lose  their  liberties,  and
bring  themselves  under  bondage  to  a  foreign  usurper !  The
class  which  cherished  these  sentiments  are  named  Hypocrites
in  the  Kor'an.  But  hypocrisy  and  disaffection  are,  in  its
vocabulary,  nearly  synonymous  ;  and,  as  the  views  of  this  party
developed  into  political  rather  than  into  religious  antagonism,
it  will  be  more  correct  to  call  them  the  DISAFFECTED.  Such
outward  conformity,  cloaking  an  opposition  ill  concealed,  was
more  dangerous  than  open  animosity.  The  class  soon
became  peculiarly  obnoxious  to  Mohammad ;  he  established
through  his  adherents  a  close  and  searching  watch  over  both
their  words  and  actions ;  and  in  due  time  followed  up  his
espionage  by  acts  which  struck  dismay  into  the  hearts  of  the
disaffected.^

him  what  'Abdallah  had  said.  Then  Sa'd  replied:  'Treat  him  gently,
for  I  swear  that  when  God  sent  thee  unto  us,  we  had  already  strung
pearls  to  crown  him,  and  he  seeth  that  thou  hast  snatched  the  kingdom
out  of  his  grasp.' Ibn  Hisham,  p.  411  ff.

^  Ibn  Ishak  thus  describes  them:  'When  the  Jewish  doctors  were
filled  with  hatred  and  envy  of  Mohammad,  because  God  had  chosen  a
prophet  from  amongst  the  Arabs,  there  joined  them  certain  men  of  the
Aus  and  Khazraj,  who  were  in  reality  little  removed  from  heathenism  and
unbelief,  only  that  Islam  had  by  its  prevalence  overpowered  them.  So
they  took  the  faith  outwardly  as  a  shield  unto  them  from  death  ;  but  in
secret  they  were  traitors,  and  their  hearts  were  with  the  Jews  in  their
rejection  of  the  Prophet' Ibn  Hisham,  p.  351.

Tradition  delights  to  hold  up  this  class  to  scorn,  in  stories  such  as
this: — 'Julas,  the  hypocrite,  said  privately  of  Mohammad's  teaching:
"Verily,  if  this  man  speak  the  truth,  we  are  all  worse  than  asses."
'Omeir,  his  ward,  a  believer,  overheard  the  saying  and  told  it  to
Mohammad  ;  Julas  went  also  to  Mohammad,  and  swore  by  the  day  of


IX.]  JEWISH  TRIBES  183

On  an  entirely  different  footing  were  the  three  Jewish  IV.  The
Tribes  established  in  their  settlements  without  the  city.  ■^^'^^
Mohammad  had  acknowledged  the  divine  authority  of  their
religion,  and  had  even  rested  his  claim,  in  an  important
degree,  upon  the  evidence  of  their  Scriptures  and  the  testi-
mony of  their  learned  men.  One  of  the  objects  nearest  his
heart  was  a  federal  union  with  the  Jews,  His  feasts,  his
fasts  and  ceremonies  were,  up  to  this  time,  framed  in  close
correspondence  with  Jewish  custom.  His  very  Kibla,  the
Holy  of  holies  to  which  he  and  his  people  turned  five  times  a
day  while  they  prostrated  themselves  in  prayer,  was  Jeru-
salem. No  concession,  in  fact,  short  of  the  abandonment  of
his  claim  to  the  prophetic  office,  was  too  great  to  gain  the
Jews  over  to  his  cause.

It  was  natural  that  Mohammad,  holding  these  sentiments, Treaty  of
should  desire  to  enter  into  a  close  and  binding  union  with ^ith^he
the  Jews,  and  this  he  did  in  a  formal  manner  shortly  after  Jews
reaching Medina. He  associated them  with  himself  by  a
treaty  of  mutual  obligation  drawn  up  in  writing,  which  bound
his  followers  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Jews  on  the  other,
and  confirmed  the  latter  among  other  things  in  the  practice
of  their  religion  and  the  secure  possession  of  their  property.
The  main  provisions  are  the  following  : —

'In  the  name  of  God,  the  compassionate,  the  merciful!

'The  Charter  of  Mohammad  the  Prophet,  in  behoof  of  the
Believers,  and  whosoever  else  joineth  himself  unto  them  and  striveth
with  them  for  the  faith.  The  Refugees  shall  defray  the  price  of  blood
shed  among  themselves,  and  shall  ransom  honourably  their  prisoners.
The  Believers  of  the  various  tribes  of  Medina  (named  in  detail)  shall  do
the  same.  Whosoever  is  rebellious,  or  seeketh  to  spread  enmity  and
sedition,  the  hand  of  every  man  shall  be  against  him,  even  if  he  be  a  son.
No  Believer  shall  be  put  to  death  for  the  blood  of  an  infidel ;  neither
shall  any  infidel  be  supported  against  a  Believer.  Whosoever  of  the
Jews  followeth  us  shall  have  aid  and  succour  ;  they  shall  not  be  injured,
nor  shall  any  enemy  be  aided  against  them.  No  unbeliever  shall  grant
protection  to  the  people  of  Mecca,  either  in  person  or  property,  nor  inter-
judgment  that  'Omeir  lied.  Whereupon  a  passage  of  the  Kor'an  (vii.  75),
convicting  Julas  of  falsehood,  was  revealed.'  There  are  also  tales  of  the
'disaffected'  being  ignominiously  expelled  from  the  Mosque,  and  even
from  the  clubs  or  social  circles  of  the  citizens  ;  but  all  such  tales  are
to  be  received  with  caution,  owing  to  the  natural  bias  against  this  class.
Ibn  Hisham,  p.  355  ff.


i84


FIRST  TWO  YEARS  AT  MEDINA


[chap.


Ill-will
grows  up
between
Mohammad
and  Jews


pose  between  the  Believers  and  them.^ Whosoever  killeth  a  Believer
wrongfully  the  Muslims  shall  join  as  one  man  against  him.

'The  Jews  shall  contribute  with  the  Muslims,  while  at  war  with  a
common  enemy.  The  Jewish  clans  in  alliance  with  the  several  tribes  of
Medina  are  one  people  with  the  Believers.^  The  Jews  will  profess  their
religion,  the  Muslims  theirs.  As  with  the  Jews,  so  with  their  adherents.
No  one  shall  go  forth  to  war  excepting  with  the  permission  of
Mohammad  ;  but  this  shall  not  hinder  any  from  seeking  lawful  revenge.
The  Jews  shall  be  responsible  for  their  expenditure,  the  Muslims  for
theirs  ;  but,  if  attacked,  each  shall  come  to  the  assistance  of  the  other.
Medina  shall  be  sacred  and  inviolable  for  all  that  join  this  treaty.
Strangers,  under  protection,  shall  be  treated  as  their  protectors  are  ;  but
no  female  shall  be  so  received  save  with  consent  of  her  kindred.  Con-
troversies and  disputes  shall  be  referred  to  the  decision  of  God  and  His
prophet.  None  shall  join  the  men  of  Mecca  or  their  allies  ;  for  verily
the  engaging  parties  are  bound  together  against  every  one  that  shall
threaten  Medina.  War  and  Peace  shall  be  made  in  common.  He  that
goeth  forth  shall  be  secure  ;  and  he  that  sitteth  at  home  shall  be  secure  ;
— saving  him  that  transgresseth  and  committeth  wrong.  And  verily  God
is  the  protector  of  the  righteous  and  the  godly  ;  and  Mohammad  is  His
Prophet.'^

We  are  not  told  when  this  treaty  was  entered  into,  but
it  probably  was  not  long  after  the  arrival  of  Mohammad  at
Medina.  For  a  short  time  the  Jews  remained  on  terms  of
cordiality  with  their  new  ally ;  but  it  soon  became  evident
that  Judaism  could  not  go  hand  in  hand  with  Islam.  The
position  of  Mohammad  was  no  longer  negative :  his  religion
was  not  a  mere  protest  against  error  and  superstition.  It
was  daily  becoming  more  positive,  exclusive,  and  exacting  in
its  terms.  The  Prophet  rested  his  claims  on  the  predictions
of  the  Jewish  Scriptures ;  yet  he  did  not  profess  to  be  the


^  U7ibeliever  here  refers  apparently  to  that  portion  of  the  population
of  Medina  which  had  not  yet  submitted  to  Mohammad's  claims,  and  who
are  thus  brought  indirectly  within  the  covenant.

^  Said  to  refer  to  Jewish  proselytes  from  the  Aus  and  Khazraj  ;  but
the  expression  may  also  mean  Jews  who  had  simply  attached  themselves
to  those  tribes.

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  341  ff.  The  translation  is  in  an  abridged  form.
There  is  throughout  frequent  reiteration  that  upright  and  honest  dealing
shall  be  observed,  and  whoever  transgresses  shall  do  so  at  his  own  risk,
&c.  There  are  some  references  to  the  hostility  of  Mecca  and  also
anticipatory  allusions  to  religious  wars — additions  made  apparently  at  a
later  time.  As  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  original  or  any
copy  was  preserved,  we  can  only  regard  the  treaty  as  transmitted  by
memory,  and  this  will  account  for  spurious  clauses  and  loose  expression.


1


IX.] ILL-WILL  BETWEEN  MOHAMMAD  AND  THE  JEWS 185

Messiah  of  the  Jews  ; — the  Messiah  had  already  appeared  in
the  person  of  Jesus,  and  had  been  rejected  by  their  fore-
fathers. He  was  another,  and  a  greater  Prophet,  also  foretold
in  their  Book.  The  Jews  knew  this  well.  They  recognised
in  him  the  promised  Prophet,  '  even  as  they  recognised  their
own  sons ' ;  yet,  out  of  jealousy,  and  wilful  blindness,  they
rejected  him,  in  like  manner  as  they  had  rejected  their  own
Messiah.  This  was  the  position  Mohammad  now  held,  and
to  concede  it  was  simply  to  abandon  Judaism.  Thus  Judaism
and  Islam  came  rapidly  into  antagonism.  In  short,  a  Jew,
in  joining  Mohammad,  of  necessity  now  abandoned  his
ancestral  faith,  and  went  over  to  another.  With  few  excep-
tions, however,  the  Jews  remained  steadfast,  and  fearlessly
testified  that  their  Scriptures  contained  no  warrant  for  the
assumptions  of  the  Ishmaelite  ; — the  prophet  that  was  to  come
— their  long-looked  for  Messiah — should  be  not  of  Arabian,
but  of  Jewish  blood,  and  of  the  lineage  of  David.  The
cherished  and  now  disappointed  hope  of  the  Jews,  that  they
would  find  in  Mohammad  a  supporter  of  their  faith,  soon
changed  into  bitter  hostility.  What  availed  his  oft-repeated
professions  of  respect  for  their  ancient  prophets  and  of
allegiance  to  their  Scriptures,  when  he  now  so  openly  con-
tradicted their  clearest  testimony  ?

The  few  faithless  Jews,  whom  Mohammad  was  able  (by They  are
what  inducements  we  shall  see  by-and-by)  to  gain  over,  were !,"JaTifstts
of  the  utmost  service to his  cause. They  are constantly blind  and
referred  to  as  his  *  Witnesses.' They  bore  evidence  that  the ^*'
person  and  character  of  Mohammad  agreed  in  every  particular
with  the  prophetic  description  in  their  Books. Their  brethren,
jealous  that  the  gift  of  prophecy  should  pass  from  them  to
another  people,  had  hid  the  proofs  of  the  Prophet's  mission,
or,  by  '  dislocating '  them  from the  context,  had  misinter-
preted the  clear  prediction. Of  the  believing  few  alone,  the
eyes  were  open. Judicial  blindness  had  seized  the  rest;  a
'thick  covering' enveloped  their  hearts,  and  rendered  them
seared  and  callous. They  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  their
forefathers. What but unbelief and rebellion should be
looked for  from the  descendants  of  those  who  murmured
against Moses, killed their prophets, and rejected the
Messiah  ?

Such  was  the  plausible  reasoning  by  which  Mohammad


i86  FIRST  TWO  YEARS  AT  MEDINA  [chap.  ix.

The  Jews  a succeeded  with  his  own  followers  in  setting  aside  the  adverse
standing testimony  of  the  Jews. Yet  the  Jews  were  a  constant  cause
annoyance of  trouble  and  anxiety. They  plied  him  with  questions  of
to  Moham- yvhich  the  point  was  often  difficult  to  turn  aside. The  very
people  to  whose  testimony  he  had  so  long  appealed  in  the
Kor'an,  proved  now  a  stubborn  and  standing  witness  against
him.^ The  Jewish  tribes  were  also  allied  each  with  some  one
or  other  of  the  Medina  clans ;  they  had  stood  by  them  in
trouble,  and  repeatedly  shed  blood  in  their  defence. Sym-
pathy in  such  a  direction,  especially  amongst  the  doubting
and  disaffected  Citizens,  was  dangerous  to  Mohammad. He
resolved  to  rid  him  of  the  risk  and  trouble ;  and  he  was  not
long  in  finding  means  to  gain  his  end.
Notices  of  Meanwhile,  the  portions  of  the  Kor'an  given  forth  at  this

them  in  period  teem  with  invectives  against  the  Israelites.  The  tales
of  their  forefathers'  disobedience,  folly,  and  idolatry  are
reiterated  at  wearisome  length ;  and  the  conclusion  is  con-
tinually drawn  that  the  descendants  of  so  flagitious  and  in-
corrigible a  race  must  themselves  be  equally  incorrigible  and
flagitious.  All  this  led,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  following
chapter,  to  the  early  and  decisive  secession  of  Mohammad
from  the  Jews,  his  abandonment  of  their  customs  and  institu-
tions, and  the  widening  of  the  breach  between  the  two.^

1  Tradition  gives  a  great  variety  of  tales  in  illustration,  but  they  are
all  cast  in  a  mould  of  ridicule  and  contempt  of  the  Jew,  who  is  repre-
sented as  always  coming  off  the  worst,  humbled  and  abased. We  may
'  be  allowed  to  doubt  whether  the  scales  did  not  oftener  turn  on  the  other

side. Mohammad  evidently  smarted  at  this  period  under  the  attacks  of
the  Jews.

^  We  find,  for  example,  such  injunctions  as  the  following  in  the  Suras
of  this  period  :  '  Neither  the  Jews  nor  the  Christians  will  rest  satisfied
with  thee,  until  thou  followest  their  religions.  Say, — Verily,  God  is  the
Guide,  if  thou  followest  their  desires,  thou  shalt  not  have  God  for  thy
Master  nor  thy  Helper.' — Sura  ii.  114.


CHAPTER X

RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS, AND MISCELLANEOUS EVENTS
DURING THE FIRST AND SECOND YEARS OF THE HIJRA^

A.H. I. & II. — A.D, 623

The  new  faith  touched  the  outer  life  of  its  votaries  at  every  The  five
step.  Five  times  a  day,  as  commanded  in  the  Heavenly  ^^^^y^y^j
journey ,2  the  Believer,  however  occupied,  must  turn  aside
to  prayer.  The  rite  remains  to  the  present  day  the  same,
and  consists  in  repeating  a  few  petitions  or  short  passages,
with  fixed  ceremonial  of  genuflexion  and  prostration.  The
prayers  by  day  were  ordinarily  said  in  the  Mosque  by  the
Prophet  and  such  as  dwelt  in  the  vicinity.  They  might  with
equal  merit  be  offered  anywhere,  at  home  or  by  the  way,
singly  or  in  companies,  but  ever  at  the  stated  times.  The
service  was  invariably  led  by  Mohammad  himself,  when
present ;  in  his  absence,  by  the  chief  person  in  the  assembly,
or  by  any  one  else  charged  by  the  Prophet  with  the  duty.
The  nightly  prayers  were  generally  said  at  home.^

Lustration  had  by  this  time  become  the  necessary  pre- Lustration
Hminary  to  prayer. When  prescribed  is  uncertain. It  may ary  to"pi'ayer
have been at Mecca ;  but,  however that may be,  it was
evidently  borrowed  from  the  Jews,  with  whose  teaching  the

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  346  f.  ^  See  p.  12 r.

2  When  the  fast  of  Ramadan  was  appointed,  the  people  in  their  zeal
gathered  in  the  Mosque  at  a  late  hour  for  the  nightly  prayer  ;  and,
fancying  that  the  Prophet  had  fallen  asleep,  coughed  at  his  door  as  a
sign  for  him  to  issue  forth.  He  came  out,  and  said  :  '  I  have  observed
for  some  days  your  coming  for  the  nightly  prayer  into  the  Mosque,  until
I  feared  that  it  would  grow  by  custom  into  a  binding  ordinance  ;  and,
verily,  if  it  were  so  commanded,  my  people  could  not  fulfil  the  command.
Wherefore,  pray  ye  at  eventide  in  your  own  houses.  Truly,  the  best
prayer  is  that  which  a  man  offers  up  in  his  own  house,  excepting  only
the  prayers  which  are  commanded  to  be  offered  up  in  the  Mosque.'


1 88


RELIGIOUS  INSTITUTIONS


[chap.


Friday  or

public

service


ordinances  established  by  Mohammad  respecting  ceremonial
impurity  and  ablutions  very  closely  correspond.
Daily  round  The  Believer's  life  has  thus  from  the  first  been  a  daily
of  prayer  round  of  religious  observance.  At  dawn  he  begins  the  day
with  lustration,  preliminary  to  the  matin  prayer ;  at  mid-day
he  must  for  the  moment  leave  his  employment  for  the  same
duty ;  in  the  afternoon,  and  again  when  the  sun  has  set,  the
ceremony  is  repeated ;  and  the  day  is  closed  when  darkness
has  set  in  by  the  same  rite  with  which  it  opened.  With  this
duty  nothing  may  interfere.  Saints  and  sinners  join  in  the
stereotyped  form ;  no  engagement,  good  or  bad,  however
inappropriate  to  the  occasion,  may  interfere  with  the  per-
formance of  these  devotions  ;  and  the  neglect  to  observe  them
is  an  abnegation  of  the  faith  and  insult  to  the  majesty  of
Islam  which  demands  interposition  of  the  temporal  arm.

The  daily  prayers  are  not  necessarily  congregational.
They  may  be  offered  up  by  the  worshippers  singly  or  'in
companies,  in  the  mosque,  at  home,  or  by  the  way.  But  at
mid-day  of  Friday,  the  service  took  a  more  public  form,  at
which  the  Believers  as  a  body,  unless  detained  by  sufficient
cause,  were  expected  to  attend.  The  usual  prayers  were  on
this  occasion  followed  by  an  address  or  sermon  pronounced
Sermon  by  Mohammad.  This  weekiy  oration  was  usefully  adapted
to  the  circumstances  of  the  day  and  feelings  of  the  audience.
It  allowed  full  scope  for  the  Prophet's  eloquence,  and  by  its
frequent  recurrence  helped  to  confirm  his  influence  and  rivet
the  claims  of  Islam.  No  religious  antagonism  is  to  be
supposed  in  the  selection  of  Friday  for  the  public  service,
because,  when  he  fixed  upon  it,  Mohammad  was  still  on
friendly  terms  with  the  Jews,  and  inclined  to  adopt  their
institutions.  In  the  Christian  Sunday  he  had  a  precedent
for  change,  and  he  may  have  desired  in  a  similar  manner  to
distinguish  the  sacred  day  of  Islam  from  the  Jewish  Sabbath.'^

^  There  is,  moreover,  no  close  analogy  between  the  Jewish  Sabbath
and  the  Muslim  Friday.  In  the  latter  there  is  no  halloiving  of  the  day
as  one  meant  for  rest  or  religious  worship.  After  the  public  service,  the
people  were  encouraged  to  return  to  their  ordinary  work.  [Wellhausen
holds  the  contrary  opinion,  that  the  sacred  symbols  of  Islam  were
intended  to  cut  it  off  from  both  Christianity  and  Judaism  ;  Friday  instead
of  Sunday  and  Sabbath,  the  call  to  prayer  instead  of  bells  and  trumpets,
Ramadan  instead  of  Lent  and  the  day  of  atonement. — Das  arabische
Reich  und  sein  Sturz,  p.  12.]


X.]  DAILY  PRAYERS,  AND  FRIDAY  SERVICE  189

Perhaps  also  he  hoped  by  the  choice  of  another  day  to  secure
the  attendance  of  the  Jews  at  his  public  service,  which  was
composed,  like  theirs,  of  prayer,  reading  of  the  Scripture,
and  a  sermon.  As  a  Jew  (according  to  the  doctrine  of
Mohammad  at  this  time)  might  follow  all  the  precepts  of
Moses  and  yet  be  a  perfect  Muslim,  it  is  by  no  means  im-
probable that  some  Jews  may  at  the  first  have  attended  both
the  synagogue  and  the  mosque.  There  are  instances  of
Rabbins  being  present  at  the  service  in  the  Mosque,  as,  in-
deed, there  also  are  of  the  Synagogue  being  visited  by
Mohammad  himself,  and  by  his  followers.

But  in  the  second  year,  a  change  took  place,  which  Jerusalem
rendered  it  impossible  for  faithful  Jews  any  longer  to  join  in  xfua^^
the  Muslim  service.  Jerusalem  was  the  first  Kibla  of
Mohammad ;  that  is  to  say,  after  the  fashion  of  the  Jews,  he
and  his  followers  prayed  with  their  faces  turned  towards  the
Temple  of  Solomon.  When  no  longer  any  hope  remained
of  gaining  over  the  Jews,  or  of  fusing  into  one  religion
Judaism  and  Islam,  then  the  ceremony  lost  its  value.  Rather
it  opened  a  vulnerable  point :  '  This  Prophet  of  yours,'  said
the  Jews  tauntingly,  '  knew  not  where  to  find  his  Kibla,  till
we  pointed  it  out  to  him.'  He  might  now  avoid  the  charge
by  transferring  the  homage  of  his  people  from  Jerusalem,
and  concentrating  it  upon  the  Ka'ba.  His  system  would
receive  a  fresh  accession  of  strength  and  local  influence  if  he
were  thus  to  magnify  the  Holy  House  and  make  it  the
Kibla  of  his  people.

Mohammad,  we  are  told,  and  also  some  of  his  followers,  The  Kibla
greatly  desired  the  change. How  it  was  effected  is  told  us  j^^.^^^^
with  the  usual  supernatural  colouring. Sixteen  or  seventeen Ka'ba.
months after his arrival,  the Prophet thus addressed  his m"' "*

' _  ^  Nov.  A.D.

guardian  angel :  '  O  Gabriel !  would  that  the  Lord  might  623
change  the  direction  of  my  face  at  prayer  away  from  the
Kibla  of  the  Jews!'  *I  am  but  a  servant,' replied  Gabriel;
'address  thy  prayer  to  God.'  So  Mohammad  made  his
petition  to  the  Lord.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  on  a  certain
day,  as  he  was  praying  towards  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,
and  raising  his  face  upwards  in  that  direction,  the  following
divine  revelation  came  unexpectedly  to  him  :  *  Verily  We
have  seen  thee  tuuiing  about  thy  face  towards  the  Heavens ;
wherefore We  shall  cause  thee  to  turn  toivards  a  Kibla  that


190  RELIGIOUS  INSTITUTIONS  [chap

shall  please  thee.  Turn  therefore  thy  face  toward  the  holy
Temple  of  Mecca.  Wheresoever  ye  be,  wheti  ye  pray,  turn
toward  the  same! '^  The  Prophet  had  already  performed  two
prostrations  with  his  face  towards  Jerusalem,  when,  receiving
this  behest,  he  turned  suddenly  round,  and  with  him  all  the
worshippers  in  the  Mosque,  and  finished  thus  the  service
looking  to  the  south.  Thenceforward  Jerusalem  was
abandoned  for  the  Ka'ba  as  the  Kibla  of  Islam.^  The
incident  significantly  marked  a  change  of  policy.  The  tide,
rising  rapidly  towards  Judaism,  now  stayed  and  turned.
The  Jews,  knowing  full  well  the  motives  for  the  change,  were
mortified  and  estranged.  Mohammad  had  broken,  as  it
were,  the  last  outward  link  that  bound  him  to  their  creed.
They  charged  him  with  fickleness,  and  worshipping  towards
an  idolatrous  Temple,  charges  which  he  endeavoured  in  the
Kor'an  to  meet.^ But  it  required  the  victory  at  Bedr,  and

1  Sura  ii.  139.  [For  the  date  when  the  change  took  place,  cf.
At-Tabari,  i.  1279  f.]

2  About  three  miles  to  the  N.W.  lies  a  mosque  called  the  '  Mosque  of
the  double  Kibla^  where  some  say  the  change  took  place.  Others  give
the  title  also  to  the  mosque  at  Koba.  The  change  of  the  Kibla  has
elicited  a  great  mass  of  discrepant  tradition.  Many  spots  are  mentioned
as  the  scene  of  its  occurrence,  and  many  different  companies  claim  the
honour  of  being  its  witnesses.  Tradition  delights  to  tell  how,  as  the
rumour  spread  abroad,  one  and  another  was  startled  by  the  strange
intelligence.  The  most  probable  account  gives  the  Great  mosque  as  the
scene,  and  the  time  that  of  mid-day  prayer.

3  The  passage  is  instructive  : —

Sura  ii.  'The  Fools  from  amongst  the  people  will  say,  What  hath  turned  them

136  ff.  from  their  Kibla,  towards  which  they  used  to  pray  ? SAY,  Unto  God

belongeth  the  East  and  the  West :  He  guideth  whom  He  chooseth  into
the  right  way.  Thus  have  We  made  you  an  intermediate  People,  that  ye
should  be  Witnesses  for  mankind  ;  and  the  Prophet  shall  be  Witness  for
you.  We  appointed  the  Kibla  towards  which  thou  usedst  to  pray,  only
that  We  might  know  him  who  followeth  the  Apostle  from  him  that
turneth  back  on  his  heels,  although  it  be  a  stumbling  block,  excepting
unto  those  whom  God  hath  directed.'  \Here  follows  the  verse  quoted  in
the  text;  after  which  the  passage  proceeds  -X  'And  verily,  if  thou  wert  to
show  unto  those  who  have  received  the  Scriptures  every  kind  of  sign,
they  would  not  follow  thy  Kibla  ;  and  thou  shalt  not  follow  their  Kibla.
Neither  doth  one  part  of  them  follow  the  Kibla  of  the  other  part.*  And
if  thou  wert  to  follow  their  desires  after  the  knowledge  that  hath  reached
thee,  then  verily  thou  shouldest  be  amongst  the  Transgressors. They  to

*  Christians  turn  towaids  the  East,  and  Jews  towards  Jerusalem :  whence
Mohammad  would  argue  a  propriety  in  having  a  distinctive  Kibla  for  Islam.


Atonement.
A.H.  II,


X.]  CIRCUMCISION. FAST  OF  RAMADAN  tqi

hostilities  against  the  Jews  themselves,  to  silence  their
objections.  From  this  time  forward  Islam  cast  aside  the
trammels  of  the  Mosaic  law,  and  bound  itself  up  with  the
worship  of  the  Ka'ba.

The  rite  of  circumcision  is  hardly  to  be  mentioned  as  an Circum
institution  of  Islam. It  was  current  among  the  Arabs  as  an '^'^'°"
Abrahamic ceremony, and so continued (without any
command  in the  Kor'an)  [in  which  it  is  not  mentioned  or
referred  to]  to  be  practised  by  the  followers  of  Mohammad.^

A  few  m.onths  after  his arrival  in  Medina,  Mohammad Fast  of

saw  the  Jews  keeping  the  great  Fast  of  the  Atonement ;

and  he  readily  adopted  it  for  his  own  people. Prior  to  this, Sept.  a.d.

622

whom  We  have  given  the  Scriptures  know  this,*  even  as  they  know  their

own children  ; but verily, a party amongst them hideth the truth

designedly.  .  .  .  And  every  (people)  hath  a  direction  to  which  it  turneth

(in prayer).  .  .  .  Now,  therefore,  from  whatsoever place  thou  comest

forth,  turn  thy  face  towards  the  Holy  Temple  ;  for  it  is  the  truth  from

thy  Lord,  and  God  is  not  regardless  of  that  which  ye  are  doing.  .  .  .

Fear  them  not  therefore  ;  but  fear  Me,  that  I  may  fulfil  My  grace  upon

you,  and  that  ye  may  be  rightly  directed.'

Shortly  after  comes  the  following  passage  (addressed  probably  also
to  the  Jews)  in  justification  of  the  pilgrim  ceremony  at  the  Safd  and
Meriva,  alleged  to  be,  or  to  have  been,  the  sites  where  two  idols  stood  :
'  Verily  the  Safd  and  Merwa  are  of  the  monuments  of  God.  Whosoever,
therefore,  performeth  the  Greater  pilgrimage,  of  the  Holy  house,  or  the
Lesser,  it  shall  be  no  crime  in  him  if  he  perform  the  circuit  of  them  both.
And  whosoever  performeth  that  which  is  good  of  a  willing  heart,  verily
God  is  grateful  and  knowing.' Sura  ii.  153. Ibn  Hisham,  p.  381  f.

'  The  practice  is  incumbent  on  Muslims  as  a  part  of  the  Sunna
(custom  or  example  of  the  Prophet),  but  it  is  curious  that  we  have  no
authentic  account  of  Mohammad's  own  circumcision.

2  ''Ashor,  or  the  '  Fast  of  the  Tenth,'  i.e.  tenth  day  of  the  seventh
month. — Lev.  xxiii.  27.  It  was  a  day  of  affliction  and  atonement ;  but
popular  tradition  at  Medina  assigned  to  it  another  origin.  'When
Mohammad  asked  the  Jews  what  was  the  origin  of  the  Fast,  they  said
that  it  was  in  memory  of  the  delivery  of  Moses  out  of  the  hands  of
Pharaoh,  and  the  destruction  of  the  tyrant  in  the  Red  Sea  :  "  IVe  have  a
greater  right  in  Moses  than  they,"  said  Mohammad  ;  so  he  fasted  like
the  Jews,  and  commanded  his  people  to  fast  also.  Afterwards,  when  the
Muslim  Fast  of  Ramadan  was  imposed,  Mohammad  did  not  command
the  Fast  of  'Ashor  {i.e.  of  the  tenth)  to  be  observed,  neither  did  he  forbid
it  ; '  i.e.  he  left  it  optional  to  keep  up  the  one  as  well  as  the  other.
At-Tabari,  i.  1281.  'Ashura  is  the  tenth  (or  ninth)  day  of  the  first  month,
Moharram.

*  Either  the  change,  or  Mohammad  himself.


192  RELIGIOUS  INSTITUTIONS  [chap.

Fast  of  fasting  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a  prescribed  ordinance

Ramadan of  Islam. It  was  established at  a  period  when  it  was  the
A.H,  n.  object of  Mohammad to bring his  religion  into  harmony

Dec.  A.D. ^yj^j-j  |-j^g Jewish  rites  and  ceremonies. But  when  he  had
^^  cast  off  Judaism  and  its  customs,  this  fast  was  to  be  super-

seded by  another.  Accordingly  about  a  year  and  a  half
later,  the  divine  command  was  promulgated  that  the  follow-
ing month  of  Ramadan  (or  Ramzan)  was  to  be  observed
thenceforward  as  an  annual  fast.  Although  the  new
ordinance  was  expressly  ordained  as  similar  in  principle  to
that  of  the  Jews,  yet  its  term  and  the  mode  of  its  obser-
vance were  entirely  different.  At  first  the  Muslims  (following
the  Jews,  who  fasted  for  four-and-twenty  hours  from  sunset
to  sunset)  thought  themselves  bound  to  abstain  from  all
enjoyments  night  and  day  throughout  the  month.
Mohammad  checked  this  ascetic  spirit.  His  followers  were
to  fast  rigorously  by  day,  but  from  sunset  till  dawn  they
might  eat  and  drink  and  indulge  in  all  pleasures  that  were
otherwise  lawful.^
Its  unequal  It was winter when this fast was ordained, and

tressure Mohammad probably then contemplated its  being  always

and  rigour  •  ^  ^  '■  .  o  j

Sura  ii.  ^  '  O  ye  that  believe  ! A  Fast  is  ordained  for  you,  as  it  was  ordained

1 80  fF.  for  those  before  you,  that  haply  ye  may  follow  Piety, —

'  For  the  computed  number  of  days.  The  sick  amongst  you,  and  the
traveller  (shall  fast),  an  equal  number  of  other  days  ;  but  he  that  is  able
to  keep  it  (and  neglecteth)  shall  make  amends  by  the  feeding  of  a  poor
man.  And  whoever  performeth  that  which  is  good,  of  a  willing  heart,  it
shall  be  well  for  him.  And  if  ye  fast  it  shall  be  well  for  you,  if  ye
comprehend, —

*  In  the  month  of  Ramadan  ;  wherein  the  Kor'an  was  sent  down  .  .  .
Wherefore  let  him  that  is  present  in  this  month  fast  during  the  same  ;  but
he  that  is  sick,  or  on  a  journey,  shall  fast  an  equal  number  of  other  days
God  willeth  that  which  is  easy  for  you  :  He  willeth  not  for  you  that  which
is  difficult.  ...  It  is  lawful  unto  you,  during  the  nights  of  the  Fast,  to
consort  with  your  wives.  They  are  a  garment  unto  you,  and  ye  are  a
garment  unto  them.  God  knoweth  that  ye  are  defrauding  yourselves,
wherefore  He  hath  turned  unto  you,  and  forgiven  you.  Now,  therefore,
sleep  with  them,  and  earnestly  desire  that  which  God  hath  ordained  for
you  ;  and  eat  and  drink  until  ye  can  distinguish  a  white  thread  from  a
black  thread,  by  the  daybreak.  Then  keep  the  fast  again  until  night,
and  consort  not  with  them  during  the  day  ;  but  be  in  attendance  in  the
places  of  worship.  These  are  the  limits  prescribed  by  God  :  wherefore
draw  not  near  unto  them.  Thus  God  declareth  His  signs  unto  mankind,
that  they  may  follow  Piety,'


X]  'ID  AL-FITR,  OR  BREAKING  OF  THE  FAST  193

kept  at  the  same  season,  in  which  case  the  prohibition  to  eat
or  drink  during  the  day  would  not,  even  for  a  month,  have
involved  any  extreme  hardship.^  In  the  course  of  time,
however,  by  the  introduction  of  the  lunar  year,  Ramadan
gradually  shifted  till  it  reached  the  summer  season ;  and
then  the  prohibition  to  taste  water  from  morning  till  evening
became  a  burden  heavy  to  bear.  The  strictness  of  the  fast,
as  thus  instituted,  has  nevertheless  been  maintained  unre-
laxed  at  whatever  season  it  may  fall ;  and  to  this  day,  in  the
parched  plains  of  the  East,  for  the  whole  month,  however
burning  the  sun  and  scorching  the  wind,  the  follower  of
Mohammad  may  not  suffer  a  drop  of  water,  during  the
long  summer  day,  to  pass  his  lips ;  and  he  looks  forward
with  indescribable  longing  for  the  sunset  when,  without
compromising  his  faith,  he  may  slake  his  thirst  and  refresh
with  food  his  drooping  frame.  For  the  sick  and  for  travellers
a  dispensation  is  given ;  but,  with  this  exception,  a  penalty
is  imposed  on  every  breach.  The  trial,  though  thus
unequally  severe  in  different  climes  and  at  different  terms  of
the  cycle,  is  no  doubt  a  wholesome  exercise  of  faith  and
self-denial ;  but  its  limitation  to  the  daytime  must  defeat  the
lesson  of  self-control,  so  far,  at  least,  as  certain  classes  of
indulgence  are  concerned.

As  soon  as  the  new  moon  of  the  following  month  was 'id  al-Fitr,
seen  (and  it  is  still  eagerly  looked  for  every  year  throughout  °[  fu ^"u^'
the  Muslim  world)  the  restriction  was  to  cease,  the  next  day  ing  the
being celebrated  as a festival,  called the  'Id  al-Fitr,  or  ^^^^'
'Breaking  of  the  fast.' A  day  or  two  previously,  Mohammad Feb!  a.d.
assembled  the  people,  and  instructed  them  in  the  ceremonies  ^^'^
to  be  observed  on  the  occasion. Early  in  the  morning,  they
were  to  bring  together  their  offerings  for  the  poor ;  each  one,
young  or old,  bond  or  free,  male  or female,  a  measure  of
dates,  of  barley,  or  of  raisins,  or  a  smaller  measure  of  wheat.^
'  See,'  said  he,  '  that  ye  give  plenty  to  the  poor  this  day,  so

*  The  Jewish  intercalary  year,  which  was  probably  in  use  at  this  time,
would  have  prevented  any  change  of  season  for  a  long  series  of  years
(see  ante,  p.  cii).  But  when  Mohammad  introduced  the  lunar  year,
that  which  might  have  been  'easy'  at  the  first,  came  by  the  change  of
seasons  to  be  often  a  grievous  burden  to  his  followers.

2  This  was  before  the  imposition  of  regular  almsgiving,  or  Zakat,
which  will  be  noticed  hereafter.


194


RELIGIOUS  INSTITUTIONS


[chap.


•Id  al-Adha
combined
with  Fast
of  Atone-
ment.

Dhu'l-Hijja,
A.H.  I.
March,
A.D.  623


But  sub-
sequently
shifted
to  corre-
spond with
Meccan
pilgrimage.
A.H II.
April,
A.D.  624


that  they  need  not  to  go  about  and  beg.'  Having  thus
presented  their  alms,  all  went  forth  with  the  Prophet,  who
was  clad  in  festive  garments,  to  the  Musalla^  or  place  or
prayer,  outside  the  city  on  the  road  to  Mecca.^  A  short
spear  or  iron-shod  staff  (brought  by  Az-Zubeir  from
Abyssinia)  was  carried  before  him  by  Bilal  and  planted  on
the  spot.  Taking  his  stand  there,  the  Prophet  recited
certain  prayers  appropriate  to  the  occasion,  and  then
addressed  the  assembled  multitude.  The  service  over,  they
returned  to  their  homes,  after  which  Mohammad,  having
made  a  feast  at  the  Mosque,  distributed  the  alms  of  his
followers  amongst  the  poor.^

Another  great  festival  was  established  shortly  after ; —
the  'Id  'al-Adha,  or  '  Day  of  sacrifice.'  At  the  annual
pilgrimage  of  Mecca  (as  we  have  seen)  victims  have  from
time  immemorial  been  slain  at  the  close  of  the  ceremonies
in  the  vale  of  Mina.  For  the  first  year  at  Medina  the
occasion  passed  unnoticed.  But,  Jewish  rites  being  still  in
favour,  Mohammad  kept  the  great  Day  of  Atonement  with
its  sacrifice  of  victims  in  its  stead  ;  and  had  he  continued  on
a  friendly  footing  with  the  Jews,  he  would,  no  doubt,  have
maintained  the  practice.  In  the  following  year,  however,  it
was  in  keeping  with  his  altered  relations  to  abandon
altogether  the  Jewish  ritual  of  sacrifice,  and  to  substitute  for
it  another  somewhat  similar  in  character,  but  grounded  on
the  ceremonies  of  the  Ka'ba  and  held  simultaneously  with
them.  It  was  after  having  waged  war  against  one  of  the
Jewish  tribes  settled  in  the  suburbs  of  Medina,  and  having
expatriated  them  from  the  country,  that  Mohammad  resolved
upon  the  change.  Accordingly  at  the  moment  while  the
votaries  of  the  Ka'ba  were  engaged  in  the  closing  solemnities
of  the  pilgrimage  at  Mina,  Mohammad,  preceded  by  Bilal
carrying  the  Abyssinian  staff,  and  followed  by  the  people,
went  forth  to  the  place  of  prayer  without  the  city. After  a


1  Speaking  of  Mohammad's  mosque  in  the  Munakha'  (or  open  space
between  the  city  and  its  western  suburb),  Burton  writes  :  '  Others  believed
it  to  be  founded  upon  the  Musalla  el  Nabi,  a  place  where  the  Prophet
recited  the  first  Festival  prayers  after  his  arrival  at  El  Medinah,  and
used  frequently  to  pray,  and  to  address  those  of  his  followers  who  lived
far  from  the  Harem '  (or  Great  mosque). — ii.  192.

''■  At-Tabari,  i.  1281.


X.]  THE  AZAN,  OR  CALL  TO  PRAYER  195

service  resembling  that  of  the  breaking  of  the  Fast,  two
fatted  sucking  kids,  with  budding  horns,  were  placed  before
him.  Seizing  a  knife,  he  sacrificed  the  first,  saying:  'O
Lord !  I  offer  this  for  my  people,  those  that  bear  testimony
to  thy  Unity  and  to  my  Mission.'  Then  he  called  for  the
other,  and,  slaying  it  likewise,  said : — '  O  Lord  !  this  is  for
Mohammad,  and  for  the  family  of  Mohammad.'  Of  the
latter  kid  both  he  and  his  family  partook,  and  that  which  was
over  he  gave  to  the  poor.  The  double  sacrifice  seems  in  its
main  features  to  have  been  founded  on  the  practice  of  the
Jewish  high-priest  at  the  Day  of  the  Atonement,  when  he
sacrificed  '  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for  the  people's.'  ^
The  ceremony  was  repeated  by  Mohammad  every  year
when  present  at  Medina,  and  it  is  still  observed  throughout
the  Muslim  world  at  the  time  when  the  sacrificial  rite  is
being  performed  at  Mina  which  closes  the  Greater
pilgrimage.-

The  summons  to  prayer  was  at  first  the  simple  cry,  'To  TheAzan,
public  prayer  ! '  After  the  Kibla  was  changed,  Mohammad  °l^^^^ '°
bethought  himself  of  a  more  formal  call.  Some  suggested
the  Jewish  trumpet,  others  the  Christian  bell ;  but  neither
was  grateful  to  the  Prophet's  ear.^  The  Azan,  or  call  to
prayer,  was  then  established.  Tradition  claims  for  it  a
supernatural  origin  ; — '  While  the  matter  was  under  discussion,
a  citizen  dreamed  that  he  met  a  man  clad  in  green  raiment
carrying  a  bell,  and  he  sought  to  buy  it,  saying  that  it  would
do  well  for  assembling  the  faithful  to  prayer.  "  I  will  show
thee,"  replied  the  stranger,  "  a  better  way  than  that ;  let  a
crier  call  aloud,  Great  is  the  Lord  !  Great  is  the
Lord  !  /  dear  zvitness  that  there  is  no  God  but  the  Lord :
I  bear  witness  that  JMohaimnad  is  the  Prophet  of  God. Come

^  Heb.  vii.  27  ;  Lev.  xvi.  Aaron  offered  a  sacrifice  'for  himself  and
for  his  house,'  besides  'the  goat  of  the  sin-offering  that  is  for  the  people.'

-  At-Tabari,  i.  1362.  The  short  staff  or  lance,  used  at  the  two
Festivals  by  the  Prophet,  was  still  in  the  keeping  of  the  Muezzin  at
Medina  in  the  2nd  or  3rd  century,  and  used  to  be  carried  in  state  before
the  Governor  of  Medina  when  he  went  forth  to  celebrate  these  Festivals.

^  Ibn  Hisham  says  that  he  had  actually  given  orders  for  a  trumpet  to
be  made,  which  was  probable  enough  during  his  first  relations  with  the
Jews.  Afterwards  disliking  the  idea,  he  ordered  a  wooden  bell  or  'gong'
to  be  constructed  ;  and  it  was  already  hewn  out,  when  this  dream  settled
the  question  in  favour  of  the  Azan.


196


RELIGIOUS  INSTITUTIONS


[chap.


Call  uscA
for  con-
vening a
general
assembly


The  pulpit


unfo  Prayer :  Come  unto  Salvation.  God  is  Great !  God  is
Great!  There  is  no  God  but  the  Lord V  Awaking  from
sleep,  he  went  straightway  to  Mohammad,  and  told  him  the
dream  ;  when,  perceiving  that  it  was  a  vision  from  the  Lord,
the  Prophet  forthwith  commanded  Bilal,  his  negro  servant,
to  carry  out  the  divine  behest'  Ascending  the  top  of  a
lofty  house  beside  the  Mosque  while  it  was  yet  dark,  Bilal
watched  for  the  break  of  day,  and  on  the  first  glimmer  of
light,  with  his  far-sounding  voice,  aroused  all  around  from
their  slumbers,  adding  to  the  divinely-appointed  call  these
words, '  Prayer  is  better  than  Sleep  !  Prayer  is  better  than
Sleep ! '  Every  day,  at  the  five  appointed  times,  the  well-
known  cry  summoned  the  people  to  their  devotions.  For
twelve  centuries  the  same  call  has  continually  sounded  forth
from  a  myriad  minarets  ;  and  the  traveller  in  the  East  is
still  startled  in  his  sleep  at  early  dawn  by  Muezzins  crying
aloud  from  their  various  mosques  the  self-same  words  used
by  Bilal.i

The  old  cry,  '  To  public  prayer,'  was  still  retained  for
secular  occasions,  as  when  an  assembly  was  summoned  for
the  announcement  of  a  victory,  or  for  the  proclamation  of
a  general  order,  such  as  the  going  forth  to  war.  The  people
hurried  to  the  Mosque  at  the  call,  but  it  had  no  longer  any
connection  with  their  devotions.

On  the  spot  where  Mohammad  used  to  stand  in  the
Great  Mosque  at  public  prayers,  the  branch  of  a  date-tree
was  planted  as  a  post  for  him  to  hold  by.  When  the  Kibla
was  changed,  the  post  was  taken  up  from  the  northern  end
and  fixed  near  the  southern  wall.  In  process  of  time
Mohammad,  now  beyond  the  prime of  life,  began to feel


1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  347  f.  After  crying  the  Azan,  Bilal  used  to  come  to
the  door  of  Mohammad  and  rouse  him  thus  :  '  To  prayer,  oh  Apostle  of
God  !  to  Salvation  ! '  Then  Bilal  would  take  his  stand  in  the  front  row
of  the  worshippers,  who  used  strictly  to  follow  his  example  in  the  prayers
and  genuflexions.  There  were  two  other  Muezzins  employed  by
Mohammad,  but  they  acted  only  in  case  of  Bilal's  absence.  As  the
Prophet's  treasurer,  Bilal  also  kept  the  money  and  the  gifts  presented  to
Mohammad.  He  was  held  in  much  esteem  by  the  Muslims  ;  and  by  his
influence  obtained  a  free-born  Arab  wife  for  his  negro  brother.  Bilal,
like  many  other  Muslim  warriors,  was  granted  landed  property  at
Damascus,  where  he  died  A.H.  20,  aged  sixty,  and  where  his  tomb  is  still
shown. Caliphate^  p.  238.


X.]  SERVICE  IN  THE  MOSQUE  197

fatigue  at  standing  throughout  the  long  Friday  service.  So
he  consulted  with  his  followers ;  and  one  said :  '  Shall  I
make  for  thee  a  pulpit  such  as  I  have  seen  in  the  churches  of
Syria  ? '  The  thing  pleased  Mohammad,  both  as  a  relief  to
himself,  and  with  the  view  of  being  better  seen  and  heard
at  public  worship.  Accordingly  one  or  two  tamarisk  trees
were  felled  and  fashioned  into  a  pulpit,  having  a  place  to  sit
on,  and  three  steps  leading  up  to  it.  It  was  erected  near  the
southern  wall  on  the  spot  which  the  pulpit  of  the  Great
mosque  occupies  to  the  present  day.

Mohammad  ascended  the  pulpit  for  the  first  time  on  a  Manner  of
Friday.  As  he  mounted  the  steps,  he  turned  towards  the  daily  .prayer
Ka'ba,  and  uttering  a  loud  Teklnr, '  God  is  most  great ! '  the
whole  assembly  from  behind  burst  forth  into  the  same
exclamation.  Then  he  bowed  himself  in  prayer,  still  stand-
ing in  the  pulpit  with  his  face  to  the  south,  and  his  back  to
the  people  ;  after  which  he  descended,  stepping  backwards,
and  at  the  foot  of  the  pulpit  prostrated  himself  towards  the
Ka'ba.  This  he  did  twice,  using  appropriate  verses  and
ejaculations.  Then,  the  prayers  being  ended,  he  turned
round  to  the  assembly  and  told  them  he  had  done  all  this
that  they  might  know  and  imitate  his  manner  of  worship.
Such  was  the  form  of  daily  prayer ;  and,  handed  down  from
generation  to  generation,  such  to  the  minutest  point  it  has
continued  ever  since.  Worshippers  drawn  up  now  as  then
by  rows  in  the  mosques,  the  wayfarer  who  overtaken  at  the
hour  spreads  his  carpet  for  prayer  by  the  roadside,  high  and
low,  rich  and  poor,  prince  and  peasant,  all  follow  with
exactest  scrupulosity  the  example  of  their  Prophet  in  his
forms  of  obeisance  and  prostration.^

The  order  of  the  Friday  service,  which  all  were  expected And  of  the
to attend, is thus described. On enterirg the place of  ^"4^7

service

worship  the  Prophet  mounted  the  pulpit  and  gave  the
assembly  the  salutation  of  peace.  Then  he  sat  down,  while
Bilal  sounded  forth  the  call  to  prayer.  When  this  was  over
he  descended,  and,  turning  towards the  Ka'ba,  performed

*  A  series  of  two  obeisances  followed  by  prostration^  with  appropriate
ejaculations  and  prayers,  is  called  a  Rak^a.  It  is  said  that  Mohammad,
a  month  after  his  arrival  at  Medina,  prescribed  two  such  Rak'as  for  each
time  of  prayer,  but  subsequently  increased  them  to  four,  excepting  for
persons  on  a  journey.


RELIGIOUS  INSTITUTIONS


[chap.


Extraordin-
ary sanc-
tity of  the
pulpit


The  moan
ing  post


the  prayers  as  at  other  times.  After  this,  he  usually
ascended  the  pulpit  again,  and  delivered  one  or  more
addresses,  sitting  down  between  each.  He  would  on  such
occasions  gesticulate  in  earnest  discourse,  with  outstretched
arm  and  pointed  finger.  The  people,  with  faces  raised,
would  hang  upon  his  words,  and  at  the  close  join  in  a  loud
Amen.  As  he  discoursed  he  leant  upon  a  staff.  On  Fridays
and  Festivals  he  was  clad  in  a  mantle  of  striped  Yemen
stuff  thrown  over  his  shoulders,  with  a  girdle  of  fine  cloth
from  'Oman,  bound  about  his  waist.  At  the  conclusion  of
the  service,  these  robes  were  folded  up  and  carefully  put
away. At  other  times  he  ministered  in  his  ordinary  dress.

The  pulpit  was  invested  with  a  special  sanctity.  Oaths
regarding  disputed  rights  were  taken  close  beside  it.  Any
one  who  should  swear  falsely  by  it,  '  even  if  the  subject  were
as  insignificant  as  a  toothpick,'  was  doomed  to  hell.  The
Prophet  used  to  speak  of  the  space  between  the  pulpit  and
his  door  '  as  one  of  the  gardens  of  paradise.'  The  figurative
words  were  soon  taken  literally,  and  the  fond  conceit  we
find  perpetuated  to  the  present  day  by  flowery  carpeting  on
the  floor,  and  festoons  to  correspond,  upon  the  walls.  '  It  is
a  space,'  says  Burton,  *  of  about  eighty  feet  in  length,  tawdrily
decorated,  so  as  to  resemble  a  garden.  The  carpets  are
flowered,  and  the  pediments  of  the  columns  are  cased  with
bright  green  tiles,  and  adorned  to  the  height  of  a  man  with
gaudy  and  unnatural  vegetation  in  arabesque.'^  When
Mohammad  took  possession  of  the  pulpit,  he  expressed  in
feeling  terms  his  sorrow  at  parting  with  the  post  by  side  of
which  he  had  so  long  prayed,  and  commanded  it  to  be
buried  beneath  the  pulpit.  Tradition  adds  the  romantic
story  that  the  post  moaned  loudly  at  its  desertion,  and  would
not  cease  until  the  Prophet,  placing  his  hand  upon  it,
soothed  its  grief.^

1  Similarly,  Mohammad  said  that  his  pulpit  was  'over  one  of  the
Fountains  of  Paradise' ;— as  a  church  might  be  called  'the  gate  of
Heaven.'  The  sanctity  of  the  pulpit  was  so  great  that,  at  times  other
than  the  public  assembly,  worshippers  used  to  come,  and,  catching  the
knob  of  the  pulpit,  pray,  holding  it  with  their  hands.

2  It  is  a  congenial  subject  for  tradition.  The  people  were  terrified  at
the  noise,  for  the  groanings  of  the  post  were  '  like  those  of  a  she-camel
ten  months  gone  with  young' ;  and  it  ceased  not  till  the  Prophet  fondly
stroked  it  with  his  hand. It  was  then  buried  under  the  pulpit,  or,  as


X.]


THE  FRIDAY  SERMON


T99


During  the  first  year  of  his  residence  Mohammad  lost  two Death  of


Kulthum
and  As'ad
ibn  Zurara


of  his  chief  adherents  among  the  men  of  Medina.  Kulthum,
with  whom  he  had  lodged  at  Koba,  died  shortly  after  his
arrival.  And  the  Mosque  was  hardly  completed,  when  As'ad,
son  of  Zurara,  one  of  the  earliest  converts,  was  seized  with  a
virulent  sore-throat.  He  belonged  to  the  famous  Six  who
first  met  Mohammad  at  Mina.  Elected  'Leader'  of  the
Beni  an-Najjar  when  they  pledged  their  faith  to  the  Prophet
at  the  '  Second  'Akaba,'  he  had  ever  since  taken  a  prominent
part  in  the  spread  of  Islam.  Mus'ab,  when  sent  from  Mecca
to  instruct  the  inquirers  at  Medina,  lodged  with  him,  and
together  they  had  openly  established  prayers  in  the  city.
His  house  was  hard  by  the  Great  Mosque,  where,  as  we  have
seen,  he  welcomed  Mohammad  on  his  arrival,  and  took
charge  of  his  favourite  camel.  The  Prophet  was  deeply
grieved  at  his  illness ;  but  most  of  all  was  he  troubled  by  the
insinuations  of  the  Jews  and  disaffected  citizens.  '  If  this
man  were  a  prophet,'  they  said,  '  could  he  not  have  warded
off  sickness  from  his  friend  ? '  '  And  yet,'  said  Mohammad^
*  I  have  no  power  from  my  Lord  over  even  mine  own  life,
or  over  that  of  any  of  my  followers.  The  Lord  destroy
the  Jews  that  speak  thus ! '  He  visited  his  sick  friend
frequently,  and  twice  caused  his  neck  to  be  cauterised  all
round.  But  the  remedies  were  of  no  avail ;  he  sank  rapidly
and  died.  Mohammad  preceded  the  funeral  procession  to
the  spot  which  had  been  selected  for  a  burial-ground.  It
was  a  large  enclosure,  studded  with  thorny  shrubs,  without
the  city,  to  the  east,  called  Baki'-  al-Gharkad}  As'ad  was
the  first  of  the  illustrious  band  of  early  heroes  buried  in  the
cemetery,  whose  tombs  are  still  visited  by  the  pilgrim.^

For  many  months  after  their  arrival,  it  so  happened  that Barrenness
no children were born to the Muslim women ; and the Muslim
rumour  began  to  spread  abroad  that  their  barrenness  was women
due to the  sorcery  and  enchantments  of  the Jews. More
than  a  year  of  the  Hijra  had  elapsed  when  the  first  infant
was  born  to  the  Refugees — the  wife  of  Az-Zubeir  presenting

others  say,  placed  among  the  rafters  of  the  roof.  According  to  another
tradition,  Mohammad  ejnbraced xh.^  post,  and  then  it  stopped  moaning;
on  which  the  Prophet  said,  that  'had  he  not  done  so,  it  would  not  have
ceased  to  moan  till  the  Day  of  Judgment.'

1  So  called  from  the  thorns  that  covered  it.  -  At-Tabari,  i.  1260  f.


RELIGIOUS  INSTITUTIONS


[chap.


Moham-
mad's
nervous
tempera-
ment


him  with  a  son ;  and  shortly  after,  the  same  good  fortune
happened  to  one  of  the  Citizens.  These  births,  dispelling
their  apprehensions,  caused  great  joy  among  the  Believers.
It  may  possibly  have  been  with  reference  to  such  supposed
enchantments  that  Mohammad  composed  one  or  other  of  the
two  short  Suras  which  now  stand  at  the  close  of  the  Kor'an
and  which  are  used  as  spells  to  counteract  mischievous
designs.  A  later  occasion  (hereafter  mentioned)  is,  however,
assigned  them  by  tradition.^

The  Prophet  was  of  a  highly  strung  and  nervous  tem-
perament. So  afraid  was  he  of  darkness,  that,  on  entering
a  room  at  night,  he  would  not  sit  down  till  a  lamp  had
been  lighted  for  him ;  and  Al-Wakidi  adds  that  he  had  such
a  repugnance  to  the  form  of  the  cross  that  he  broke  every-
thing brought  into  the  house  with  the  figure  upon  it.  When
cupped,  he  would  have  the  operation  performed  an  odd
number  of  times,  believing  that  the  virtue  was  greater  than
with  an  even  number.  He  also  fancied  that  cupping  on  any
Tuesday  which  fell  on  the  17th  of  the  Month  was  peculiarly
efficacious,  a  remedy  even  for  all  the  disorders  of  the  coming
year.  If  the  heavens  were  overcast  with  heavy  clouds,  he
would  change  colour,  and  betray  a  mysterious  apprehension
till  they  cleared  away ;  and  he  was  also  strangely  anxious
about  the  effect  of  the  winds.^  Such  traditions,  which,  from
their  number  and  agreement,  must  be  more  or  less  founded
on  fact,  illustrate  the  nervous  sensibility,  and  apprehension
of  unseen  and  supernatural  influences  for  good  or  for  evil,
which  were  liable  to  affect  his  mind.

1  Op.  at  i.  1263  f.

2  'When  the  wind  blew  ('A'isha  tells  us)  the  Prophet  would  say  :  "  O
Lord  !  verily  I  supplicate  Thee  for  good  from  this  wind,  and  good  from
its  nature,  and  good  for  that  thing  for  which  it  is  sent ;  and  I  seek
protection  with  Thee  from  the  bad  effects  of  this  wind,  and  its  baneful
influence,  and  the  harm  which  it  was  sent  to  do."  And  when  black
clouds  loured,  he  used  to  change  colour  ;  and  he  would  come  out,  go  in,
walk  forwards  and  backwards  ;  and  when  they  ramed,  and  passed  away
without  doing  harm,  his  alarm  would  cease.  On  'A'isha  asking  him  the
reason,  he  said :  "  O  'A'isha !  peradventure  these  clouds  and  winds
might  be  like  those  which  are  mentioned  in  the  history  of  the  tribe  of
'Ad.  For  when  they  saw  a  cloud  overshadowing  the  heavens,  they  said.
This  is  a  cloud  bringing  raiftfor  us;  but  it  was  not  so,  but  a  punishment
because  they  had  called  for  rain  impatiently  ;  and  there  was  in  it  a
destroying  wind."'


X.]


THE  PROPHET'S  TEMPERAMENT


loi


Mohammad  lived  a  simple  life.  His  wives' apartments,  in  Simplicity
which  he  dwelt  by  turns,  were  homely  in  appearance,  built  of  °^  Moham-
unburnt  brick  and  thatched  with  palm-branches,  in  dimen-
sion but  twelve  or  fourteen  feet  square,  and  so  low  that  the
roof  might  be  reached  by  the  hand.  The  doorway  was  pro-
tected by  a  screen  of  goat  and  camel  hair ;  but  'A'isha's
apartment  had  a  wooden  door.  Some  had  an  outer  room  or
verandah  formed  by  a  second  wall,  in  others  by  a  mere  parti-
tion of  palm-twigs  daubed  with  mud.  At  the  door  of  'A'isha's
chamber  was  a  closet,  where  in  the  evening  or  at  night
Mohammad  used  to  retire  for  his  devotions.  The  furnishings
were  in  keeping.  A  leathern  mattress  stuffed  with  palm-coir
was  spread  for  repose  upon  the  floor,  with  pillows  of  the  same
material.  The  Prophet  himself  sometimes  used  a  cot  of  teak-
wood  strung  with  coarse  cords  of  the  palm  ;  ^  but  ordinarily  the
mattresses  sufficed.  In  place  of  garniture  the  walls  were  hung
with  skins  such  as  are  used  in  the  East  to  hold  water,  milk,
or  honey,  and  when  empty  are  blown  out  and  so  suspended.

The  constant  attendant  of  Mohammad  was  'Abdallah  ibn
Mas'ud,  whose  mother,  once  like  her  son  a  slave,  performed
the  same  menial  office  for  the  Prophet's  wives.  Both  were
now  free.  'Abdallah  was  secretary  to  Mohammad  as  well  as
body-servant,  and  attended  him  in  his  campaigns.  He  took
charge  of  his  bed,  his  shoes  or  sandals,  his  toothpicks,  and
his  washing  gear.  When  bathing  he  screened  him  ;  when
sleeping  he  watched  him  ;  and  he  accompanied  him  abroad.
If  the  Prophet  went  forth  upon  a  visit,  'Abdallah  would  bring
his  shoes  for  him  to  put  on,  and  taking  charge  of  his  staff
precede  him  on  the  way.  Reaching  his  destination,
'Abdallah  again  took  charge  of  his  shoes  and  gave  the  staff
into  his  hand  ;  returning  home,  he  did  as  before,  re-entering
in  advance.  He  resided  close  by  the  Mosque,  and  was
always  ready  at  the  call  of  Mohammad.  From  'Abdallah
much  of  the  tradition  regarding  the  life  and  habits  of  the
Prophet  has  been  gathered  ;  and  his  known  intelligence  and
veracity have secured for his narrations special weight.^

^  The  cot  is  said  to  have  been  a  gift  from  As'ad.  After  the  Prophet's
death  it  was  used  as  a  bier  at  funerals,  and  was  eventually  sold  for  a  great
price.

-  If  one  may  judge  by  the  style  of  his  traditions,  he  was  particularly
careful  and  conscientious  in  the  statement  of  his  recollections  ;  though,


'Abdallah,
the  atten-
dant of
Mohammad


2o2  RElLIGIOUS  INSTITUTIONS  [cHap.  X.

Anas  also  attended  the  Prophet,  and  above  a  dozen  other

persons  are  named  as  having  served  him  at  various  times :

but  'Abdallah  was  his  favourite.^

Contrast  Comparing  the  sumptuous  luxury  which  rapidly  sprang

between up throughout the  Muslim  world with the  homeliness  of

maci's  simple  Mohammad's  life,  tradition  would  draw  for  his  degenerate

life  and  the followers  a  lesson  of  frugality  and  self-denial,  and  even  imply

his^ollowers  that  the  Prophet  suffered  want  and  hardship. But  meanness

and discomfort lay only in contrast with  the  pomp and

splendour  of  a  Caliph's  court. Bred in  the  simplicity  of

Arab  life,  artificial  comforts,  soon  regarded  by  his  followers

as  necessaries  of  life,  would  to  him  have  been  irksome  and

weary. The  Prophet  was  happier  with  his  wives  each  in

her  small  and  rudely  furnished  cabin,  than he  would  have

been  surrounded  with  all the  delicacies  and  grandeur  of  a

palatial  residence.

In  this,  and  the  preceding  chapter,  the  history  has  been
somewhat  anticipated  in  order  to  trace  the  development  of
several  of  the  social  and  religious  institutions  that  followed
close  upon  the  Hijra,  Our  story  will  now  lead  us  to  more
stirring  scenes,

like  the  other  Companions  of  the  Prophet,  he  used  to  be  surrounded  by
crowds  of  curious  inquirers,  and  thus  had  every  temptation  to  exaggerate.
He  was  settled  by  'Omar  at  Al-Kufa  with  great  distinction,  and  survived
Mohammad  twenty  years.

^  Anas,  or  Anis,  must  now  have  been  young,  for  some  seventy-five
years  after  we  find  him  seized  by  the  tyrant  AI-Hajjaj,  but  liberated  with
honour  by  the  Caliph,  'as  one  who  had  faithfully  waited  on  the  Prophet
for  ten  years,' See  Caliphate,  p.  345,


CHAPTER  XI


HOSTILITIES BETWEEN MEDINA AND MECCA


A.H. I. & II. — A.D. 623


The  first  six  months  of  Mohammad's  residence  at  Medina
were  disturbed  neither  by  alarms  from  without  nor  by  hostile
councils  at  home.  Vindictive  thoughts  died  out  of  Mecca.
He  who  had  for  so  many  years  kept  the  city  in  excitement,
broken  up  old  parties,  and  introduced  a  new  faction  of  his
own,  was  now  with  all  his  adherents  gone,  and  his  absence
gave  immediate  relief.  The  current  of  society,  long  troubled
and  diverted  by  his  designs,  now  returned  to  flow  peaceably
for  a  while  in  its  ancient  channel.

The  thoughts  of  Mohammad,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the
day  of  his  flight,  were  not  thoughts  of  peace.  In  his  Revela-
tion vengeance  was  threatened  against  his  enemies  —  a
vengeance  not  postponed  to  a  future  life,  but  immediate  and
overwhelming  even  now.  Sheltered  in  his  present  refuge,
he  might  become  the  agent  for  executing  the  divine  sentence,
and  at  the  same  time  triumphantly  impose  the  true  religion
on  those  who  had  rejected  it.  Hostility  to  Koreish  lay  as  a
seed  germinating  in  his  heart ;  it  wanted  but  a  favourable
opportunity  to  spring  up.

The  opportunity  did  not  at  once  present  itself.  The
people  of  Medina  were  pledged  only  to  defend  the  Prophet
from  attack,  not  to  join  in  aggressive  steps  against  enemies.
He  must  take  time  to  gain  their  affections,  and  secure
co-operation  in  offensive  measures  against  those  who  had
cast  him  out.  His  followers  from  Mecca  were  too  few  to
measure  arms  alone  with  Koreish.  They  were  also,  like
himself,  at  present  occupied  by  the  duty  of  providing
dwelling-places  for  their  families.  In  fulfilling  this  domestic
obligation,  in  establishing  friendly  relations  with  the  citizens

203


Repose  at
Medina
for  the  first
six  months


Hostilities
contem-
plated by
Mohammad
from  the
first  :


But  de-
ferred from
motives  of
policy


204 HOSTILITIES  BETWEEN  MEDINA  AND  MECCA [chap.


Extent  and
value  of
the  caravan
trade  of
Mecca  with
Syria


of  Medina  and  at  the  first  also  with  the  Jewish  tribes,  in
organising  civil  and  religious  institutions  for  his  followers
now  fast  assuming  the  position  of  an  independent  body,  and
in  riveting  the  hold  of  his  theocratic  government  upon  them,
the  autumn  of  the  first  year  passed  away.  From  midsummer
to  winter  was  passed  in  peace.

But  in  their  caravan  traffic  with  the  north  (the  beaten
path  of  which  passed  between  Medina  and  the  seacoast),  the
Koreish  offered  a  point  for  attack  too  vulnerable,  and  pros-
pect of  booty  too  tempting,  for  this  inaction  long  to  last.
The  trade  of  Mecca  was  large  and  profitable.  From  thence,
and  from  its  sister  city  At-Ta'if,  caravans  proceeded  in  the
autumn  to  the  Yemen  and  Abyssinia,  and  in  spring  to  Syria,
Leather,  gums,  frankincense,  the  precious  metals,  and  other
products  of  Arabia,  formed  the  staples  of  export.  The
leather  of  Mecca,  At-Ta'if,  and  the  Yemen  was  in  much
request  both  in  Syria  and  Persia,  and  fetched  a  high  price.
Piece-goods,  silk,  and  articles  of  luxury  were  received  in
exchange  at  Gaza  and  other  Syrian  marts,  and  carried  back
to  Mecca.  We  read  of  at  least  six  such  expeditions  during
the  year  following  the  Flight,  and  there  were,  no  doubt,
several  more.  Some  of  these  caravans  were  very  large  and
very  rich.  One  consisted  of  2,000  camels,  whose  freight  was
valued  at  50,000  dinars.  The  annual  export  trade  of  Mecca
has  been  estimated  by  Sprenger  at  not  less  than  250,000
dinars,  and  the  return  merchandise  at  the  same  amount.^
The  ordinary  profit  being  50  per  cent.,  it  is  easy  to  see  how
lucrative  was  the  traffic,  and  how  greatly  the  merchants  of
Mecca  must  have  been  dismayed  at  any  contingency  that

1  These  figures  can  only  be  taken  as  conjectural  ;  but  as  each  camel
carried  about  2  cwt.  of  costly  goods,  the  value  must,  no  doubt,  have
been  very  considerable.  The  dinar  (or  mithkal)  was  a  golden  coin
corresponding  with  the  Byzantine  aureus;  the  dirhem  (drachma)  a  silver
coin.  Sprenger,  by  elaborate  calculation,  estimates  the  dinar  at  about
15  francs, — or  say  about  two-thirds  of  a  pound  sterling.  The  silver
dirhem  he  rates  at  72  centimes,  say  td.  to  Zd.  Considering  the  high
value  in  that  age  of  the  precious  metals,  the  caravans  at  the  figures
mentioned  in  the  text  must  have  been  rich  indeed.  By  the  Byzantine
system,  gold  stood  to  silver  in  the  ratio  of  I4§  to  i  ;  among  the  Muslims,
strange  to  say,  the  ratio  was  as  low  as  8  or  9,  and  even  7,  to  i  ;  at  which
rate  the  legal  demands  were  commuted  ;  subsequently  the  ratio  rose  to
10  or  12.  Gold  was  the  currency  in  the  Byzantine  provinces,  as  Syria
and  Western  Mesopotamia  ;  silver  in  Persia  and  Babylonia.


XI.]  CARAVANS  A  VULNERABLE  POINT  OF  ATTACK 205


might  threaten  its  safety.  Moreover,  the  whole  city  of
Mecca  was  devoted  to  the  trade.  While  the  leading
merchants  embarked  great  sums  in  these  expeditions,  almost
every  citizen  who  could  spare  a  dinar  or  two  invested  in
them  his  little  capital.  A  caravan  was  ordinarily  under  the
conduct  of  the  one  or  two  chief  men  who  owned  the  bulk  of
the  merchandise ;  but  these  for  a  consideration  of  half  the
profit,  readily  took  charge  also  of  the  smaller  ventures,  as
commissions  to  be  accounted  for  on  their  return.  It  thus
happened  that  in  some  of  the  larger  caravans,  almost  every
citizen,  man  and  woman,  having  any  means  at  command,
owned  a  share  however  small ;  and  when  such  a  caravan  was
threatened  the  whole  city  was  thrown  into  alarm.

The  caravans,  indeed,  had  always  been  subject  to  a
certain  risk  from  the  attack  of  Arab  bandits.  Halting  by
day  and  travelling  by  night,  the  long  strings  of  camels,  with
but  a  slender  escort,  were  at  once  thrown  into  confusion,
especially  in  defiles  and  narrow  passes,  by  the  onset  of  a  few
determined  brigands,  who  in  the  turmoil  could  secure  their
plunder  and  effect  an  easy  retreat.  The  danger  from  such
desultory  attack  was  ordinarily  met  by  extreme  caution  on
the  part  of  the  leader,  whose  scouts  gave  timely  notice  of
any  risk,  and  who  was  able  accordingly,  either  by  retiring  or
by  a  hurried  movement  forward,  to  avoid  it.  But  Koreish
were  not  slow  to  perceive  that  their  position  must  be  very
different  now  with  an  enemy  on  the  watch,  who,  like  an  eagle
from  his  eyrie,  was  ever  ready  to  swoop  down  unawares  upon
their  caravans.  During  the  first  six  months,  however,  it  was
not  the  period  for  traffic  northwards,  and  Mohammad  was
otherwise  engaged  at  home.  But  the  season  was  now
approaching ;  and  Koreish  watched  with  anxiety  the
attitude  of  the  Prophet  and  his  exiled  band  towards  the
first  caravans  which  they  were  now  despatching  to  Syria.

The  earliest  acts  of  hostility  were  of  a  petty  and  marauding
character ;  but  still  sufficiently  indicative  of  the  impend-
ing struggle.^  In  the  winter,  about  seven  months  after  his
arrival,-  Mohammad  despatched  his  uncle  Hamza,  at  the
head  of  some  30  Refugees,  to  surprise  a  caravan  returning


The  whole
city  devoted
to  the  traffic


1  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  2  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  33  f.
^  I  follow  the  chronology  of  M.  C.  de  Perceval,
date  fall  about  two  and  a  half  months  later.


This  trade  a
vulnerable
point  of
attack  from
Medina


Expeditions
against
Koreishile
caravans


Sprenger  makes  the


2o6 HOSTILITIES  BETWEEN  MEDINA  AND  MECCA [chap.


First :
Hamza,
Ramadan.
A.H.  I.Dec.
A.D.  622


Second  :
'Obeida  ibn
al-Harith.
A.H.  I.  Jan.
A.D.  623


Third :
Sa'd  ibn  abi
Wakkas


A  standard
presented  by
Mohammad
to  each
leader


Three  ex-
peditions
conducted
by  Moham-
mad him-
self :—
Al-Abwa
Safar,  A.H.
I'l.  June,

A.D.  623


from  Syria  under  the  guidance  of  Abu  Jahl.^  Guarded  by
300  Koreish,  it  was  overtaken  near  the  seashore,  when  a
chief  of  the  Beni  Juheina,  confederate  of  both,  interposed
between  the  parties  already  drawn  up  for  an  encounter;
Hamza  upon  this  retired  to  Medina,  and  Abu  Jahl  proceeded
on  his  journey.  About  a  month  later  a  body,  double  the
strength  of  the  first,  was  sent  by  Mohammad  under  command
of  his  cousin  'Obeida,  in  pursuit  of  another  caravan  protected
by  Abu  Sufyan  with  200  men.-  Koreish  were  surprised
while  their  camels  were  grazing  by  a  fountain  in  the  valley
of  Rabigh  ;  but  the  Muslims  found  the  escort  too  strong  for
them,  and,  beyond  the  discharge  of  arrows  from  a  distance,
no  hostilities  were  attempted.  'Obeida  is  distinguished  in
tradition  as  he  who,  on  this  occasion,  'shot  the  first  arrow
for  Islam.'  In  the  convoy  there  were  two  Believers  who,
finding  an  opportunity,  fled  from  the  caravan  and  j'oined  the
party  of  'Obeida.  After  the  lapse  of  another  month,  a  third
expedition  started,  under  the  youthful  Sa'd  with  20  followers,
in  the  same  direction.^  He  was  to  proceed  as  far  as  a
certain  valley  on  the  road  to  Mecca,  and  there  lie  in  wait  for
a  caravan  expected  to  pass  that  way.  Like  most  of  the
subsequent  parties  intended  to  effect  a  surprise,  they  marched
by  night  and  lay  in  concealment  during  the  day.  Notwith-
standing this  precaution,  when  they  reached  their  destination
on  the  fifth  morning,  they  found  that  the  caravan  had  passed
a  day  before,  and  so  they  returned  empty-handed  to  Medina.
These  excursions  occurred  in  the  winter  and  spring  of  the
year.  On  each  occasion,  Mohammad  mounted  a  white
banner  on  a  staff  or  lance,  and  presented  it  to  the  leader  on
his  departure.  In  these  and  all  other  expeditions  of  any
importance  the  names  of  the  leaders,  and  also  of  those  who
carried  the  standard,  are  carefully  recorded  by  tradition.*

In  the  summer  and  autumn  of  the  same  year,  Mohammad
led  in  person  three  somewhat  larger,  though  equally  unsuc-
cessful, expeditions.  The  first  set  out  in  midsummer,  nearly
twelve  months  after  his  arrival,  and  was  directed  to  Al-Abwa

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  419  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1265  f.
2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  416  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1267.
^  Op.  cit.  p.  422  f.,  and  i.  1265  f.

^  A  small  night  attack  is  called  sarlya;  a  larger  expedition,  especially
one  in  which  Mohammad  himself  took  part,  ghazwa — a  term  still  in  use.


XI.]  FIRST  EXPEDITION  LED  BY  MOHAMMAD  207

(the spot where his mother was buried) in pursuit  of  a

Koreishite  caravan.^ The  prey  was  missed  ;  but  something

was gained in a friendly  treaty concluded with a tribe

hitherto  connected  with  Mecca,  but  now  detached  from  its

alliance. The  treaty  was  committed  to  writing,  the  first  that

Mohammad entered into with any outside body. He

returned, after fifteen days' absence, to Medina. Next Bowat :

month, the Prophet again marched, at the  head  of  200 Iuw'ad

followers,  including  a  large  number  of  the  Citizens,^  to  Bowat 623

on  the  caravan  route  south-west  of  Medina. A  rich  burden

laden  on  2,500  camels,  under  the  escort  of  one  of  Mohammad's

chief  opponents,  Omeiya  ibn  Khalaf,  with  100  armed  men,

was  to  proceed  that  way. But  it  eluded  pursuit,  and  passed

on  safely. The  presence  of  so  many Citizens shows the

advancing influence  of  Mohammad ; they  were,  no  doubt,

tempted  by  the  hope  of  so  great  a  prize ;  but  whether  or  no,

they  had  now  crossed  the  Rubicon  and  identified  themselves

with Mohammad in hostilities against Koreish. Shortly

after  their  return,  some  of  the  camels  and  flocks  of  Medina,

while  feeding  in  a  plain  a  few  miles  from  the  city,  were  fallen

upon  by  Kurz  ibn  Jabir,  a  marauding  Bedawi  chieftain,  and (Kurz  ibn

carried  off.^ Mohammad  pursued  him  nearly  to  Bedr,  but  J^l^'.i"  "^^^^s

^ •  ^  J  'a  raid  near

he  made  good  his  escape. We  find  him  not  long  afterwards Medina)
converted  to  Islam,  and  leading  a  Muslim  expedition  against
a  Bedawi  robber  like  himself.

Two  or  three  months  elapsed  before  Mohammad  set  out 'Osheira:
on  his  third  expedition.^ Volunteers  were  invited,  and  from o'^t.  a.'d.
150  to  200  followers  joined  the  party. They  had  between 623
them  only  thirty  camels,  on  which  they  rode  by  turns. At
'Osheira,  distant  nine  marches  on  the  way  to  Yenbo',  they
expected  to  waylay  a  rich  caravan  which  Abu  Sufyan  was
conducting towards Syria, and of  the  departure  of  which
from  Mecca  tidings  had  been  received. But  it  had  passed
several  days  before. It  is  the  same  caravan  which,  on  its

^  Ibn  Hishfim,  p.  415  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1270.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  421  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1268.  More  than  half  must  have
been  Medina  men  :  for  at  the  battle  of  Bedr,  when  every  exile  from
Mecca  was  mustered,  there  were  but  83  Refugees  present.

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  423.  [This  raid  is  sometimes  called  'the  first  Bedr.']
At-Tabari,  i.  1269  f.

^  FAccording  to  Ibn  Hisham  (p.  421  f.)  and  At-Tabari  (i.  1269  f.)  a
few  days  before.]


2o8 HOSTILITIES  BETWEEN  MEDINA  AND  MECCA [chap.


MohauiiiiP.d
concludes
alliance
with  tribes
by  the  way

Mohammad
calls  'All
Abu  Torab


His

standard-
bearers


Mohammad
leaves  re-
presenta-
tive at
Medina


Affair  of
Nakhla.
Rajab  :
A.H.  II.
Nov.  A.D.
623


return  from  Syria,  gave  occasion  to  the  famous  action  of
Bedr.  In  this  excursion  the  Prophet  entered  into  an  alb'ance
with  several  tribes  inhabiting  the  vicinity  of  'Osheira.  He
was  thus  gradually  extending  his  influence  along  the  sea-
shore, and  so  still  further  hedging  the  passage  of  the  Meccan
caravans.  An  instance  of  the  pleasantry  in  which  the
Prophet  sometimes  indulged  is  here  recorded.  'All  had
fallen  asleep  on  the  dusty  ground  under  the  shade  of  a  palm-
grove.  Mohammad  espied  him  lying  thus,  all  soiled  with
the  dust,  and,  pushing  him  with  his  foot,  called  out,  '  Ho !
Abu  Torab !  {Father  of  dust)  is  it  thou  ?  Abu  Torab,  sit
up  ! '  'All,  half-ashamed,  sat  up  ;  and  the  sobriquet  ever  after
clung  to  him.^  On  each  of  these  expeditions  Mohammad
appointed  a  standard-bearer  to  carry  his  white  banner.
Hamza,  Sa'd,  and  'All  successively  had  this  honour.

Whenever  the  Prophet  left  Medina  to  proceed  to  any
distance,  he  named  a  representative  to  exercise  authority
over  those  who  were  left  behind,  and  to  lead  the  public
prayers  during  his  absence.  The  first  person  selected  for
the  office  was  one  of  the  twelve  '  Leaders,'  Sa'd  ibn  'Obada,
of  the  Beni'l-Khazraj.  The  next  who  received  this  token  of
confidence  was  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh,  of  the  Beni'1-Aus,  so  care-
fully was  Mohammad  minded  to  distribute  his  favours
between  these  two  jealous  tribes.  On  the  third  occasion  his
friend  Zeid  was  honoured  with  the  post.

In  November  and  December,  Mohammad  did  not  himself
quit  Medina ;  but  he  sent  forth  'Abdallah  ibn  Jahsh,  with
seven  other  Refugees,  on  an  expedition  attended  with  more
serious  results  than  any  of  the  preceding.^  As  he  bade  fare-
well to  'Abdallah,  the  Prophet  placed  in  his  hands  a  closed
packet,  and  charged  him  not  to  open  it  till  he  entered  a
certain  valley  two  days'  march  toward  Mecca.  On  reaching
the  spot,  'Abdallah  broke  open  the  letter,  and  read  it  aloud
to  his  comrades  as  follows :  Go  forward  to  Nakhla,  in  the
name  of  the  Lord,  and  with  His  blessing  !  Yet  force  not  any
of  thy  folloivers  against  his  inclination.  Proceed  with  those
that  acconipany  thee  willingly  ;  and  when  thou  hast  arrived  at
the valley of  Nakhla,  lie there  in  wait  for  the  caravans  of

1  At-Tabari,  i.  1272  f.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  423  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1275  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  34  f.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  5.


dered


XI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  NAKHLA  209

Koreish.  Nakhla  has  been  already  noticed  as  lying  to
the  east  of  Mecca,  about  half-way  to  At-Ta'if ;  and  the  trade
with  South  Arabia  all  passed  that  way.  Watched  and
pursued  in  their  commerce  with  Syria,  traffic  would  be  all  the
more  securely  and  busily  prosecuted  towards  the  South  by
the  merchants  of  Mecca ;  for  the  route  lay  far  removed  from
the  outlook  of  their  enemy.  Mohammad  had,  no  doubt,
intimation  of  some  rich  venture,  shortly  expected  at  Mecca
by  this  route,  and  by  his  sealed  instructions  effectually  provided
against  intelligence  of  his  design  being  conveyed  to  Koreish.

Having  read  the  order,  'Abdallah  told  his  comrades  that  A  Koreish-
any  who  wished  was  at  liberty  to  go  back  :  '  As  for  myself,'  '^'^d  cara-
he  said,  '  I  will  go  forward  and  fulfil  the  command  of  the  van  plun
Prophet'  All  joined  in  the  same  determination,  and
proceeded  onwards ;  but  two  fell  behind  in  search  of  their
camel,  which  had  strayed,  and  lost  the  party.^  The  remain-
ing six,  having  reached  Nakhla,  waited  there.  In  a  short
time  the  expected  caravan,  laden  with  wine,  raisins,  and
leather  from  the  South,  came  up.  It  was  guarded  by  four
Koreish,  who,  seeing  the  strangers,  were  alarmed  and  halted.
With  the  view  of  disarming  their  apprehensions,  one  of
'Abdallah's  party  shaved  his  head,  thus  making  the  convoy
believe  that  they  had  just  returned  from  the  Lesser  pilgrim-
age ;  for  this  was  one  of  the  months  in  which  that  ceremony
was  ordinarily  performed.  The  men  of  the  caravan  seeing
his  shaven  head  were  reassured,  and,  turning  the  camels
adrift  to  pasture,  began  to  cook  their  food.  Meanwhile,
'Abdallah  and  his  comrades  debated  what  to  do.  It  was  the
last  day  of  Rajab,  in  which  it  was  forbidden  to  fight ;  and  so
they  said  to  one  another :  '  If  we  defer  the  attack  this  night,
they  will  surely  move  off,  and  find  asylum  in  the  Holy
territory ;  and  if  we  fight  against  them  now,  it  will  be  a
transgression  o^  the  Sacred  month.'  They  were  thus  fixed
on  the  horns  of  a  dilemma.  At  last  they  overcame  their
scruples.  One  of  their  number  advanced  covertly,  andj
discharging  an  arrow,  killed  a  man  of  the  convoy,  'Amr  ibn
al-Hadrami,  on  the  spot.  All  then  rushed  upon  the
caravan,  and  securing  two,  'Othman ibn  'Abdallah ibn al-

^  By  some  accounts  they  took  advantage  of  the  option  to  go  back,
and  turned  aside.  The  straying  of  the  camel  may  have  been  invented  to
cover  what  in  after  days  must  have  appeared  discreditable  lukewarmness.

O


2JO HOSTILITIES  BETWEEN  MEDINA  AND  MECCA [chap.


Mohammad
at  first
disclaims
responsi-
bility


Then  pro-
mulgates an
approving
revelation


Sura  ii.  214


Prisoners
ransomed


Importance
of  this  ex-
pedition


Moghira  and  Al-Hakam  ibn  Keisan,  carried  them  off
prisoners,  with  the  spoil,  to  Medina.  Naufal,  brother  of
'Othman,  leaped  on  his  horse  and  escaped  to  Mecca ;  but  too
late  to  give  alarm  for  the  pursuit.

On  'Abdallah  reaching  Medina,  he  acquainted  Mohammad
with  what  had  passed.  The  Prophet,  who  had  probably  not
expected  the  party  to  reach  Nakhla  till  after  the  close  of
Rajab,  appeared  displeased,  and  said  :  '  I  never  commanded
thee  to  fight  in  the  Sacred  month.'  So  he  put  the  booty
aside,  pending  further  orders,  and  kept  the  prisoners  in
bonds.  'Abdallah  and  his  comrades  were  crestfallen,  and
the  people  reproached  them.  But  Mohammad  was  unwilling
to  discourage  his  followers ;  and,  soon  after,  a  revelation
appeared,  justifying  warfare  even  in  the  sacred  months  as  a
lesser  evil  than  hostility  to  Islam  : —

They  will  ask  thee  concerning  the  Sacred  months,  whether  they  may
war  therein.  Say  : — Warring  therein  is  grievous  ;  but  to  obstruct  the
way  of  God  and  to  deny  Him,  to  hinder  men  from  the  Holy  temple,  and
to  expel  His  people  thence,  that  is  more  grievous  with  God.  Tempting
(to  idolatry)  is  more  grievous  than  slaughter.^

Having  promulgated  this  dispensation,  Mohammad  made
the  booty  over  to  the  captors,  who  (anticipating  the  subse-
quent practice)  presented  a  fifth  to  Mohammad,  and  divided
the  remainder  among  themselves.

The  relatives  of  the  two  prisoners  now  sent  a  deputation
from  Mecca  for  their  ransom.  Sa'd  and  'Otba,  the  two  who
had  wandered  from  'Abdallah's  party,  were  not  yet  returned.
Mohammad,  apprehensive  for  their  safety,  refused  to  ransom
the  captives  till  he  was  assured  that  no  foul  play  had  been
used  towards  them  :  '  If  ye  have  killed  my  two  men,'  he  said,
'  verily,  I  will  put  yours  also  to  death.'  But,  soon  after,  they
made  their  appearance,  and  Mohammad  accepted  the  proffered
ransom,  forty  ounces  of  silver,  for  each.^  Al-Hakam,  how-
ever, continued  at  Medina,  and  eventually  embraced  Islam.

Arabian  writers  rightly  attach  much  importance  to  this
expedition.  'This,'  says  Ibn  Hisham,  'was  the  first  booty
which  the  Muslims  obtained,  the  first  captives  they  seized,
and  the  first  life  they  took.'  'Abdallah  is  said  to  have  been
called  in  this  expedition  Amir  al-Muininln — an  appellation,

^  The  silver  iiklya,  or  ounce,  was  equal  to  forty  dirhems.  For  the
value  of  the  dirhem  see  note  aiite^  p.  204.


XI.] INCREASING  HOSTILITY  TOWARDS  KOREISH 211


'Commander  of  the  Faithful,'  assumed  in  after  days  by  the
Cah'phs,  and  first  by  'Omar.

It  was  now  a  year  and  a  half  since  Mohammad  and  his
followers  had  fled  for  refuge  to  Medina.  Their  attitude
towards  Mecca  was  becoming  daily  more  hostile.  Latterly,
no  opportunity  had  been  lost  of  threatening  the  numerous
caravans  passing  through  the  Hijaz.  On  the  regular  and
uninterrupted  march  of  these  to  Syria  depended  the
prosperity  of  Mecca,  for  the  traffic  with  the  Yemen  and
Abyssinia  was  of  greatly  less  importance  ;  and  even  for  it,
as  now  appeared,  their  enemy  would  allow  them  no  security.
The  last  attack  had  also  shown  that  Mohammad  and  his
followers,  in  the  combat  on  which  they  were  entering,  would
respect  neither  life  nor  the  inviolability  of  the  Sacred  months.
Blood  had  been  shed — treacherously  and  sacrilegiously  shed —
and  was  yet  unavenged.  Still  Mecca  made  no  hostile  response.
Though  followers  of  the  Prophet  were  in  the  city,  no  cruelties
were  perpetrated  on  them,  nor  any  reprisals  attempted.  But
the  breach  was  widening,  and  the  enmity  becoming  deeper
seated  :  blood  could  be  washed  out  by  blood  alone.

At  Medina,  on  the  other  hand,  the  prospect  of  mortal  con-
flict with  their  enemies  was  steadily  contemplated,  and  openly
spoken  of  by  Mohammad  and  his  adherents.  At  what  period
the  divine  command  to  fight  against  the  Unbelievers  was
promulgated,  is  uncertain.  Repeated  attacks  on  the  caravans
of  Koreish  had  been  gradually  paving  the  way ;  and  at  last,
when  given  forth,  the  heavenly  behest  appeared  but  as  the
embodiment  of  a  long-formed  resolution  for  revenge.  The
following  are  the  earliest  passages  on  the  subject : —

Bear  good  tidings  unto  the  Righteous  !  Truly  the  Lord  will  keep  back
the  Enemy  from  those  who  believe,  for  God  loveth  not  the  perfidious
Unbeliever.  Permission  is  given  to  bear  arms  against  those  that  have
wronged  them,  and  verily  the  Lord  is  mighty  for  the  assistance  of  such
as  have  been  driven  from  their  homes  for  no  other  cause  than  that  they
said,  God  is  our  Lord.  And  truly  if  it  were  not  that  God  holdeth  back
mankind,  one  part  by  means  of  another  part.  Monasteries  and  Churches
and  Places  of  prayer  and  worship,  wherein  the  name  of  the  Lord  is
frequently  commemorated,  would  be  demolished.  God  will  surely  assist
them  that  assist  Him. For  God  is  Mighty  and  Glorious.

Fight  in  the  way  of  God  with  them  that  fight  against  you  :  but
transgress  not,  for  God  loveth  not  the  Transgressors.  Kill  them  where-
soever ye  find  them  ;  and  expel  them  from  whence  they  have  expelled
you  :  for  temptation  (to  idolatry)  is  more  grievous  than  killing. Yet  fight


Growing

hostility
towards
Koreish


Forbear-
ance of
Koreish


Command
to  fight
against
Koreish


Sura  xxii.
38  ff.


Sura  ii.
lS6ff,  212  f.


212 HOSTILITIES  BETWEEN  MEDINA  AND  MECCA [chap.


Fighting
prescribed
on  religious
grounds


The  fearful
reproved


Sura  xlvii.
22  f.


Paradise
promised  to
the  slain

Siira  xxii.
57  f-

The  cause
not  depen-
dent on
their  efforts


Sura  xlvii.
5f.


not  against  them  beside  the  Holy  ternple,  until  they  fight  with  you
thereat.  *  *  *  Fight,  therefore,  until  temptation  to  idolatry  cease,  and
the  Religion  be  God's.  And  if  they  leave  off,  then  let  there  be  no
hostility,  excepting  against  the  Oppressors.

War  is  ordained  for  you,  even  if  it  be  irksome  unto  you.  Perchance
ye  may  dislike  that  which  is  good  for  you,  and  love  that  which  is  evil  for
you. But  God  knoweth,  and  ye  know  not.

Thus  war,  upon  grounds  professedly  religious,  was  established
as  an  ordinance  of  Islam.  Hostilities,  indeed,  were  justified
by  the  '  expulsion '  of  the  Believers  from  Mecca.  But  the
main  and  undisguised  issue  which  Mohammad  in  this
warfare  set  before  him  was  the  victory  of  Islam.  They  were
to  fight  '  iintil  the  religion  became  the  Lord's  a/one.'

Although  the  general  bearing  of  his  followers  was,  like
that  of  their  Prophet,  defiant  and  daring,  yet  there  were
timorous  men  amongst  them,  who  needed  encouragement
and  reproof: —

The  Believers  say, — If  a  Siira  were  revealed  {commanding  war)  we
would  fight;  yet  now  when  a  plain  Siira  is  revealed,  and  fighting
mentioned  therein,  thou  seest  those  in  whose  heart  is  an  infirmity,  looking
towards  thee  with  the  look  of  one  overshadowed  with  death.  But
obedience  had  been  better  for  them,  and  propriety  of  speech.  Where-
fore, when  the  command  is  established,  if  they  give  credit  unto  God,  it
shall  be  well  for  them.

For  such  as  might  fall  in  battle,  the  promise  of  Paradise
is  given : —

They  who  have  gone  into  exile  for  the  cause  of  God,  and  then  have
been  slain,  or  have  died,  We  shall  certainly  nourish  these  with  an
excellent  provision,  for  God  is  the  best  Provider.  He  will  surely  grant
unto  them  an  entrance  such  as  they  will  approve.  For  God  is  knowing
and  gracious.

Yet  the  Believer  was  not  to  imagine  the  success  of  Islam
dependent  on  his  feeble  efforts.  God  could  accomplish  the
work  equally  without  him.  Thus  after  a  fierce  exhortation
to  '  strike  off  the  heads  of  the  Unbelievers,  to  make  great
slaughter  amongst  them,  and  bind  them  fast  in  bonds,  the
command  runs  thus  : —

This  do.  If  the  Lord  willed.  He  could  surely  Himself  take  vengeance
on  them  :  but  (He  hath  ordained  fighting)  in  order  that  He  may  prove
some  of  you  by  others.  They  that  are  slain  in  the  way  of  God,  He  will
not  suffer  their  works  to  perish.  He  will  guide  them,  and  dispose  their
hearts  aright.  He  will  lead  them  into  the  Paradise  whereof  He  hath
told  them.


XL]  FIGHTING  COMMANDED  IN  THE  KOR'AN  213

Furthermore,  the  true  Believer  was  not  only  to  fight :  he Believers  to
was  to  contribute  also  of  his  substance  towards  the  charges  of  contribute

towards  war
war  :  expenditure

What  hath  befallen  you  that  ye  contribute  not  of  your  substance  in  Sura  Ivii.
the  cause  of  God?  and  to  God  belongeth  the  inheritance  of  the  ^°  ^•
Heavens  and  of  the  Earth.  Those  of  you  that  contribute  before  the
victory,'  and  fight,  shall  not  be  placed  on  the  same  level,  but  shall  have
a  rank  superior  over  those  who  contribute  after  it  and  fight.  Who  is  he
that  lendeth  unto  the  Lord  a  goodly  loan  ?  He  shall  double  the  same,
and  he  shall  have  an  honourable  recompense.

The  Lord  asketh  you  not  for  (all)  your  substance.  Had  He  asked  Sura  xlvii.
you  for  (the  whole  of)  it,  and  importunately  pressed  you,  ye  had  become  38  n.
grudging,  and  it  had  stirred  up  your  ill-will.  But  ye  are  they  who  are
called  on  to  contribute  part  of  the  same  in  the  cause  of  God,  and  there
be  some  of  you  that  grudge  ;  but  whosoever  grudgeth,  he  verily  grudgeth
against  his  own  soul.  God  needelh  nothing,  but  ye  are  needy.  If  ye
turn  back.  He  will  substitute  in  your  room  a  people  other  than  you,  and
they  shall  not  be  like  unto  you.

And  somewhat  later  : —

Prepare  against  them  what  force  ye  can,  and  troops  of  horse  of  Sura  viii.  62
your  ability,  that  ye  may  thereby  strike  terror  into  the  enemy  of  God  and
your  enemy,  and  into  others  beside  them  ;  ye  know  them  not,  but  God
knoweth  them.  And  what  thing  soever  ye  contribute  in  the  cause
of  God,  it  shall  be  made  good  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  not  be  treated
unjustly.

Such passages  were promulgated  within two or three These
years  after  Mohammad's  arrival  in Medina. They  are  no commands

J  •  ■' _  addressed

longer  addressed  to  the  Refugees  only,  but  to  all  Believers,  to  the
including  the  Citizens. We  have  seen  that  some  of  these *^'^'^^"^  ^^

t>  well  as

latter  had  already  joined  in  expeditions  against  the  caravans  Refugees
of  Mecca  :  but  the  first  occasion  on  which  they  came  forward
in  any  considerable  number  to  the  aid  of  Mohammad,  was  on
the  field  of  Bedr ; — and  there,  probably  more  from  the  hope
of  sharing  in  the  spoil  of  a  richly-laden  caravan,  than  with
any  idea  of  fighting  for  the  faith,  and  avenging  the  exiles'
wrongs.  But  the  effect  was  equally  important  to  Mohammad.
It  pledged  them  to  his  cause.

^  Al-Fath;  the  victory  of  God  and  of  Islam  over  the  idolaters.  The
term  came  subsequently  to  be  applied  par  excellence  to  the  taking  of
Mecca — the  great  crisis,  prior  to  which  there  was  a  peculiar  merit  in
fighting  for  and  supporting  Islam.  Rut  the  word  had  of  course  at  this
moment  no  such  distinct  and  anticipative  sense.


Great  detail
with  which
campaign
of  Bedr  is
related


Scouts  for
news  of  Abu
Sufyan's
caravan.
A.H.  II.
Jan,  A.D.
624


Abu  Sufyan,
warned  ;
sends  for
succour


CHAPTER xri

BATTLE OF BEDR^

Ramadan^  A.H.  II. — Jattuary,  A.D.  624

With  the  battle  of  Bedr  opens  a  new  era  in  Islam.  The
biographers  of  Mohammad  have  shown  their  sense  of  the
influence  ir  exercised  on  his  future  fortunes,  by  the  extra-
ordinary space  allotted  to  this  chapter  of  their  story.  The
minutest  circumstances  and  most  trifling  details,  even  to  the
name  of  each  person  engaged  in  it,  have  been  carefully
treasured  up.  From  this  vast  mass  of  undigested  tradition
it  will  be  my  endeavour  to  frame  a  brief  and  consistent
narrative.

The  caravan  of  Abu  Sufyan,  which,  on  its  passage  through
the  Hijaz,  had  escaped  pursuit  in  the  autumn,  would  now,  in
ordinary  course,  after  two  or  three  months,  be  returning  to
Mecca,  Mohammad  was  resolved  that  it  should  not  this
time  elude  his  grasp.  His  first  step  was  to  secure  the  neu-
trality, if  not  co-operation,  of  the  tribes  upon  the  way.  In
the  beginning  of  January  he  despatched  two  scouts  to
Al-Haura,  a  caravan  station  on  the  seashore  west  of  Medina,
for  early  intelligence  of  the  approach  of  Abu  Sufyan.  They
were  hospitably  lodged  and  concealed  by  an  aged  chief  of
the  Juheina  tribe,  whose  family  was  subsequently  rewarded
by  the  grant  of  Yenbo'.  When  the  caravan  appeared,  they
were  to  hasten  back  and  apprise  Mohammad  of  its  approach.

The  Prophet  had  not  yet  learned  to  mask  his  movements.
His  intention  of  attacking  the  caravan  was  noised  abroad.
The  rumour  reached  Abu  Sufyan  while  yet  on  the  confines  of
Syria. He  was  warned,  perhaps  by  the  treachery  of  some

1  At-Tabari,  i.  1281  ff.  ;  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  427  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p,  2>7  ff-  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  6  fif.


CHAP,  xn]


THE  MECCA  CARAVAN


215


disaffected  Citizen,  to  be  on  his  guard  as  Mohammad  had
entered  into  confederacy  with  the  tribes  upon  the  road
to  surprise  the  caravan.  Greatly  alarmed,  he  forthwith
despatched  a  messenger,  named  Damdam,  to  Mecca,  bidding
Koreish  hasten  with  an  army  to  his  rescue.  The  caravan
then  moved  with  quickened  pace,  and  yet  with  caution,  along
the  route  which  lay  close  by  the  shore  of  the  Red  Sea.

Mohammad,  becoming  impatient,  and  apprehensive  lest Mohammad
the  caravan  should,  as  on  previous  occasions,  be  beforehand S'^^j  ^°™"

'  ^  mand  for

With  him,  resolved  not  to  wait  for  the  spies'  return.  He  the  cam-
called  upon  his  followers  at  once  to  make  ready,  with  this  P^'^"
command ; — '  See !  here  cometh  a  caravan  of  Koreish  in
which  they  have  embarked  much  wealth.  Come  I  let  us  go
forth ;  peradventure  the  Lord  will  enrich  us  with  the  same.'
The  love  of  booty  and  of  adventure,  so  passionate  in  the
Arab,  induced  not  only  all  the  Refugees,  but  a  large  body  of
the  Citizens  also,  to  respond  with  alacrity  to  the  call.  Of
the  former,  'Othman  alone  remained  behind  to  tend  the  sick-
bed of  his  wife  Rokeiya,  the  Prophet's  daughter.'^

'  The  motive  which  prompted  most  of  Mohammad's  followers  to
accompany  the  force,  as  well  as  tempted  many  to  join  Islam  itself,  is
illustrated  by  the  following  anecdote,  which  bears  the  stamp  at  least  of
verisimilitude.  Two  Citizens  of  Medina,  still  heathens,  were  noticed  by
Mohammad  among  the  troops.  He  called  them  near  his  camel,  and
asked  them  what  had  brought  them  there.  *  Thou  art  our  kinsman,'  they
replied,  'to  whom  our  city  hath  given  protection  ;  and  we  go  forth  with
our  people  in  the  hope  of  plunder.'  '  None  shall  go  forth  with  me,'  said
Mohammad,  'but  he  who  is  of  our  Faith.'  They  tried  to  pass,  saying
that  they  were  great  warriors,  and  would  fight  bravely  by  his  side,
requiring  nothing  beyond  their  share  of  plunder  ;  but  Mohammad  was
firm.  'Ye  shall  not  go  thus.  Believe  attd fight !'  Seeing  no  alternative
they  'believed,'  and  confessed  that  Mohammad  was  the  Prophet  of  God.
'Now,'  said  Mohammad,  'go  forth  and  fight!'  So  they  accompanied
the  army,  and  became  noted  spoilers  both  at  Bedr  and  in  other  expedi-
tions. On  Mohammad's  return  to  Medina,  one  of  the  Citizens  exclaimed  ;
'Would  that  I  had  gone  forth  with  the  Prophet!  Then  I  had  surely
secured  large  booty  ! '

Eight  persons  who  remained  behind  are  popularly  counted  in  the
number  of  the  veterans  of  Bedr — the  future  nobility  of  Islam  ;  Ihree
Refugees,  viz.  'Othman  and  the  two  spies  ;  and  five  Citizens,  viz.  the  tvvo
left  in  command  of  the  City  and  of  Upper  Medina,  a  messenger  sent
back  to  the  Beni  'Amr  ibn  'Auf  at  Koba,  and  two  men,  who,  having
received  a  hurt  on  the  road,  were  left  behind.  The  names  of  the  famous
Three  hundred  and  five  were  recorded  in  a  Register  at  Medina,  called
Sadr  al-Kitdb.


2l6


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


Marches
from
Medina,
Ramadan,
A.H.  11.
Jan.  8,
A.D.  623


Spies  sent
forward  by
Mohammad
to  Bedr


Abu  Sufyan,
discovering
traces  of
the  scouts,
hastens  for-
ward and
escapes


On  Sunday,  the  12th  of  Ramadan,  Mohammad  set  out
upon  his  march.  He  left  Abu  Lubaba,  one  of  the  Citizens,
in  charge  of  Medina  ;  and,  for  some  special  reason,  appointed
another  over  Koba  and  Upper  Medina.^  At  a  short  distance
from  the  city  on  the  Mecca  road,  he  halted  to  review  his
little  army,  and  sent  back  the  striplings  unfit  for  action.
The  number  that  remained,  with  which  he  proceeded
onwards,  was  305.  Eighty  were  Refugees  ;  of  the  remainder,
about  one-fourth  belonged  to  the  Aus,  and  the  rest  to  the
Khazraj.  They  had  but  two  horses ;  and  there  were  70
camels,  on  which  by  turns  they  rode.

For  two  or  three  days  they  travelled  by  the  direct  road  to
Mecca,  but,  on  reaching  As-Safra,  turned  to  the  west  by  a
pathway  leading  to  Bedr,  a  halting-place  on  the  route  to
Syria.  While  on  the  march,  Mohammad  despatched  two
spies  thither,  to  find  out  whether  any  preparations  were
making  for  the  reception  of  Abu  Sufyan  ;  for  it  was  at  Bedr
that  he  hoped  to  waylay  the  caravan.^  At  the  fountain
there,  the  spies  overheard  some  women  who  had  come  to  draw
water  talking  among  themselves  '  of  the  caravan  expected  on
the  morrow  or  the  day  after,'  and  they  returned  in  haste  with
the  intelligence  to  Mohammad.

Let  us  now  turn  to  Abu  Sufyan.  As  he  approached
Bedr,  his  apprehensions  were  quickened  by  the  dangerous
vicinity,  and  he  hastened  in  advance  to  reconnoitre  the  spot.
Reaching  Bedr,  he  was  told  by  a  chief  of  the  Beni  Juheina
that  no  strangers  had  been  seen,  excepting  two  men,  who,
after  resting  their  camels  for  a  little  by  the  well,  and  drinking
water,  went  off  again.  Proceeding  to  the  spot,  he  carefully
scrutinised  it  all  around.  '  Camels  from  Yathrib ! '  he
exclaimed,  as  among  their  litter  he  spied  out  the  small  stone
peculiar  to  the  dates  of  Medina; — 'these  be  the  scouts  of
Mohammad ! ' With  such  words,  he hurried back  to the

^  It  is  said  that  he  did  this  because  he  heard  something  suspicious
regarding  the  Beni  'Amr  ibn  'Auf,  who  lived  there.  He  also  sent  back
Al-Harith  from  his  camp  with  a  message  to  the  same  tribe.  The  two
persons  left  in  charge,  as  well  as  this  messenger,  belonged  to  the  Beni  Aus.

^  This  was  probably  on  the  Monday.  It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  find
time  for  all  the  events  that  crowd  in  between  Sunday  and  Thursday
evening.  The  spies  were  of  the  Juheina  tribe  which  dwelt  on  the  sea-
shore ;  they  were  acquainted  with  the  vicinity,  and  better  fitted  than
either  Refugees  or  Citizens  to  gain  the  information  Mohammad  required.


XII.]


ESCAPE  OF  CARAVAN


217


caravan ;  and  striking  to  the  right,  so  as  to  keep  close  by
the  seashore,  pressed  forward,  halting  neither  day  nor  night,
till  he  was  soon  beyond  the  reach  of  danger.  Then  hearing
that  an  army  had  marched  from  Mecca  to  his  aid,  he
despatched  a  courier  to  them  saying  that  all  was  safe,  and
that  they  should  now  return.

Ten  or  twelve  days  before  this,  Mecca  had  been  thrown
into  great  alarm  by  the  sudden  appearance  of  Damdam,  the
first  messenger  of  Abu  Sufyan.  Urging  his  camel  at  full
speed  along  the  valley  and  up  the  main  street  of  Mecca,  he
made  it  kneel  down  in  the  open  space  before  the  Ka'ba,
hastily  reversed  its  saddle,  cut  off  its  ears  and  nose,  and  rent
his  shirt  before  and  behind.  Having  signified  thus  the
alarming  import  of  his  mission,  he  cried  at  the  pitch  of  his
voice  to  the  crowd  around  him  : — '  Koreish  !  Koreish  !  your
caravan  is  pursued  by  Mohammad.  Help !  O  help ! '
Immediately  the  city  was  in  a  stir ;  for  the  caravan  was  the
chief  one  of  the  year,  in  which  every  Koreishite  of  any
substance  had  a  venture ;  and  the  value  of  the  whole  was
50,000  golden  pieces.  It  was  at  once  determined  to  march
in  force,  repel  the  marauding  troops,  and  rescue  the  caravan.
'  Doth  Mohammad,  indeed,  imagine,'  said  they  among  them-
selves, '  that  it  will  be  this  time  as  in  the  affair  of  the
Hadramite  ! '  alluding  to  the  treacherous  surprise  at  Nakhla
where,  two  months  before,  'Amr  ibn  al-Hadrami  had  been
slain. '  Never  ! He  shall  know  it  otherwise.'

Preparations  were  hurried  forward  on  every  side.  The
resolve,  at  any  sacrifice,  to  chastise  and  crush  the  Muslims
was  universal.  Every  man  of  consequence  prepared  to  join
the  army.  A  few,  unable  themselves  to  go,  sent  substitutes ;
among  these  was Mohammad's  uncle,  Abu Lahab.^ One


Alarm  at
Mecca

Koreish
resolve  to
rescue
caravan


Meccan
army  meets
Abu  Sufyan' I
messenafer


^  Some  say  that  Abu  Lahab  neither  went  himself  nor  sent  a  substitute  ;
others  that  he  sent  in  his  stead  Al-As,  a  grandson  of  Al-Moghira,  in
consideration  of  the  remission  of  a  debt  of  400  dirhems  ;  others  that  he
refused  to  accompany  the  army  in  consequence  of  a  dream  of  his  sister
'Atika.  I  have  omitted  any  allusion  to  this  dream,  as  well  as  to  other
dreams  and  prodigies  seen  by  Koreish,  anticipatory  of  the  disasters  at
Bedr,  because  I  believe  them  all  to  be  fictitious.  The  tinge  of  horror  in
after  days  reflected  back  on  the  'sacrilegious'  battle,  the  anxiety  to
excuse  certain  families,  and  the  wish  to  invest  others  with  a  species  of
merit  in  having,  even  while  unbelievers,  served  Islam  by  dreams  or
prophecies,  combined  to  give  them  rise.


2l8


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


Koreishite
army
debates
whether  to
return  or
go  forward


They
resolve  to
advance  on
Bedr


fear  there  was  that  Mecca  might,  during  their  absence,  be
surprised  by  the  Beni  Bekr,  an  adjacent  tribe,  with  which
there  was  a  present  feud.  But  this  was  obviated  by  the
guarantee  of  a  powerful  chief  allied  to  both  tribes.  So  great
was  the  alacrity,  that  in  two  or  three  days  after  the  alarm  by
Damdam,  and  about  the  very  time  that  Mohammad  was
marching  from  Medina,  the  army  was  in  motion.  They  then
despatched  a  messenger  to  apprise  Abu  Sufyan  of  their
approach,  but  he  missed  the  caravan,  which  (as  we  have  seen)
had  left  the  ordinary  route.  The  army  marched  in  haste,  but
not  without  some  rude  display  ;  for  singing  women,  with  their
tabrets,  followed  and  sang  by  the  fountains  at  which  they
halted.  At  Al-Johfa,  the  second  courier  of  Abu  Sufyan  (who
himself,  with  his  caravan,  passed  unnoticed  by  a  route  closer
to  the  sea)  reached  the  army  with  intelligence  of  his  safety,
and  the  message  that  now  they  should  go  back.

On  receiving  this  welcome  intimation,  the  question  of
going  forward  or  of  turning  back  was  warmly  debated  by  the
leading  chiefs.  On  the  one  hand,  it  was  argued  that,  their
object  being  now  secured,  they  might  at  once  retrace  their
steps ;  and  further,  that,  being  all  so  closely  related  to  the
army  of  Mohammad,  they  should  abstain  from  fatal  extre-
mities. 'When  we  have  fought,  and  spilled  the  blood  of  our
brethren  and  our  kinsmen,'  said  the  advocates  of  peace,  '  of
what  use  will  life  be  to  us  any  longer?  Let  us  now  go  back,
and  we  will  be  responsible  for  the  blood-money  of  'Amr,
killed  at  Nakhla.'  Many  persons,  and  among  them  'Otba  ibn
Rabl'a  and  Hakim,  the  nephew  of  Khadija  (he  who  supplied
food  to  Mohammad's  party  when  shut  up  with  Abu  Talib),
were  urgent  with  this  advice.  Others,  and  Abu  Jahl  at  their
head,  demanded  that  the  army  should  advance.  '  If  we  turn
back,'  they  said,  it  will  surely  be  imputed  to  our  cowardice.
Let  us  go  forward  to  Bedr  ;  and  there,  by  the  fountain,  spend
three  days  eating  and  making  merry.  All  Arabia  will  hear
of  it,  and  ever  after  stand  in  awe  of  us.'  The  affair  of  Nakhla,
and  the  slaughter  of  the  Hadrami  still  rankled  in  the  heart
of  Koreish,  and  they  listened  willingly  to  the  warlike  counsel.
Two  tribes  alone,  the  Beni  Zuhra  and  'AdI,  returned  to  Mecca.^

*  The  reason  is  not  given  ;  the  Beni  Zuhra  (of  whom  loo  men  were
present)  was  the  tribe  of  Mohammad's  mother  ;  the  Beni  'AdT,  that  of
'Omar. [Ibn  Ishak  says  (p.  438)  that  none  of  the  latter  tribe  left  Mecca.]


XII.]


MECCAN  ARMY  ADVANCES


219


The  rest  marched  onwards.^  Leaving  Medina  to  the  right,
they  kept  straight  along  the  Syrian  road,  and  made  for
Bedr.

We  now  return  to  Mohammad.  He,  too,  was  advancing
rapidly  on  Bedr ;  for  there  he  expected,  from  the  report  of
his  spies,  to  find  the  caravan.  On  Tuesday  night  he  reached
Ar-Ruha ;  as  he  drank  from  the  well  there,  he  blessed  the
valley  in  terms  of  which  the  pious  traveller  is  reminded  to  the
present  day.  On  Wednesday  he  proceeded  onwards.  Next
day,  while  on  the  last  march  to  Bedr,  the  startling  news  was
brought  by  some  wayfarers  that  the  enemy  was  in  full  march
upon  him.  This  was  the  first  intimation  that  Koreish,
having  heard  of  the  danger  to  the  caravan,  were  on  their
way  to  defend  it.  A  council  of  war  was  summoned,  and  the
chief  men  invited  to  offer  their  advice.  There  was  but  one
opinion,  and  each  delivered  it  more  enthusiastically  than
another.  Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar  advised  an  immediate  ad-
vance. The  Prophet  turned  to  the  men  of  Medina,  for
their  pledge  did  not  bind  them  to  offensive  action,  or  even
to  fight  in  his  defence  when  away  from  their  city.  Sa'd
ibn  Mo'adh,  their  spokesman,  replied:  'Prophet  of  the
Lord !  march  whither  thou  listest :  encamp  wheresoever
thou  mayest  choose :  make  war  or  conclude  peace  with
whom  thou  wilt.  For  I  swear  by  Him  who  hath  sent
thee  with  the  Truth,  that  if  thou  wert  to  march  till  our
camels  fell  down  dead,  we  should  go  forward  with  thee
to  the  world's  end.  Not  one  of  us  would  be  left  behind.'
Then  said  Mohammad:  'Go  forward,  with  the  blessing  of
God !  For,  verily.  He  hath  promised  one  of  the  two —
the  army  or  the  caravan — that  He  will  deliver  it  into  my


Mohammad
receives
intelligence
of  Koreish-
ite  army.
Thursday


Council  of
war  decides
on  onward
march


1  But  they  sent  back  the  singing  girls.  The  messenger,  who  carried
the  intelligence  to  Abu  Sufyan  that  Koreish  refused  to  turn  back,  reached
him  near  Mecca  ;  and  Abu  Sufyan  is  represented  as  lamenting  the  folly
of  his  countrymen.  All  this  seems  apocryphal.  Till  viewed  in  the  light
of  its  disastrous  issue,  the  advance  on  Bedr  must  have  appeared  a  politic
and  reasonable  measure.  It  was  not  an  attack  on  Medina,  for  Bedr  was
on  the  road  to  Syria,  so  that  Koreish  left  Medina  far  on  their  right.  If
therefore  they  should  meet  any  enemy  at  Bedr,  it  could  only  be  because
they  had  come  forth  gratuitously  to  attack  the  Mecca  caravan — a  fair  and
sufficient  casus  belli;  for  what  security  could  there  any  longer  be  if  the
men  of  Medina  were  allowed  thus  with  impunity  to  attack  the  convoys,
and  plunder  the  caravans  of  Mecca?


220


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


hands.i By  the  Lord ! methinks  I  even  now  see  the  battle-
field strewn  with  dead.'  ^


It  is  remarkable,  when  comparing  this  council  with  that
of  Koreish  at  Al-Johfa,  to  find  that  in  the  minds  of  Moham-


Muslims
more  im-

than  Koreish  mad  and  his  followers  there  was  no  trace  whatever  of
compunction  at  the  prospect  of  a  mortal  combat  with  their
kinsmen.  Koreish,  goaded  as  they  had  been  by  oft-repeated
attacks  upon  their  caravans  and  the  blood  shed  at  Nakhla,
were  yet  staggered  by  the  prospect  of  an  internecine  war,  and
nearly  persuaded  by  their  better  feelings  to  turn  back.
The  Muslims,  though  the  aggressors,  were  hardened  by
memory  of  former  injuries,  by  the  dogma  that  their  faith  had
severed  all  earthly  ties  without  the  pale  of  Islam,  and  by  a
fierce  fanaticism  for  the  Prophet's  cause.  At  one  of  the
stages,  where  he  halted  to  lead  the  public  devotions,  Moham-
mad, after  rising  from  his  knees,  thus  called  down  the  curse
of  God  upon  the  infidels,  and  prayed  :  *  O  Lord  !  Let  not
Abu  Jahl  escape,  the  Pharaoh  of  his  people !  Lord  !  let  not
Zama'a  escape ;  rather  let  the  eyes  of  his  father  run  sore  for
him  with  weeping,  and  become  blind  ! '  The  Prophet's  hate,
indeed,  was  unrelenting  against  his  chief  opponents,  and  his
followers  imbibed  from  him  the  same  inexorable  spirit.

In  the  afternoon  of  Thursday,  on  nearing  Bedr,  Mohammad
sent  forward  'All,  with  a  few  others,  to  reconnoitre  the  rising
ground  about  the  springs.  There  they  surprised  three  water-
carriers  filling  their  skins  at  the  wells.  One  escaped  to
Koreish ;  the  other  two  were  raptured  and  taken  to  the
Muslim  army. The  chiefs  questioned  them  about  the  cara-

^  This  point  is  alluded  to  in  the  Kor'an,  which  henceforth  becomes
often  the  vehicle  of  the  'general  orders'  of  Mohammad,  as  of  a  military
commander.  'And  when  the  Lord  promised  one  of  the  two  parties  that
it  should  be  given  over  unto  you  :  and  ye  desired  that  it  should  be  the
party  unarmed  for  war  {i.e.  that  ye  should  meet  the  caravan,  and  not  the
Koreishite  army),  whereas  the  Lord  willed  to  establish  the  Truth  by  His
words,  and  to  cut  away  the  foundation  from  the  Unbelievers  ; — that  He
might  establish  the  Truth,  and  abolish  Falsehood,  even  though  the
transgressors  be  averse  thereto.' — Sura  viii.  7,  8.

2  The  latter  clause  may  be  apocryphal.  In  later  traditions  it  is
worked  out  to  a  fabulous  extent.  Mohammad,  for  example,  points  out
what  was  to  be  the  death  spot,  as  seen  in  the  vision,  of  each  of  his  chief
opponents  ;  'and,'  it  is  added,  'the  people  were  by  this  apprised  for  the
first  time  that  it  was  the  Koreishite  army  they  were  about  to  encounter
and  not  the  caravan.'


Mohammad
learns
strength  of
enemy


XII.]


MUTUAL  HATRED


van,  imagining  that  they  belonged  to  it ;  and,  receiving  no
satisfactory  answer,  had  begun  to  beat  them,  when  Moham-
mad, coming  up,  soon  discovered  the  proximity  of  his  enemy.
The  camp,  they  replied  to  his  inquiries,  lay  just  beyond  the
sandhills  skirting  the  western  side  of  the  valley.  As  they
could  not  tell  the  strength  of  the  force,  the  Prophet  asked
how  many  camels  they  slaughtered  for  their  daily  food-
'  Nine,'  they  answered, '  one  day,  and  ten  the  next,  alternately.'
'Then,'  said  Mohammad,  'they  are  between  900  and  1,000
strong.'  The  estimate  was  correct.  There  were  950  men  ; —
more  than  threefold  the  number  of  the  Muslim  force.  They
were  mounted  on  700  camels  and  100  horses,  the  horsemen
all  clad  in  mail.^

The  followers  of  Mohammad  were  chagrined  at  finding
their  expectation  of  an  easy  prey  thus  changed  into  the  pros-
pect of  a  bloody  battle.  They  seemed  to  have  advanced
even  to  the  field  of  action  with  the  hope  that  they  might  still,
as  conquerors,  pursue  and  seize  the  caravan.  But  it  was,  in
truth,  a  fortunate  event  that  it  had  already  passed,  for  the
continuing  jeopardy  of  the  caravan  would  have  nerved  the
enemy  and  united  them  by  a  bond  which  the  knowledge  of
its  safety  had  already  dissipated.  The  prize  of  victory  on
the  field  of  Bedr  was  of  incomparably  greater  consequence  to
Mohammad  than  any  spoil,  however  costly.

The  valley  of  Bedr  consists  of  a  plain,  with  steep  hills  to
the  north  and  east ;  on  the  south  is  a  low  rocky  range ;
and  on  the  west  a  succession  of  sandy  hillocks.  A  tiny
rivulet  from  the  eastern  hills  ran  through  the  valley,  breaking
out  here  and  there  into  springs,  which  at  various  spots  were
dug  for  the  use  of  travellers  into  cisterns.  At  the  nearest  of
these  springs,  the  army  of  Mohammad  halted.  Al-Hobab,  a
Citizen  acquainted  with  the  ground,  advised  him  to  proceed
onwards  :  '  Let  us  go,'  he  said,  '  to  the  farthest  spring  on  the
side  of  the  enemy.  I  know  a  never-failing  fountain  of  sweet
water  there ;  make  that  our  reservoir,  and  destroy  all  other
wells.'  The  advice  was  good.  It  was  at  once  adopted,  and
the  command  of  water  thus  secured.

The  night  was  drawing  on.  So,  near  the  well,  they  hastily
ran  up  a  hut  of  palm  branches,  in  which  Mohammad  and  Abu

'  Weil  would  make  their  number  600,  but  apparently  on  insufficient
grounds. — Ei7ileitung,  p.  20.


Escape  of
caravan  a
benefit  to
Mohammad


Moham-
mad's
position  at
Bedr


Mohammad
sleeps  in  a
hut  of  palm
branches


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


his  army


Kore'sh,
after
further
dissensions,
move  for-
ward


Bekr  passed  the  night.  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh  kept  watch  by  the
entrance  with  his  drawn  sword.  It  rained  during  the  night,
but  more  heavily  towards  the  camp  of  Koreish.^  The  Muslim
army,  wearied  with  its  long  march,  enjoyed  sound  and
refreshing  sleep — a  mark  of  the  Divine  favour,  we  are  told.
The  dreams  of  Mohammad  turned  upon  his  enemies,  and
they  were  pictured  to  his  imagination  as  a  weak  and  con-
Mohammad  temptible  force.^  In  the  morning  rising  betimes  he  drew  up
draws  up  ^jg  \[ii\q  army,  and,  pointing  with  an  arrow  which  he  held  in
his  hand,  arranged  thus  the  ranks.  The  previous  day,  he
had  placed  the  chief  banner,  that  of  the  Refugees,  in  the
hands  of  Mus'ab,  who  nobly  proved  his  right  to  the
command.  The  Khazrajite  ensign  was  committed  to  Al-
Hobab ;  that  of  the  Aus,  to  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh.^

Meanwhile  dissension  again  broke  out  in  the  camp  of
Koreish  on  the  policy  of  fighting  with  their  kinsmen.
Sheiba  and  'Otba,  two  chiefs  of  rank,  influenced  by  their
slave,  'Addas  (the  same  who  comforted  the  Prophet  on  his
flight  from  At-Ta'if),  strongly  urged  that  the  attack  should
be  abandoned.  Just  then,  'Omeir,  a  diviner  by  arrows,
having  ridden  hastily  round  the  valley,  returned  to  report  the
result  of  his  reconnaissance.  '  Ye  Koreish,'  he  said,  after  telling
the  enemy's  number, 'calamities  approach  you,  fraught  with
destruction.  Their  numbers  are  small,  but  death  is  astride
upon  the  camels  of  Yathrib.  Their  only  refuge  is  the  sword  ;
dumb  as  the  grave,  their  tongues  they  put  forth  with  the
serpent's  deadly  aim.  Not  a  man  of  them  shall  fall  but  in
his  stead  one  of  ourselves  will  be  slain  ;  and  when  there  shall

^  The  rain  is  thus  alluded  to  in  the  Kor'an  :  'When  He  overshadowed
you  with  a  deep  sleep,  as  a  security,  from  Himself;  and  caused  to
descend  upon  you  Rain  from  the  heavens,  that  He  might  purify  you
therewith,  and  take  from  you  the  uncleanness  of  Satan  ;  and  that  He
might  strengthen  your  hearts,  and  establish  your  steps  thereby.' — Siira
viii.  II.  As  a  foil  to  this  picture,  Koreish  are  represented  as  being  appre-
hensive and  restless  till  morning  broke.

2  'And  when  God  caused  them  to  appear  before  thee  in  thy  sleep,
few  in  number  ;  and  if  He  had  caused  them  to  appear  unto  thee  a  great
multitude,  ye  would  have  been  affrighted,  and  have  disputed  in  the
matter  (of  their  attack).  But  truly  God  preserved  thee,  for  He  knoweth
the  heart  of  man.' — viii.  45.

^  The  name  given  is  Lzn/a,  a  white  ensign.  The  Rdya^  Mohammad's
black  banner,  is  said  to  have  been  first  unfurled  Ave  years  later  on  the
expedition  to  Kheibar,


XII.]  DETERMINATION  TO  FIGHT  223

have  been  slaughtered  amongst  us  a  number  equal  unto
them,  of  what  avail  will  life  be  to  us  after  that ! '  The  words
began  to  tell,  when  Abu  Jahl  taunted  his  comrades  with
cowardice,  and,  turning  to  'Amir  ibn  al-Hadrami,  bade  him
to  call  his  brother-blood  to  mind.  The  flame  burst  forth
again.  'Amir  threw  off  his  clothes,  cast  dust  upon  his  body
and  began  frantically  to  cry  aloud  his  brother's  name.  The
deceased  had  been  a  confederate  of  the  family  of  Sheiba  and
'Otba  themselves,  and  their  honour  was  affected  ;  thoughts  of
peace  must  now  be  scattered  to  the  winds ;  and  their  name
vindicated  from  the  imputation  of  cowardice  cast  on  it  by  Abu
Jahl.  The  army  was  at  once  drawn  up  in  line.  The  three
standards,  for  the  centre  and  wings,  were  borne,  according  to
ancient  privilege,  by  members  of  the  house  of  'Abd  ed-Dar.
They  moved  forward  slowly  over  the  sandy  hillocks  which
separated  them  from  the  enemy,  and  which  the  rain  had  made
heavy  and  fatiguing.  The  same  rain,  acting  with  less  intensity,
had  rendered  the  ground  in  front  of  Mohammad  lighter  and
more  firm  to  walk  upon.  Koreish  laboured  under  another  dis-
advantage ;  facing  eastwards,  the  rising  sun  was  in  their  eyes,
a  serious  drawback  that  told  in  favour  of  the  Muslim  side.

Mohammad  had  barely  arrayed  his  line  of  battle,  when Moham.
the  advanced  column  of  the  enemy  was  discerned  over  the  ^^ne^st
rising  sands  in  front. Their  greatly  superior  numbers  were prayer
concealed  by  the  fall  of  the  ground  behind  ;  and  this  imparted
confidence  to  the  Muslims.^ But  Mohammad  knew  the  dis-

^  Represented  in  the  Kor'an  (Sura  viii.)  as  the  result  of  divine  interpo-
sition. After  mentioning  Mohammad's  dream,  the  passage  proceeds :
'And  when  He  caused  them  to  appear  in  your  eyes,  at  the  time  ye  met,
to  be  few  in  number,  and  diminished  you  in  their  eyes,  that  God  might
accomplish  the  thing  that  was  to  be;'  i.e.  by  this  ocular  deception  his
followers  were  encouraged  in  their  advance  to  victory,  and  Koreish  lured
on  to  their  fate.  So  again  :  '  When  ye  were  on  the  hither  side,  and  they
on  the  farther  side  (of  the  valley),  and  the  caravan  below  you  ;*  and  if
ye  had  made  a  mutual  appointment  to  fight,  ye  would  surely  have
declined  the  appointment ;  but  (the  Lord  ordered  otherwise)  that  he
might  bring  to  pass  the  thing  that  was  to  be — that  He  who  perisheth
might  perish  by  a  manifest  interposition,  and  he  that  liveth  might  live
by  a  manifest  interposition  ;' — that  is,  each  army  advanced  to  the  field  of
battle,  without  knowing  of  the  approach  of  the  other  ;  an  unseen  hand
led  them  on.

In  a  later  passage  (iii.  11),  the  interposition  of  God  is  represented  as

*  /.(?.  on  the  plain,  by  the  seashore,  passing  on  towards  Mecca.


224


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


Fierce  com-
bat by  the
reservoir


Three

Koreish

challenge

Muslims  to

single

combat


parity  of  his  little  army ;  and,  alive  to  the  issue  that  hung
upon  the  day,  retired  for  a  moment  with  Abu  Bekr  to  his
hut ;  and,  there  raising  his  hands  aloft,  he  thus  poured  forth
his  soul :  '  O  Lord  !  I  beseech  thee,  forget  not  Thy  promise
of  assistance  and  of  victory,  O  Lord  !  if  this  little  band  be
vanquished.  Idolatry  will  prevail,  and  the  pure  worship  of
Thee  cease  from  off  the  earth ! '  '  The  Lord,'  rejoined  his
friend,  'will  surely  come  to  thine  aid,  and  will  lighten  thy
countenance  with  the  joy  of  victory.^

The  time  for  action  had  arrived.  Mohammad  again  came
forth.  The  enemy  was  already  close ;  but  the  army  of
Medina  remained  still.  Mohammad  had  no  cavalry  to  cover
an  advance;  and  before  superior  numbers  he  must  keep  close
his  ranks.  Accordingly  his  followers  were  strictly  forbidden
to  stir  till  he  should  order  an  advance ;  only  if  their  flank
were  threatened  by  the  Koreishite  cavalry,  they  were  to
check  the  movement  by  a  discharge  of  archery.  The  cistern
was  guarded  as  their  palladium.  Some  desperate  warriors  of
Koreish  swore  that  they  would  drink  water  from  it,  destroy
it,  or  perish  in  the  attempt.  But  they  were  met  with  equal
daring  and  hardly  one  escaped  alive  the  fatal  enterprise.
With  signal  gallantry,  Al-Aswad  advanced  close  to  the  brink,
when  a  blow  from  Hamza's  sword  fell  upon  his  leg  and
nearly  severed  it  from  his  body.  Still  defending  himself
he  crawled  onwards  and  made  good  his  vow ;  for  he  drank  of
the  water,  and  with  his  remaining  leg  demolished  part  of  the
cistern  before  the  sword  of  Hamza  put  an  end  to  his  life.

Already,  after  Arab  fashion,  single  combats  had  been
fought  at  various  points,  when  the  two  brothers  Sheiba  and
'Otba,  and  Al-Walld  the  son  of  'Otba,  still  smarting  from  the
taunts  of  Abu  Jahl,  advanced  into  the  space  between  the
armies,  and  defied  three  champions  from  the  enemy  to  meet
them  singly.  Three  Citizens  stepped  forward ;  but
Mohammad,  unwilling  that  the  glory  or  the  burden  of  the

doubling  the  army  of  Medina  in  the  eyes  of  Koreish.  The  discrepancy
is  thus  explained  by  the  commentators  :  Koreish  were  at  first  drawn  on
by  fancying  Mohammad's  army  to  be  a  mere  handful  ;  when  they  had
actually  closed  in  battle,  they  were  terrified  by  the  exaggerated  appear-
ance of  the  Muslims,  who  now  seemed  a  great  multitude.

^  Sprenger  (iii.  122)  says  that  outside  the  hut  a  swift  dromedary  was
tied  up  to  carry  Mohammad  off  in  case  of  defeat ;  but  I  do  not  remember
seeing  this  in  any  early  authority.


XII.]  SINGLE  COMBATS  225

opening  conflict  should  rest  with  his  allies,  called  them  back  ;^
and,  turning  to  his  kinsmen  :  '  Ye  sons  of  Hashim  !'  he  cried,
'arise  and  fight,  according  to  your  right.'  Then  Hamza,
'Obeida  and  'All,  uncle  and  cousins  of  the  Prophet,  went
forth.  Hamza  wore  an  ostrich  feather  in  his  breast,  and  'All
a  white  plume  in  his  helmet.  But  their  features  were  hid  by
their  armour,  'Otba,  therefore,  not  knowing  who  his
opponents  might  be,  cried  aloud :  '  Speak,  that  we  may
recognise  you  !  If  ye  be  equals,  we  shall  fight  with  you.'
Hamza  answered  :  '  I  am  the  son  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  the
Lion  of  God,  and  the  Lion  of  his  Prophet!  *  A  worthy  foe,'
exclaimed  'Otba;  'but  who  are  these  others  with  thee?'
Hamza  repeated  their  names.  '  Meet  foes,  every  one ! '
replied  'Otba.

Then  'Otba  called  to  his  son  Al-Walid,  '  Arise  and  fight ! '  Koreishite
So  Al-Walld  stepped  forth  and  'All  went  out  against  him.  champions
They  were  the  youngest  of  the  six.  The  combat  was  short
and  sharp  ;  Al-Walld  fell  mortally  wounded  by  the  sword  of
'All.  Eager  to  avenge  his  son's  death,  'Otba  hastened  forward,
and  Hamza  advanced  to  meet  him.  The  swords  gleamed
quick,  and  again  the  Koreishite  warrior  was  slain  by  the
Muslim  lion.  Sheiba  alone  remained  of  the  three  champions
of  Mecca  ;  and  'Obeida,  the  veteran  of  the  Muslims,  threescore
years  and  five,  now  drew  near  to  fight  with  him.  Both  well
advanced  in  years,  the  conflict  was  less  decisive  than  before.
But  at  the  last,  Sheiba  dealt  a  blow  which  severed  the
tendon  of  'Obeida's  leg  and  brought  him  to  the  ground.  At
this,  Hamza  and  'All  rushed  on  Sheiba  and  despatched  him
with  their  swords.  'Obeida  survived  but  for  a  few  days,  and
was  buried  on  the  march  back  at  As-Safra.

The  fate  of  their  champions  was  ominous  for  Koreish,  and  The  amies
their  spirits  sank.  The  ranks  began  to  close,  with  the  battle-  '^'^^^
cry  on  the  Muslim  side  of  Ya  viansiir  amit, '  Ye  conquerors,
strike ! '  and  the  fighting  became  general.  But  there  were
still  many  of  those  scenes  of  individual  bravery  which
characterise  the  irregular  warfare  of  Asiatic  armies,  and
impart  an  Homeric  interest  to  the  page.  Prodigies  of  valour
were  exhibited  on  both  sides  ;  but  the  army  of  the  Faithful

1  [Ibn  Ishak  (p.  443)  states  that  the  Koreish  champions  declined  to
fight  with  them  (their  quarrel  being  only  with  their  own  tribesmen),  and
called  upon  Mohammad  to  send  them  champions  from  Koreish.]

P


226


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


ilohammad
incites  his
followers


Muslims
put  Koreish
to  flight


Slaughter
of  Moham-
mad's chief
opponents.
Abu  Jahl


was  borne  forward  by  an  enthusiasm  which  the  half-hearted
warriors  opposite  were  unable  to  withstand.  What  part
Mohammad  himself  took  in  the  battle  is  not  clear.  Some
traditions  represent  him  as  moving  along  the  ranks  with  a
drawn  sword.  It  is  more  likely,  according  to  others,  that  he
contented  himself  with  inciting  his  followers  by  the  promise
of  divine  assistance,  and  by  holding  out  the  prospect  of
Paradise  to  those  who  fell.  Tradition  revels  in  details  of
gallantry.  Thus  we  read  that  the  spirit  of  'Omeir,  a  stripling
of  sixteen,  was  kindled  within  him  as  he  listened  to  the
Prophet's  words.  Throwing  away  a  handful  of  dates  which
he  was  eating — '  Is  it  these,'  he  cried,  '  that  hold  me  back  from
Paradise?  Verily  I  will  taste  no  more  of  them  until  I  meet
my  Lord  ! '  And  so,  rushing  on  the  enemy,  he  obtained  the
fate  he  coveted.

It  was  a  stormy  day.  A  piercing  blast  swept  across  the
valley.  That,  said  Mohammad,  is  Gabriel  with  a  thousand
angels  charging  doiun  tipon  the  foe.  Another,  and  yet  another
blast : — it  was  Michael  and  Seraphil,  each  with  a  like  angelic
troop.  The  battle  raged.  The  Prophet  stooped,  and  lifting
a  handful  of  gravel,  cast  it  at  the  enemy,  shouting — Confusion
seize  their  faces  I  The  action  was  well  timed.  Before  the
onset  of  the  brave  Three  hundred,  they  began  to  waver.
Their  movements  were  impeded  by  the  heavy  sands  on
which  they  stood ;  and,  when  the  ranks  gave  way,  their
numbers  added  but  confusion.  The  Muslims  followed  eagerly
their  retreating  steps,  slaying  or  taking  captive  all  that  fell
within  their  reach.  Retreat  soon  turned  into  ignominious
rout ;  and  the  flying  host,  casting  away  their  armour,  aban-
doned beasts  of  burden,  camp,  and  equipage.  Forty-nine  were
killed  and  a  like  number  taken  prisoners.  Mohammad  lost  only
fourteen,  of  whom  eight  were  Citizens  and  six  Refugees.

Many  of  the  principal  men  of  Mecca,  and  some  of
Mohammad's  bitterest  opponents,  were  amongst  the  slain.
Chief  of  these  was  Abu  Jahl.  Mo'adh  brought  him  to  the
ground  by  a  blow  which  cut  his  leg  in  two.  Mo'adh,  in  his
turn,  was  attacked  by  Tkrima,  the  son  of  Abu  Jahl,  and  his
arm  nearly  severed  from  his  shoulder.  As  the  mutilated
limb  hanging  by  the  skin  impeded  his  action,  Mo'adh  put  his
foot  upon  it,  pulled  it  off,  and  went  on  his  way  fighting.
Such  were  the  heroes  of  Bedr. Abu  Jahl  was  yet  breathing


XII.]  DEFEAT  OF  KOREISH  227

when  'Abdallah  ran  up,  and,  cutting  off  his  head,  brought  it
to  his  master.  '  The  head  of  the  enemy  of  God  ! '  exclaimed
Mohammad ;  *  God !  there  is  none  other  God  but  he ! '
'  There  is  no  other  ! '  responded  'Abdallah,  as  he  cast  it  gory
at  the  Prophet's  feet.  '  It  is  more  acceptable  to  me,'  cried
Mohammad,  '  than  the  choicest  camel  in  all  Arabia.'

But  there  were  others  whose  death  caused  no  gratification  Abu'l-
to  Mohammad,  Abu'l-Bakhtari  had  shown  him  special
kindness  at  the  time  when  he  was  shut  up  in  the  quarter  of
Abu  Talib ;  Mohammad,  mindful  of  this  favour,  had
commanded  that  he  should  not  be  harmed.  Abu'l-Bakhtari
had  a  companion  seated  on  his  camel  behind  him.  Awarrior^
riding  up,  told  him  of  the  quarter  given  by  Mohammad  ;  but
added,  '  I  cannot  spare  the  man  behind  thee.'  *  The  women
of  Mecca,'  Abu'l-Bakhtari  exclaimed,  '  shall  never  say  that  I
abandoned  my  comrade  through  love  of  life.  Do  thy  work
upon  us.' So  they  were  killed,  both  he  and  his  companion.

After  the  battle  was  over,  some  of  the  prisoners  were  Cruel
cruelly  put  to  death.  Omeiya  ibn  Khalaf  and  his  son,  unable  of^omeof
to  escape  with  the  fugitive  Koreish,  and  seeing  'Abd  ar-Rah-  the  prisoners
man  pass,  implored  that  he  would  make  them  his  prisoners.
'Abd  ar-Rahman,  mindful  of  ancient  friendship,  cast  away  the
plunder  he  was  carrying,  and,  taking  charge  of  both,  was
proceeding  with  them  to  the  Muslim  camp.  As  the  party
passed,  Bilal  espied  his  old  enemy,  for  Omeiya  had  used  to
persecute  him  when  a  slave ;  and  he  screamed  aloud,  '  Slay
him.  This  man  is  the  head  of  the  Unbelievers.  I  am  lost,  if
he  lives,  I  am  lost  !  '  From  all  sides  the  infuriated  comrades,
hearing  Bilal's  appeal,  poured  in  upon  the  wretched  captives ;
and  'Abd  ar-Rahman,  finding  resistance  impossible,  bade  them
save  their  lives  as  best  they  could.  Defence  was  vain  ;  and
the  two  prisoners  were  immediately  cut  in  pieces.  Such  was
the  savage  spirit  already  characteristic  of  the  faith.^

1  Two  other  prisoners  were  slaughtered  in  cold  blood.  The  first
was  Naufal,  for  whose  death  'All  overheard  Mohammad  praying  ;  so,
when  he  saw  him  being  led  off  a  prisoner,  he  fell  upon  him  and  killed
him.  Mohammad  uttered  a  tekbJr  of  joy  when  told  of  it,  and  said  that  it
had  happened  in  answer  to  his  prayer.  The  other  was  Ma'bad.  'Omar
met  one  of  his  comrades  carrying  him  off,  and  taunted  him  :  'Well,  ye
are  beaten  now  ! '  '  Nay,  by  Al-Lat  and  Al-'Ozza  ! '  said  the  prisoner.  '  Is
that  the  manner  of  speech  for  a  captive  Infidel  towards  a  Believer.''  cried
'Omar,  as  he  cut  off  the  wretched  man's  head  by  one  blow  of  his  scimitar.


228


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


Enemy's
dead  cast
into  a  pit


Colloquy  of
Mohammad
with  the
dead


Abu

Hodheifa's
grief  for
his  father


The  booty
is  collected


When  the  enemy  had  disappeared,  the  army  of  Medina
spent  some  time  in  gathering  the  spoil.  Then  as  the  sun
declined,  they  hastily  dug  a  pit  on  the  battle-field,  and  cast
the  enemy's  dead  into  it.  Mohammad  looked  on.  Abu  Bekr
too  stood  by,  and,  examining  their  features,  called  aloud  their
names.  '  'Otba  ! — Sheiba  ! — Omeiya  ! — Abu  Jahl ! '  exclaimed
Mohammad,  as  one  by  one  the  corpses  were,  without
ceremony,  thrown  into  the  common  grave.  '  Have  ye  now
found  true  that  which  your  Lord  did  promise  you  ?  What
my  Lord  promised  me,  that  verily  have  I  found  to  be  true.
Woe  unto  this  people  !  Ye  have  rejected  me,  your  Prophet !
Ye  cast  me  forth,  and  others  gave  me  refuge  ;  ye  fought
against  me,  and  others  came  to  my  help!'  'O  Prophet!'
said  the  bystanders,  '  dost  thou  speak  unto  the  dead  ? '  *  Yea,
verily,'  replied  Mohammad,  'for  now  they  well  know  that  the
promise  of  their  Lord  hath  fully  come  to  pass.  At  the
moment  when  the  corpse  of  'Otba  was  tossed  into  the  pit,  a
look  of  distress  overcast  the  countenance  of  his  son,  Abu
Hodheifa.  Mohammad  turned  kindly  to  him,  and  said :
'  Perhaps  thou  art  distressed  for  thy  father's  fate  ?  ' '  Not  so,

0  Prophet  of  the  Lord !  I  do  not  doubt  the  justice  of  my
father's  fate  ;  but  I  knew  well  his  wise  and  generous  heart,  and

1  had  trusted  that  the  Lord  would  have  led  him  to  the  faith.
But  now  that  I  see  him  slain,  and  my  hope  destroyed,  it  is  for
that  I  grieve.'  So  the  Prophet  comforted  Abu  Hodheifa,  and
blessed  him  ;  and  said,  '  It  is  well.'  ^

On  the  way  home  from  Bedr,  the  day  after  the  battle,  the
booty  was  divided.  Every  man  was  allowed  to  retain  the
plunder  of  such  as  had  been  slain  by  his  own  hand.  The
rest  was  thrown  into  a  common  stock.  The  booty  consisted
of  115  camels,  14  horses,  an  endless  store  of  vestments  and
carpets,  articles  of  fine  leather,  with  much  equipage  and
armour.  A  diversity  of  opinion  arose  about  the  distribution.
Those  who  had  hotly  pursued  the  enemy  and  exposed  their
lives  in  securing  the  spoil,  claimed  the  whole,  or  at  least  a


1  On  the  other  hand,  we  are  told  that  when  'Otba  came  forth  to
challenge  the  Muslim  army,  Abu  Hodheifa  arose  to  combat  with  his
father,  but  Mohammad  bade  him  sit  down.  It  is  said  that  he  aided
Hamza  in  giving  his  father  the  coup  de  grace.  Tradition  gloats  over
such  savage  passages  ;  and  it  is  all  the  more  pleasing  to  light  upon  the
outburst  of  natural  affection  in  the  text.


XII.]


PRISONERS  AND  SPOIL


229


Contention
about  its
division
decided  by
revelation


superior  portion  ;  while  such  as  had  remained  behind  upon
the  field  of  battle  for  the  safety  of  the  Prophet  and  of  the
camp,  urged  that  they  had  equally  with  the  others  fulfilled
the  part  assigned  to  them,  and  that,  restrained  by  duty  from
the  pursuit,  they  were  entitled  to  an  equal  share.  The  con-
tention was  so  sharp  that  Mohammad  interposed  with  a
message  from  Heaven,  and  assumed  possession  of  the  whole.
It  was  God  who  had  given  the  victory,  and  to  God  the  spoil
belonged  :  '  They  will  ask  thee  concerning  the  prey.  Say,  Sura  viii.  i
the  prey  is  God's  and  his  Prophet's.  Wherefore,  fear  God,
and  dispose  of  the  matter  rightly  among  yourselves  ;  and  be
obedient  unto  God  and  his  Prophet,  if  ye  be  true  Believers ; '
and  so  on  in  the  same  strain.  Shortly  afterwards,  the  following
ordinance,  the  law  of  prize  to  the  present  day,  was  given  forth  :

And  know  that  whatsoever  thing  ye  plunder,  verily  one  Fifth  thereof
is  for  God  and  the  Prophet,  and  for  him  that  is  of  kin  (unto  the  Prophet),
and  for  the  Orphans,  and  the  Poor,  and  the  Wayfarer, — if  ye  be  they
that  believe  in  God,  and  in  that  which  We  sent  down  to  our  Servant  on
the  day  of  Discrimination,  the  day  on  which  the  two  armies  met :  and
God  is  over  all  things  powerful. — SOra  viii.  42.


In  accordance  with  this  command,  the  booty  gathered  on
the  field  was  placed  under  a  Citizen  who  acted  the  part  of
prize  agent  for  the  army.  It  was  then  divided,  as  they
encamped  at  As-Safra,  in  equal  allotments,  among  the  whole
army,  after  the  Prophet's  Fifth  had  been  set  apart.^  All
shared  alike,  excepting  that  each  horseman  received  two
extra  portions  for  his  horse.  To  the  lot  of  every  man  fell  a
camel,  with  its  gear ;  or  two  camels  unaccoutred ;  or  a
leathern  couch,  or  some  such  equivalent.  Mohammad
obtained  the  camel  of  Abu  Jahl,  and  the  famous  sword
known  as  Dhu'l-Fikar.^  This  sword  was  selected  by  him
beyond  his  share ;  for,  in  virtue  of  the  prophetic  dignity,  he
was  privileged  to  choose  from  the  booty,  before  division,
whatever  thing  might  please  him  most.

The  army  of  Medina,  leading  their  captives  handcuffed
and  carrying  their  dead  and  wounded,  retired  in  the  evening

^  Weil  supposes  the  distribution  to  have  been  equal  all  round  ;  and
that  the  passage  ordaining  the  Fifth  was  subsequently  revealed.
Einleitung,  p.  21.

-  We  find  notices  of  this  sword  at  Medina,  A.H.  145,  and  again  at
Baghdad,  A.H.  320. Caliphate^  pp.  452,  561.


Spoil

divided  near
As-Safra


A  prisoner
put  to
death  by
Mohammad


230


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


'Okba,
another
prisoner,
executed


to  the  valley  of  Al-Otheil,  several  miles  from  Bedr ;  and
there  Mohammad  passed  the  night.  On  the  morrow,  the
prisoners  were  brought  up  before  him.  As  he  scrutinised
each,  his  eye  fell  fiercely  on  An-Nadr,  made  captive  by
Mikdad.  'There  was  death  in  that  glance,'  whispered
An-Nadr  trembling  to  a  bystander.  'Not  so,'  replied  the
other ;  'it  is  but  thine  imagination.'  The  unfortunate
prisoner  thought  otherwise,  and  besought  Mus'ab  to  inter-
cede for  him  ;  on  which  Mus'ab  reminded  him  that  he  had
denied  the  faith  and  persecuted  Believers.  '  Ah ! '  said
An-Nadr,  'had  Koreish  made  thee  a  prisoner,  they  would
never  have  put  thee  to  death ! '  '  Even  were  it  so,'  replied
Mus'ab  scornfully,  '  I  am  not  as  thou  art ;  Islam  hath  rent
all  bonds  asunder.'  Mikdad,  the  captor,  fearing  lest  his
prisoner,  and  with  him  the  chance  of  a  rich  ransom,  was
about  to  slip  from  his  hands,  cried  out:  'The  prisoner  is
mine ! '  At  this  moment,  the  command  to  '  strike  off  his
head'.'i  was  interposed  by  Mohammad,  who  had  been
watching  what  passed.  '  And,  O  Lord  ! '  he  added,  'do  thou
of  Thy  bounty  grant  unto  Mikdad  a  better  prey  than  this.'
An-Nadr  was  forthwith  beheaded  by  'All.

Two  days  afterwards,  about  half-way  to  Medina,  'Okba,
another  prisoner,  was  ordered  out  for  execution.  He
ventured  to  expostulate,  and  demand  why  he  should  be
treated  more  rigorously  than  the  other  captives.  '  Because
of  thine  enmity  to  God  and  his  Prophet,'  replied  Mohammad.
^ And  my  little  girl!'  cried  'Okba,  in  the  bitterness  of  his
soul — ^wko  will  take  care  of  her?'  'Hell-fire!'  exclaimed
the  Prophet ;  and  on  the  instant  the  victim  was  hewn  to  the
ground.  '  Wretch  that  thou  wast ! '  he  continued,  '  and
persecutor !  unbeliever  in  God,  in  his  Prophet,  and  in  his
Book !  I  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  that  hath  slain  thee,  and
comforted  mine  eyes  thereby.'^

^  The  phrase,  Strike  his  neck,  used  for  beheading.  The  executioner,
by  a  dexterous  stroke  of  the  sword  on  the  back  of  the  neck  can  sever  the
head  at  one  blow.  It  is  still  the  mode  of  capital  punishment  in
Mohammadan  countries.  [The  scene  of  An-Nadr's  execution  was
As-Safra,  according  to  Ibn  Ishak. — Ibn  Hisham,  p.  458.]

^  The  incident  was  made  plentiful  use  of  in  the  factious  days  ending
in  'Othman's  death  ;  for  Um  Kulthum,  daughter  of  'Okba,  was  foster-
sister  to  that  unfortunate  Caliph  ;  as  was  Ibn  abi  Sarh  (noticed  at  the
taking  of  Mecca)  his  foster-brother. See  Ibn  al-AthIr,  iii.  56.


xir.]


SOME  PRISONERS  EXECUTED


231


We  are  even  told  that  it  had  been  in  contemplation  to
put  the  whole  of  the  prisoners,  some  50  in  number,  to  death.
Indeed,  Mohammad  is  represented  as  himself  directing  this
course.^  Abu  Bekr,  always  on  the  lenient  side,  pleaded  for
mercy.  'Omar,  the  personification  of  stern  justice,  urged
Mohammad  vehemently  to  put  them  to  death.  At  this
juncture  Gabriel  brought  a  message  from  heaven,  leaving  it
at  the  Prophet's  option  either  to  slay  the  captives  or  demand
a  ransom ;  with  the  condition,  however,  that,  for  every
captive  spared,  a  Believer  would  be  hereafter  slain  in  battle
the  ensuing  year."  Mohammad  consulted  his  followers  ;  and
they  said  : — '  Let  us  save  the  prisoners  alive,  and  take  their
ransom  ;  hereafter,  they  that  are  killed  in  lieu  thereof  will
inherit  Paradise  and  the  crown  of  martyrdom ; ' — which
counsel  was  adopted.  These  traditions  embody  the  popular
belief  on  the  subject.  But  the  only  mention  of  the  matter
in  the  Kor'an  is  the  following  verse,  which,  though  produced
by  Mohammad  rather  to  justify  the  slaughter  of  the  few
prisoners  put  to  death  by  himself  and  his  followers,  and  to
gain  the  character  of  having,  against  the  divine  commission,
erred  on  the  side  of  mercy,  has,  no  doubt,  given  rise  to  this
mass  of  fiction  : —

It  is  not  for  a  prophet  to  take  prisoners  until  he  hath  inflicted  a
grievous  wound  upon  his  enemies  on  the  Earth.  Ye  seek  after  the
good  things  of  this  Life  :  but  God  seeketh  after  the  Life  to  come.  .  .  .
Unless  a  revelation  from  the  Lord  had  interposed,  surely  a  grievous
punishment  had  overtaken  you  for  (the  ransom)  which  ye  took.  Now,
therefore,  enjoy  of  that  which  ye  have  gained,  whatever  is  lawful  and
good  ;  and  fear  God,  for  God  is  gracious  and  merciful.


Mohammad
said  to  have
been  repri-
manded for
saving
prisoners
alive


Teaching
of  Kor'an
on  the
subject


Sura  viii.
68  tf.


1  Thus  Mohammad  said:  'Tell  not  Sa'd  of  his  brother  Ma'bad'j
death'  (see  ante^  p.  227  note);  'but  kill  ye  every  man  his  prisoner.'
Again  :  'Take  not  any  man  his  brother  prisoner,  but  rather  kill  him.'  I
would  not,  however,  lay  much  stress  on  these  traditions.  I  am  inclined
rather  to  view  them  as  called  into  existence  by  the  passage  quoted  from
the  Kor'an.  Mohammad  (they  say)  likened  Abu  Bekr  to  Michael,
Abraham,  and  Jesus,  all  advocates  of  mercy ;  and  'Omar  to  Gabriel,
Noah,  and  Moses,  the  ministers  of  Justice.  He  added  that  if  the  sin  of
Bedr  in  sparing  the  prisoners  had  been  punished  rigorously,  none  would
have  escaped  but  'Omar  and  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh  (another  sanguinary  Be-
liever, as  we  shall  have  full  proof  hereafter),  who  both  urged  the  slaughter
of  all  the  prisoners.  [Ibn  Ishak  says  Mohammad  gave  orders  before  the
battle  not  to  kill  any  of  the  house  of  Hashim. — Ibn  Hisham,  p.  446  f.]

^  'Which  thing'  (tradition  adds)  'came  to  pass  at  Ohod.'


232


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


Tidings  of
victory
reach
Medina


Moham-
mad's
return ;
death  of  his
daughter
Rokeiya


'O  thou  Prophet!  speak  thus  unto  thy  prisoners: — If  God  should
know  anything  in  your  hearts  which  is  good  He  will  give  unto  you
better  than  that  which  hath  been  taken  from  you  ;  and  He  will  forgive
you,  for  the  Lord  is  forgiving  and  merciful.  But  if  they  seek  to  act
unfaithfully  towards  thee — verily  they  have  acted  unfaithfully  towards
the  Lord  already,  and  God  is  knowing  and  wise.'

It  will  be  seen  from  this  quotation  that  Mohammad  already
contemplated  the  possibility  of  converting  the  prisoners  to
his  cause ;  and  in  some  instances,  as  we  shall  see,  he  was
successful.^

From  Al-Otheil,  shortly  after  the  battle,  Mohammad  had
despatched  Zeid  and  'Abdallah  the  poet,  to  make  known  his
victory  at  Medina.  At  the  valley  of  Al-'Akik,  'Abdallah
struck  off  to  the  right,  and  spread  the  good  tidings  through-
out Koba  and  Upper  Medina.  Zeid,  mounted  on  Al-Kaswa
proceeded  straightway  to  the  city.  The  disaffected  Citizens
had  buoyed  themselves  with  the  hope  of  Mohammad's  defeat ;
and  now,  seeing  his  favourite  camel  approach  without  her
master,  they  prognosticated  that  he  had  been  slain.  But
they  were  soon  undeceived  and  crestfallen  ;  for  Zeid,  taking
his  stand  at  the  entrance  of  the  city,  proclaimed  the
overthrow  of  Koreish  and  named  the  chief  men  slain  or
taken  prisoner.  The  joy  of  the  Prophet's  adherents  was
unbounded ;  and,  as  the  news  ran  from  door  to  door,  even
the  little  children  made  the  streets  resound  with  the  cry,
Abu  J  aid,  the  sinner,  is  slain  !

The  next  day,  Mohammad  himself  arrived.  His  gladness
was  damped  by  finding  that  his  daughter  Rokeiya  had  died
during  his  absence.  They  had  just  smoothed  the  earth  over
her  tomb  in  the  graveyard  of  the  Baki',  as  Zeid  entered
Medina.  'Othman  had  watched  tenderly  over  her  death-bed  ;
and  Mohammad  sought  to  solace  him  by  uniting  him,  a  few
months  later,  to  his  remaining  single  daughter,  Um  Kulthijm.
Like  Rokeiya,  she  had  been  married  to  one  of  Abu  Lahab's
sons,  but  had  for  some  time  been  separated  from  him.  She
died  a  year  or  two  before  Mohammad,  who  used,  after  her
death,  to  say  he  so  dearly  loved  'Othman,  that,  had  there
been  a  third  daughter,  he  would  have  given  her  in  marriage
to  him  also.

^  [One  of  the  prisoners  was  his  uncle  Al-'Abbas,  who  redeemed  him-
self and  his  two  nephews  'Akil  and  Naufal. — At-Tabari,  i.  1345.]


Xll]  NEWS  OF  THE  VICTORY  233

In  the  evening,  the  prisoners  were  brought  in.  Sauda,  Prisoners
the  Prophet's  wife,  had  gone  out  to  join  in  lamentation  with  ^°^?^' '"'°
the  family  of  a  Citizen  who  had  lost  two  sons  at  Bedr.  On
her  return,  she  found,  standing  by  her  house,  Suheil,  one  of
the  prisoners,  with  his  hands  tied  behind  his  neck.^  Sur-
prised at  the  sight,  she,  without  thinking,  offered  to  loose  his
hands,  when  she  was  startled  by  the  voice  of  Mohammad,
calling  loudly  from  within  :  '  By  the  Lord  and  his  Prophet !
O  Sauda,  what  art  thou  doing?'  She  replied  that  she  bad
addressed  Suheil  from  an  involuntary  impulse.  Yet
Mohammad  was  far  from  intending  to  treat  the  prisoners
whose  lives  he  had  spared,  with  harshness.  He  rather
hoped,  by  kind  and  friendly  demeanour,  to  win  their
affections  and  draw  them  over  to  the  Faith.  Thus,  when
Um  Selama  was  engaged  mourning  at  the  same  house  with
Sauda,  news  was  brought  that  some  of  the  prisoners  had
been  quartered  at  her  home.  She  went  at  once  to
Mohammad,  whom  she  found  with  'A'isha,  and  thus
addressed  him  : — '  O  Prophet !  my  uncle's  sons  desire  that  I
should  entertain  certain  of  the  prisoners,  anoint  their  heads,
and  comb  their  dishevelled  hair  ;  but  I  did  not  venture  to
do  so  until  I  had  first  obtained  thine  orders.'  Mohammad
replied  that  he  did  not  at  all  object  to  these  marks  of
hospitality,  and  desired  her  to  do  to  them  as  she  was
minded.-

In  pursuance  of  Mohammad's  command,  and  in  accord Prisoners

with  the  passage  already  quoted,  the  Citizens,  and  such  of  ^''5^1^^^
111  ri-  -11 kindly ;

the  Refugees  as  had  houses  of  their  own,  received  the
prisoners  with  kindness  and  consideration.  'Blessings  on
the  men  of  Medina ! '  said  one  of  these  in  later  days  :  '  they
made  us  ride,  while  they  themselves  walked  afoot ;  they  gave
us  wheaten  bread  to  eat  when  there  was  little  of  it,  contenting

^  Perhaps  greater  stringency  was  used  in  his  restraint,  as  he  had
nearly  escaped  on  the  road.  Mohammad  gave  orders  to  chase  and  kill
him.  Coming  up  with  him,  he  spared  his  life,  but  bound  his  hands
behind  his  neck,  and  tied  him  with  a  rope  to  his  camel.  Osama  met
Mohammad  entering  Medina  with  Suheil  following  in  this  condition,
and  exclaimed:  'What!  Abu  Yazid!'  (Suheil's  cognomen).  'Yes,'
said  Mohammad,  'it  is  the  same;  the  Chief  who  used  to  feed  the  people
with  bread  at  Mecca.'

'-'  A  year  or  two  afterwards,  on  her  husband's  death,  Mohammad
married  this  lady.


234


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


And

ransomed
from  Mecca


Importance
of  the
victory,
and  rank
assigned
to  those
engaged
in  it


The  victory
a  divine
declaration
in  favour
of  Islam


themselves  with  dates.'  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that
some  of  the  captives,  yielding  to  these  influences,  declared
themselves  Believers,  and  to  such  their  liberty  was  at  once
granted.  The  rest  were  kept  for  ransom.  But  it  was  long
before  Koreish  could  humble  themselves  to  visit  Medina
for  the  purpose.  The  kindly  treatment  was  thus  prolonged,
and  left  a  favourable  impression  on  the  minds  even  of  those
who  did  not  at  once  go  over  to  Islam.  Eventually  the  army
of  Bedr  was  enriched  by  the  large  payments  given.  The
captives  were  redeemed  according  to  their  several  means —
some  paying  a  thousand,  and  others  as  much  as  four  thousand
pieces.  Such  as  had  nothing  to  give  were  liberated  without
payment ;  but  a  service  was  required  which  shows  how  far
Mecca  was  in  advance  of  Medina  in  learning.  To  each  were
allotted  ten  boys,  to  be  taught  the  art  of  writing ;  and  the
teaching  was  accepted  as  a  ransom.

The  importance  of  Bedr  is  marked,  as  already  said,  by
the  marvellous  labour  with  which  every  incident  relating  to
it  has  been  treasured  up,  so  that  the  narrative  far  exceeds  in
profusion  of  detail  that  of  probably  any  other  of  the  great
battles  that  have  shaped  the  destinies  of  the  world.  Its  sig-
nificance is  also  stamped  by  the  exalted  rank  assigned  to  the
famous  Three  Hundred,  Their  names  were  enrolled  in  the
first  rank  of  the  '  Register  of  'Omar,'  as  entitled  to  the
highest  of  all  the  princely  dotations  there  recorded.^  They
were,  in  fact,  the  peerage  of  Islam,  '  Bring  me  hither  the
garment  in  which  I  went  forth  to  Bedr;  for  this  end  have  I
kept  it  laid  up  unto  this  day.'  So  spake  Sa'd,  the  youthful
convert  of  Mecca,  now  about  to  die  at  fourscore  years.
Crowned  with  renown  as  the  conqueror  of  Persia,  the  founder
of  Al-Kufa,  and  the  Viceroy  of  Al-'Irak',  his  honours  were
cast  into  the  shade  by  the  glory  of  having  been  one  of  the
heroes  of  Bedr.  In  his  eyes  the  'garment  of  Bedr'  was  the
highest  badge  of  nobility,  and  in  it  would  he  be  carried  to
his  grave,^

The  battle  of  Bedr  was  indeed  a  critical  point  in  the
career  of  Mohammad. However  skilful  in  turning  every  in-

*  See  Caliphate^  p.  157.

2  He  had  amassed  great  wealth  in  his  various  commands,  and,
avoiding  the  civil  wars  which  followed  the  death  of  the  Caliph  'Othnian,
had  retired  to  his  castle  at  Al-'Aklk  near  Medina,  where  he  died  a,h,  55.


XII.]  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  BATTLE  235

cident  into  proof  of  the  divine  interposition  for  the  further-
ance of  IshTm,  he  would  have  found  it  difficult  to  maintain
his  position  at  Medina  in  the  face  of  a  reverse.  The  victory
now  supplied  him  with  new  and  cogent  arguments.  He  did
not  hesitate  to  ascribe  his  success  to  the  miraculous  assist-
ance of  God  ;  and  this  was  the  easier  in  consequence  of  the
superior  numbers  of  Koreish.  Passages  have  already  been
quoted  to  this  effect,  and  the  following  are  equally  conclusive.
An  Angelic  host,  a  thousand  strong,  was  present  on  his  Angelic
side  : —


auxiliaries


When ye sought assistance from your Lord;  and He  answered, Sura  viii.  9 f.
Verily^  1  will  assist  you  wiih  a  thousand  Angels^  in  squadrons  following
one  upon  another : — This  the  Lord  did  as  good  tidings  for  you,  and  to
confirm  your  hearts  thereby. As  for  victory,  it  is  from  none  other  than
from  God  :  for  God  is  glorious  and  wise.

Verily  there  hath  been  given  unto  you  a  Sign in the two armies Sura  iii.  11
which  fought. One  army  fought  in  the  way  of  God. The  other  was
unbelieving,  and  saw  their  enemy  double  of  themselves  by  the  sight  of
the eye. And God  strenglheneth  with His aid whom He pleaseth.
Verily,  therein  is  a  lesson  unto  the  discerning  people.

And  ye  slew  them  not,  but  God  slew  them. Neither  was  it  thou,  O Sura  viii.
Prophet,  that  didst  cast  the  gravel ;  but  God  did  cast  it ;  that  He  might '7  ff-
prove  the  Believers  by  a  gracious  probation  from  Himself. Verily,  God
heareth  and  knoweth. It  was  even  so. And  God  weakeneth  the  devices
of  the  Infidels.

If  ye  (the  unbelievers)  desire  a  decision,  now  verily  the  decision  hath
already  come  unto  you.  If  ye  hold  back,  it  will  be  better  for  you;  but
if  ye  return,  We  also  shall  return.  And  your  troops  will  not  avail  you
anything,  even  though  they  be  many  in  number,  for  surely  God  is  with
the  Believers.

Furthermore,  not only  was  divine  aid afforded  to  the Satan  forced
army  of  Medina,  but  the  help  which  Satan  had  designed  for Korehh^°"
the  army  of  Mecca  was  signally  frustrated: —

Be  not  like  unto  those  who  went  forth  from  their  habitations  vain- Sura  viii.
gloriously  to  be  seen  of  men,  and  who  turned  aside  from  the  way  of  God  : 49  f-
and  God  compasseth  about  that  which  they  do.

Remember,  when  Satan  bedecked  their  works  unto  the  Enemy,  and
said, — None  shall  prevail  this  day  against  you;  for  1  verily  am  your
confederate.  But  when  the  armies  came  within  sight  one  of  the  other,
he  turned  back  upon  his  heels,  and  said, —  Verily  I  a?n  clear  of  you.
Truly  I  see  that  which  ye  see  not.  1  fear  God.,  for  Cod  is  terrible  in
vengeance.'^

^  As  may  be  imagined,  these  passages  have  given  rise  to  endless
legends. The  Devil  appeared  in  the  favourite  form  of  Ibn  Suraka. This


236


BATTLE  OF  BEDR


[chap.


Mohammad
now  stands
or  falls  by
success  in
the  field


Chief
Koreish
killed  at
Bedr


Consterna-
tion and
thirst  for
revenge  at
Mecca


The  cause  of  Mohammad,  it  was  distinctly  admitted,  must
stand  or  fall  by  the  result  of  the  armed  struggle  with  his
native  city  on  which  he  had  now  fairly  entered  :  difficult
and  dangerous  ground,  no  doubt,  for  a  fallible  mortal  to
stand  upon ;  but  the  die  was  cast,  and  the  battle  must  be
fought  out  to  the  death.  The  scabbard  cast  away,  little
additional  risk  was  incurred  when  success  in  arms  became
the  criterion  of  his  prophetical  claim.  However  strong  his
position  otherwise,  it  could  not  be  maintained  in  the  face  of
an  armed  defeat ;  however  otherwise  weak,  the  sword  would
establish  it  triumphantly.

There  was  much  in  the  battle  of  Bedr  which  Mohammad
could  plausibly  represent  as  a  special  interposition  of  the
Deity  in  his  behalf  Not  only  was  a  most  decisive  victory
gained  over  a  force  three  times  his  own  in  number,  but  the
slain  on  the  enemy's  side  included  in  a  remarkable  manner
many  of  his  most  influential  opponents.  In  addition  to  the
chief  men  killed  or  made  prisoners,  Abu  Lahab,  who  was  not
present  in  the  battle,  died  a  few  days  after  the  return  of  the
fugitive  army — as  if  the  decree  marking  out  the  enemies  of
the  Prophet  was  inevitable.^

At  Mecca,  the  news  of  the  defeat  was  received  with  con-
sternation. Burning  shame  and  thirst  for  revenge  stifled  for
a  time  all  outward  expression  of  grief.  '  Weep  not  for  your
slain,'  was  the  counsel  of  Abu  Sufyan,  '  mourn  not  their  loss,
neither  let  the  bard  bewail  their  fate.  If  ye  lament  with
elegies,  it will  ease  your  wrath  and diminish  your  enmity

man  was  seen  running  away  from  the  field  of  battle,  and  was  taxed  with
it  by  Koreish — while  all  the  time  it  was  the  Devil !  We  have  gravely
given  to  us  the  circumstantial  evidence  of  a  witness  regarding  the
Devil's  words  and  behaviour  on  this  occasion,  his  jumping  into  the  sea,
&c.  As  to  the  angels,  we  have  pages  filled  with  accounts  of  them  : —
such  as  that  one  of  the  enemy  suddenly  perceived  a  tall  white  figure  in
the  air,  mounted  on  a  piebald  horse ;  it  was  an  angel  who  had  bound
his  comrade,  and  left  him  on  the  spot  a  prisoner,  and  this  was  the  cause
of  his  conversion.  But  it  would  be  endless  and  unprofitable  to  multiply
such  tales. See  p.  262,  n.  2.

^  'Abbasid  traditions  add  that  his  death  was  caused  by  malignant
and  infectious  ulcers  ;  that  he  remained  two  days  unburied,  as  no  one
would  approach  the  offensive  corpse  ;  that  he  was  not  washed,  but  that
water  was  cast  from  a  distance  on  his  body,  which  was  then  carried
forth  and  thrown  into  a  well  in  Upper  Mecca,  and  stones  heaped  over
the  well. The  bias  is  palpable.


XII.]  FEELING  AT  MECCA  237

towards  Mohammad  and  his  fellows.  And,  should  that  reach
their  ears,  and  they  laugh  at  us,  will  not  their  scorn  be  worse
than  all  ?  Haply  the  turn  may  come,  and  ye  may  yet  obtain
your  revenge.  As  for  me,  I  will  touch  no  oil,  neither
approach  my  wife,  until  I  shall  have  gone  forth  again  to  fight
with  Mohammad.'  It  was  this  savage  pride  which  so  long
prevented  their  sending  to  Medina  for  the  ransom  of  their
captive  kinsmen.^

A month  elapsed  thus ;  and  then  they  could  refrain  no Wailing
longer. The  wild  cry  of  long-stifled  grief  burst  forth  at  last ^f^  *"  '^°'*^

*"  tlX  iVlCCC3.

from  the  whole  city.  In  almost  every  house  there  were  tears
and  wailings  for  the  captive  or  the  dead.  And  this  lasted  an
entire  month.^  One  house  alone  was  silent :  '  Why  sheddest
thou  no  tears,'  said  they  to  Hind,  the  wife  of  Abu  Sufyan ;
'  why  weep  not  for  thy  father  'Otba,  thine  uncle  also,  and  thy
brother?'  'Nay,'  replied  Hind,  'I  will  not  weep  until  ye
again  wage  war  with  Mohammad  and  his  fellows.  If  tears
could  wipe  the  grief  from  off  my  heart,  I  too  would  weep  as
ye;  but  it  is  not  thus  with  Hind.'  To  mark  her  sullen
sorrow,  she  forswore  to  use  oil  for  her  hair,  or  to  go  near  the
bed  of  Abu  Sufyan,  until  an  army  should  march  forth  against
Medina.

'  Abu  Sufyan  declared  that  he  would  not  send  to  ransom  his  own  son,
even  if  Mohammad  kept  him  a  whole  year.  His  son  was  eventually
exchanged  for  a  Muslim  who  incautiously  visited  Mecca  for  the  Lesser
pilgrimage.

2  A  plaintive  illustration  of  the  force  of  pent-up  grief  is  given
by  Al-Wakidi  with  all  the  pathos  of  Arab  feeling.  The  blind  and
aged  Aswad  had  lost  two  sons  and  a  grandson  in  the  battle.  Like  the
rest  of  Koreish,  he  sternly  repressed  his  grief;  but  as  days  rolled  on  he
longed  to  give  vent  to  his  feelings.  One  night  he  heard  the  wild  notes
of  a  female  wailing,  and  he  said  to  his  servant ;  'Go  see  !  it  may  be  that
Koreish  have  begun  to  wail  for  their  dead  :  perchance  I,  too,  may  wail
for  Zam'a,  my  son ;  for  grief  consumeth  me  within.'  The  servant
returned,  saying,  that  it  was  but  the  voice  of  a  woman  lamenting  for  her
strayed  camel.  On  this  the  old  man  gave  way  to  a  burst  of  beautiful
and  impassioned  poetry.  '  Doth  she  weep  for  her  camel,  and  for  it
banish  sleep  from  her  eyes?  Nay,  if  ye  will  weep,  let  us  weep  over
Bedr : — Weep  for  'Okeil,  and  for  Al-Harith  the  lion  of  lions  I'  &c.  Ibn
Hisham,  p.  462.


CHAPTER XIII


THE  YEAR  FOLLOWING  THE  BATTLE  OF  BEDR


Ramadan^  A.H.  ll.,  to  Sha''ba7i,  A.H.  ill. — A.D.  624


Important
effect  of
victoiy  on
Moham-
mad's
position  at
Medina


Disaffected
Jews  a
thiorn  in
Moham-
mad's
side


MTAT. 56

The  triumph  of  Bedr  was  not  less  important  in  its  effect
upon  the  inhabitants  of  Medina  than  it  was  upon  Koreish
at  Mecca.  It  was,  indeed,  more  important.  It  consolidated
the  power  of  Mohammad  over  the  wavering,  and  struck  alarm
into  the  hearts  of  the  Disaffected.  The  issue  had  been  put
not  on  political,  but  upon  religious  grounds.  It  was  for
their  unbelief  Koreish  were  overthrown.  The  victory,  the
'  Decision,'  was  vouchsafed  by  God  to  vindicate  the  Faith.
The  Lord  had  '  frustrated  the  devices  of  the  Infidels  ;  for
surely  God  is  with  the  believers.'  The  conclusion  applied
with  equal  force  to  the  Unbelievers  of  Medina.  '  Verily,'  said
the  Prophet  in  his  Revelation,  '  herein  is  a  lesson  unto  the
discerning  people ' ;  and  the  citizens  were  not  slow  to  learn  it.
'Abdallah  ibn  Obei  still  possessed  great  influence ;  he  was
the  head  of  all  who  had  not  gone  over  to  the  new  faith  or
tendered  allegiance  to  the  Stranger.  Mohammad  on  his  first
arrival  had  been  counselled  to  deal  tenderly  with  this  Chief,
and  he  had  followed  the  advice.  'Abdallah  saw  no  oppor-
tunity for  a  successful  rupture ;  his  own  position  was  too  in-
secure, and  the  attitude  of  his  people  too  weak  and  wavering,
for  an  open  conflict  with  the  enthusiasm  of  Mohammad's
followers.  The  stranger's  power  was  daily  undermining  his
authority  and  rising  on  its  ruins.

Still  there  were  clans  as  well  as  individuals  who  declined
to  go  over  to  the  new  faith,  and  there  were  the  Jewish  tribes,
and  their  adherents,  whom,  on  account  of  their  religion,
Mohammad  was  obliged  at  first  to  respect.  All  these  were  a
thorn in  his  side. They  spoke covertly  against him,  and

238


CHAP.  XIII.]  CRUSHING  THE  DISAFFECTED  239

ridiculed  him  in  satires  which  passed  readily  into  the  mouths
of  the  Disaffected,  but  they  had  not  calculated  on  the  policy
of  Mohammad  and  his  power  to  crush  them.  The  un-
questioning devotion  of  his  followers  made  them  ready
instruments  not  only  of  an  all-pervading  espionage  from
which  no  family  was  secure,  but  also  for  ridding  him  of  those
whose  opposition  was  dangerous  to  his  cause.  Even  secret
conversations  were  reported  to  the  Prophet,  and  on  such
information  he  countenanced  proceedings  that  were  some-
times both  cruel  and  unscrupulous.  It  was  the  strength  gained
at  Bedr  which  enabled  him  fearlessly  to  enter  on  this  course.

The  first  blood  shed  at  Medina  with  the  countenance  of  Assassination
Mohammad  was  a  woman's.  'Asma,  daughter  of  Merwan,  Ramadan
belonged  to  a  disaffected  tribe,  the  Aus,  and  to  a  family  a.h.  ii".
which  had  not  as  yet  thrown  off  their  ancestral  faith.^  She  624"-^'^'  ^^'
made  no  secret  of  her  dislike  to  Islam  ;  and,  being  a  poetess,
composed  some  couplets,  after  the  battle  of  Bedr,  on  the  folly
of  receiving  and  trusting  a  Stranger,  who  had  risen  against  his
own  people,  and  slain  the  chief  of  them  in  battle.  The  verses
quickly  spread  from  mouth  to  mouth  (one  of  the  few  means
of  giving  expression  to  public  opinion),  and  at  last  reached
the  ears  of  the  Muslims.  They  were  offended  ;  and  'Omeir,
a  blind  man  of  the  same  tribe  (and  according  to  some  a
former  husband  of  'Asma)  vowed  that  he  would  kill  the
author.  It  was  but  a  few  days  after  the  return  of
Mohammad  from  Bedr,  that  this  man,  in  the  dead  of  night,
crept  into  the  apartment  where  'Asma  with  her  little  ones  lay
asleep.  Feeling  stealthily,  he  removed  her  suckling  babe,
and  plunged  his  sword  into  her  breast  with  such  force  that  it
transfixed  her  to  the  couch.  Next  morning,  in  the  Mosque
at  prayer,  Mohammad,  who  was  aware  of  the  bloody  design,
said  to 'Omeir  :  '  Hast  thou  slain  the  daughter  of  Merwan  ? '
*  Yes,'  he  answered ;  '  but  tell  me  now,  is  there  cause  of
apprehension?'  '  None,' said  Mohammad  ;  'a  couple  of  goats
will  hardly  knock  their  heads  together  for  it'  Then  turning
to  the  people  assembled  in  the  Mosque,  he  said  :  '  If  ye  desire
to  see  a  man  that  hath  assisted  the  Lord  and  his  Prophet,
look  ye  here!'  'What!'  cried  'Omar,  'the  blind  'Omeir!'
'Nay,'  replied the  Prophet,  'call him  not blind; call  him

^  Al-Wakidi,  p.  90  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p. 18. [The  event  comes  later  in
Ibn  Hisham  (p.  995  f.) ;  not  mentioned  by  At-Tabari.]


240


THE  YEAR  AFTER  BEDR


[chap.


And  of

Abu  'Afak,
A.H.  II.
February,
A.D.  624


Alarm  of
Jews


Beni

Kainuka'
threatened
by  Moham-
mad


rather  'Omeir  the.  Seeing!  As  the  assassin  returned  to  his
home  in  Upper  Medina,  he  passed  the  sons  of  'Asma  burying
their  mother ;  they  accused  him  of  the  murder,  which  without
compunction  he  avowed,  and  added  that  if  they  dared  to
repeat  things  such  as  she  had  uttered  he  would  slay  the
whole  clan  of  them.  The  bloody  threat  had  the  desired
effect.  Those  of  the  family  who  had  secretly  espoused  the
cause  of  Mohammad  now  openly  professed  their  faith,  and
the  whole  tribe  soon  succumbed  before  the  fierce  determina-
tion and  growing  influence  of  the  Prophet's  followers.  In
short,  as  Sprenger  remarks,  the  only  alternative  to  a  hopeless
blood-feud  was  the  adoption  of  Islam.

Many  weeks  did  not  elapse  before  another  murder  was
committed  by  expressed  authority  of  Mohammad.^  The
victim  was  an  aged  Jewish  proselyte,  Abu  'Afak,  whose
offence  was  similar  to  that  of  'Asma.  He  belonged  to  the
Beni  'Amr,  whose  doubtful  loyalty,  it  will  be  remembered,  is
marked  by  the  message  sent  them  by  the  Prophet  on  his
march  to  Bedr.  Notwithstanding  his  change  of  faith,  Abu
'Afak  still  lived  with  his  tribe  in  Upper  Medina ;  and,  though
(as  is  said)  above  a  hundred  years  of  age,  was  active  in  his
opposition  to  the  new  religion.  He,  too,  had  composed  some
stinging  and  disloyal  verses  which  annoyed  the  Muslims.
'Who  will  rid  me  of  this  pestilent  fellow?'  said  Mohammad
to  those  about  him ;  and  not  long  after  a  convert  from  the
same  tribe  watched  his  opportunity,  and  falling  unawares
upon  the  aged  man,  as  he  slept  in  the  courtyard  outside
his  house,  despatched  him  with  his  sword.  The  death  shriek
drew  his  neighbours  to  the  spot;  but  though  they  vowed
vengeance  against  the  murderer,  he  escaped  unrecognised.

These  lawless  and  sanguinary  acts  alarmed  all  that  party
at  Medina  which  still  regarded  the  strangers  and  the  new
faith  with  suspicion  and  dislike.  And  above  all,  terror  crept
over  the  hearts  of  the  Jews. There  was  good  reason  for  it.

The  Beni  Kainuka',  who  followed  the  goldsmith's  craft  in
their  stronghold  outside  the  city,  were  the  first  of  the  three
Jewish  tribes  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  Prophet's  displeasure.^

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  994  f. ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  91  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  19  ;  [not  in
At-Tabari].

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  545  f. ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1360  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  92  f.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  19.


Xlii.] THE  BENI KAINUKA'  BESIEGED  AND  EXILED 241


It  is  asserted  that  they  rebelled  and  broke  their  treaty.
How  the  breach  first  occurred  is  not  altogether  certain.
Mohammad,  we  are  told,  went  to  their  chief  place  of  resort,
shortly  after  his  return  from  Bedr ;  and,  having  assembled
the  chief  men,  summoned  them  to  acknowledge  him  as  their
Prophet.  '  By  the  Lord  ! '  he  said, '  ye  know  full  well  that  I
am  the  Apostle  of  God.  Believe,  therefore,  before  that
happen  to  you  which  has  befallen  Koreish  ! '  They  refused,
and  defied  him  to  do  his  worst.  An  incident  soon  occurred
which  afforded  the  pretext  for  attack.  A  Muslim  maiden
visited  their  market-place,  and  at  a  goldsmith's  shop,  waiting
for  some  ornaments,  sat  down.  A  silly  neighbour,  unper-
ceived,  pinned  her  skirt  behind  to  the  upper  dress.  When
she  arose,  the  awkward  exposure  excited  laughter,  and  she
screamed  with  shame,  A  Muslim,  apprised  of  the  affront,
slew  the  offending  Jew ;  the  brethren  of  the  Jew,  in  their
turn,  fell  upon  the  Muslim  and  killed  him.  The  family  of
the  murdered  Muslim  appealed  to  the  converts  of  Medina,
who  espoused  their  cause.  Though  bound  by  a  friendly
treaty,  Mohammad  made  no  attempt  to  compose  the  quarrel,
or  single  out  the  guilty.  Forthwith  he  marshalled  his
followers,  and,  placing  the  great  white  banner,  which  had
waved  over  the  field  of  Bedr  but  a  month  before,  in  the
hands  of  Hamza,  marched  forth  to  attack  the  offending  tribe.
Their  settlement,  sufficiently  fortified  to  resist  assault,  was
invested,  and  a  strict  blockade  maintained.  This  happened
within  one  month  from  the  battle  of  Bedr.

The  beleaguered  garrison  expected  that  'Abdallah  ibn
Obei  and  the  Khazraj,  with  whom  they  had  long  been  in
alliance,  would  have  interfered  in  their  behalf;  but  no  one
dared  to  stir.  For  fifteen  days  they  were  closely  besieged  ;
and  at  last,  despairing  of  the  looked-for  aid,  they  surrendered
at  discretion.  As,  one  by  one,  they  issued  from  the
stronghold,  their  hands  were  tied  behind  their  backs,  and
preparations  made  for  execution.  But  'Abdallah,  fallen  as
he  was  from  his  high  estate,  could  not  endure  to  see  his
faithful  allies  led  thus  away  to  be  massacred  in  cold  blood.
Approaching  Mohammad,  he  begged  for  mercy;  but
Mohammad  turned  his  face  away.  'Abdallah  persisted  in
his  suit,  and  seizing  the  Prophet  by  the  arm,  as  he  stood
armed  in  his  coat  of  mail,  reiterated  the  petition. '  Let  me

Q


Quarrel
between
Jews  and
citizens  of
Medina


Beni

Kainuka'
are  besieged.
A.H.  n.
February,
A.D.  624


Surrender
at  discretion,
and  are  sent
into  exile


242


THE  YEAR  AFTER  BEDR


[chap.


The  spoil


Effect  on
the  Jews
and  dis-
affected
Citizens


alone!'  cried  Mohammad;  but 'Abdallah  did  not  relax  his
hold.  The  marks  of  anger  mantled  in  the  Prophet's  face,
and  again  he  exclaimed  loudly :  '  Wretch,  let  me  go ! '
'  Nay ! '  said  'Abdallah,  '  I  will  not  let  thee  go  until  thou  hast
compassion  on  my  friends;  300  soldiers  armed  in  mail,  and
400  unequipped — they  defended  me  on  the  fields  of  Hadaik
and  Bo'ath  from  every  foe.^  Wilt  thou  cut  them  down  in
one  day,  O  Mohammad  ?  As  for  me,  I  am  one  verily  that
feareth  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune.'  'Abdallah  was  yet  too
strong  for  Mohammad  with  safety  to  neglect  the  appeal  so
urgently  preferred.  '  Let  them  go ! '  the  Prophet  said,
reluctantly ;  '  the  Lord  curse  them,  and  him  too ! '  So
Mohammad  released  them,  but  commanded  that  they  should
be  sent  into  exile.  They  were  led  forth  some  distance  by
'Obada,  one  of  the  Khazrajite  '  leaders ' ;  thence  they  pro-
ceeded to  the  Jewish  settlement  of  Wadi  al-Kora,  and,  being
assisted  there  with  carriage,  reached  Adhri'at,  on  the  confines
of  Syria.  The  spoil  consisted  mainly  of  armour  and  gold-
smiths' tools,  for  that  was  the  chief  occupation  of  the  tribe :
they  possessed  no  agricultural  property,  nor  any  fields.
Mohammad  took  his  choice  of  the  arms — three  bows,  three
swords,  and  two  coats  of  mail.  The  royal  Fifth  was  then
set  aside,  and  the  rest  distributed  amongst  the  army.

The  Jews  might  now  see  clearly  the  designs  of
Mohammad.  It  was  no  petty  question  of  an  affronted  female.
Blood  had,  no  doubt,  been  shed  in  the  quarrel  ;  but  it  was
shed  equally  on  both  sides.  And  had  there  not  been
relentless  enmity,  and  predetermination  to  root  out  the
Israelites,  the  difference  might  easily  have  been  composed.
Moreover,  Mohammad  was  bound  by  treaty  to  deal  justly
and  amicably  with  the  tribe :  the  murderer  alone  was
'liable  to  retaliation.' ^  Indeed,  of  such  minor  importance
was  the  quarrel,  that  some  biographers  do  not  mention  it
at  all,  but  justify  the  attack  by  a  heavenly  message  revealing
Jewish  treachery.  The  violent  treatment  of  the  tribe
widened  also  to  some  extent  the  breach  between  the
Believers  and  the  disaffected  Citizens.  'Abdallah  thus
upbraided  'Obada  (both  were  principals  in  the  confederacy
with  the  Kainuka')  for  the  part  he  had  taken  in  abandoning
their  allies,  and  aiding  in  their  exile :  '  What !  art  thou  free
'  See  a7iie,  p.  115.  ^  See  ante^  p.  183.


XIII.]


RAID  OF  KOREISH  ON  MEDINA


243


from  the  oath,'  he  said,  'with  which  we  ratified  their  aUiance?
Hast  thou  forgotten  how  they  stood  by  us,  and  shed  for  us
their  blood,  on  such  and  such  a  field  ? ' — and  he  began
enumerating  the  engagements  in  which  they  had  fought
together.  'Obada  cut  him  short :  '  Hearts  have  changed,'
he  said,  '  Islam  hath  blotted  all  treaties  out'

After  the  expulsion  of  the  Beni  Kainuka',  Medina  enjoyed
a  month  of  repose.  It  was  then  thrown  into  alarm  by  a
petty  inroad  of  Koreish.^  Abu  Sufyan,  smarting  under  the
defeat  at  Bedr,  and  still  bound  by  his  oath  of  abstinence,
resolved,  by  way  of  revenge,  to  beard  his  enemies  at  their
very  doors.  Setting  out  with  200  mounted  followers,  he
took  the  eastern  road  skirting  the  tableland  of  Nejd,  and
arrived  by  night  at  the  settlement  of  the  Beni  an-NadIr,  one
of  the  Jewish  tribes  living  close  to  Medina.  Refused
admittance  by  their  chief  Huyei,  Abu  Sufyan  repaired  to
another  leading  man  of  the  same  tribe,  who  furnished  him
with  intelligence  regarding  Medina,  and  hospitably  enter-
tained his  party  during  the  night.  When  the  dawn  was
about  to  break,  the  party  moved  stealthily  forward,  and  fell
upon  the  corn-fields  and  palm-gardens  two  or  three  miles
north-east  of  the  city.  Some  of  these,  with  their  farm-
houses, they  burned  to  the  ground,  and  killed  two  of  the
cultivators.  Then,  holding  his  vow  fulfilled,  Abu  Sufyan
hurried  back  to  Mecca.  Meanwhile,  the  alarm  was  raised  in
Medina,  and  Mohammad  hastened,  at  the  head  of  the
Citizens,  in  pursuit.  To  accelerate  their  flight,  Koreish  cast
away  their  wallets  filled  with  meal  (whence  the  name  of  the
expedition),  which  were  picked  up  by  the  pursuers.  After
an  absence  of  five  days,  Mohammad  returned  from  the
fruitless  chase.  And  shortly  after,  he  celebrated  the  first
festival  of  the  ^Id  al-Adha,  already  described.

During  the  summer  and  autumn,  two  or  three  expedi-
tions were  undertaken  against  the  tribes  inhabiting  the  plain
east  of  Medina.^  These  were  of  minor  interest  in  their
immediate  results,  but  are  significant  of  the  widening  circle
of  the  struggle. The  Juheina  and  other  tribes  on  the  sea-

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  543  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1364  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  94  ;  Ibn
Sa'd,  p.  20.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  543;  At-Tabari,  i.  1363;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  95;  Ibn
Sa'd,  p.  21.


Affair  of
the  Mea/bags,
petty  attack
by  Abu
Sufyan.
A.H.  II.
April,  A.D.
624


Expedition
to  Karkarat
al-Kudr,
against  the
Ghatafan
and  Suleim.
A.H.  III.
May,  A.D.
624


544


THE  YEAR  AFTER  BEDR


[chap.


Second  ex-
pedition
against  the
Ghatafan,
to  Dhu
Amar.
June


And  against
the  Suleim,
to  Bahran.
August


coast  being  already  in  the  interest  of  Mohammad,  the  Syrian
trade  by  that  route  was  now  absolutely  barred.  There
remained  the  eastern  route  to  Babylonia.  This  passed
through  the  territories  of  two  powerful  nomad  tribes,  Suleim
and  Ghatafan,  both  allied  to  Koreish  and  employed  by  them
as  carriers.  They  inhabited  part  of  the  great  plain  of  Nejd,
in  the  centre  of  the  Peninsula.  There  the  Beni  Suleim  had
their  headquarters  in  a  fruitful  plain,  the  seventh  station
from  Mecca  on  the  caravan  route  which  crosses  the  table-
land to  the  head  of  the  Persian  Gulf.  Koreish  now  turned
their  eyes  towards  this  territory,  and  entered  into  closer
bonds  with  the  tribes  inhabiting  it.  Henceforth  the  attitude
of  the  Suleim  and  Ghatafan,  especially  of  the  former,  became
actively  hostile  towards  Mohammad.  Incited  by  Koreish,
and  by  the  example  of  Abu  Sufyan,  they  now  projected  a
plundering  attack  upon  Medina,  a  task  in  itself  congenial
with  their  predatory  habits.  Timely  intelligence  reached
Medina  that  they  had  begun  to  assemble  at  Karkarat  al-
Kudr  ;  Mohammad,  anticipating  their  design,  hastened  to
surprise  them,  at  the  head  of  200  men.  On  reaching  the  spot
he  found  it  deserted ;  but  a  herd  of  500  camels,  securely
feeding  under  charge  of  a  single  boy,  fell  into  his  hands,  and
was  divided  as  spoil  of  war.  The  boy  was  made  captive,  but
afterwards,  on  professing  faith  in  Mohammad,  released.

A  month  later,  the  Beni  Ghatafan  were  reported  to  be
again  collecting  troops  in  Nejd.  Heading  a  strong  force  of
450  men,  some  mounted  on  horses,  Mohammad  himself  pro-
ceeded to  disperse  them.  In  three  or  four  marches  he  reached
the  spot ;  but  the  enemy,  having  notice  of  his  approach,  had
retired  to  the  hills,  and  secured  in  fastnesses  their  families  and
cattle.  One  of  them,  who  was  met  on  the  road,  and  employed
as  a  guide,  embraced  Islam  and  was  spared.  In  efifecting  this
demonstration  Mohammad  was  absent  eleven  days.  In  the
autumn  he  led  another  attack,  at  the  head  of  three  hundred
followers,  against  the  Beni  Suleim,  who  still  maintained  a
threatening  attitude.  Arrived  at  their  rendezvous,  he  found
that  the  force  had  broken  up.  So,  after  staying  unavailingly
for  some  time  to  watch  the  autumn  caravans  of  Koreish  pro-
ceeding northwards,  he  returned  without  meeting  the  enemy.^

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  544  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1367  f. ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  100 ;  Ibn
Sa'd,  p.  23  f.


XIII.] PLUNDER  OF  RICH  KOREISHITE  CARAVAN  245

The  following  month  was  marked  by  a  more  successful  Zeid  plun-
affair.i  Koreish,  finding  the  seashore  closely  watched  by  a^Al-Karada.
Mohammad,  dared  not  expose  their  merchandise  to  the  September
perils  of  that  route.  They  were  reduced  to  great  straits.
'If  we  sit  still  at  home,' they  said,  '  we  shall  be  eating  up
our  capital ;  how  can  we  live,  unless  we  keep  up  the  winter
and  the  summer  caravans  ?  We  are  shut  out  from  the
coast;  let  us  try  the  eastern  road  by  Al-'Irak.'  Water  is
scarce  upon  this  route,  but  the  summer  was  now  past,  and,
moreover,  a  sufficient  supply  could  be  carried  on  camels
between  the  distant  wells.  Accordingly,  they  equipped
a  caravan  to  traverse  the  tableland  of  the  central  desert.
It  was  headed  by  Safwan,  and  Koreish  sent  much  property
with  him  for  barter,  chiefly  in  vessels  and  bars  of  silver.
An  Arab  guide  promised  to  lead  them  by  a  way  unknown
to  the  followers  of  Mohammad  ;  but  intelligence  of  the  rich
venture,  and  of  the  road  which  it  was  to  take,  reached  the
Prophet  through  an  Arab  who  chanced  to  visit  the  Jews  at
Medina ;  whereupon  Zeid  was  immediately  despatched  in
pursuit,  with  a  hundred  picked  and  well-mounted  men.  He
came  up  with  the  caravan,  and  fell  suddenly  upon  it.  The
leaders  of  Koreish  fled,  the  rest  were  overpowered,  and  all
the  merchandise  and  silver  were  carried  off,  with  one  or
two  prisoners,  to  Medina.  The  booty  was  valued  at  100,000
pieces ;  so  that,  after  appropriation  of  the  Prophet's  Fifth,
800  pieces  fell  to  the  lot  of  each  soldier.  The  guide  was
brought  to  Mohammad,  who  promised  him  liberty  if  he
would  believe.  He  embraced  Islam,  and  was  set  free.  This
was  the  first  occasion  on  which  the  Muslims  secured  the
rich  plunder  of  a  caravan.  Zeid  obtained  great  distinction
in  consequence,  and  thenceforward  became  a  favourite
commander.

No  further  expedition  took  place  this  year  ;  but I must Assassina-
not  omit  to  notice  another  of  those  dastardly  acts  of  cruelty  s'°nof  ai- '
which darken the pages of  the  Prophet's  life.^ Ka'b  ibn Ashraf.
al-Ashraf  was  the  son  of  a  Jewess  of  the  Beni  an-NadIr,  and j^j '  ^  ^^
with  that  tribe  appears  to  have  identified  himself He  was  624

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p. 547  ;  At-Tabari, i. 1373  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p. 100  f.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  24.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  548  ;  At-Tabari, 1368  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  95  f. ■  Ibn
Sa'd,  p.  21.


246  THE  YEAR  AFTER  BEDR  [chap.

a  '  proselyte  of  the  gate,'  and  is  said  to  have  followed
Mohammad  till  he  abandoned  Jerusalem  as  his  Kibla,  The
victory  of  Bedr  deeply  mortified  him,  in  common  with  other
ill-wishers  of  the  Prophet.  He  made  no  attempt  to  conceal
his  discontent ;  and  soon  after  proceeded  to  Mecca,  where,
being  a  poet,  he  stirred  up  Koreish  to  avenge  their  heroes
buried  in  the  pit  of  Bedr,  by  elegies  lamenting  their  hard
fate.  On  his  return  to  Medina  he  was  further  accused  of
disquieting  the  Muslims  by  the  publication  of  amatory
sonnets  addressed  to  certain  of  their  women — a  curious  and
favourite  mode  of  annoyanceamongst  the  Arabs.^  Mohammad,
apprehensive  that  the  free  expression  of  hostile  feeling  by
persons  of  such  influence  would  sap  his  authority  at  Medina,
made  no  secret  of  his  animosity  towards  Ka'b.  He  prayed
aloud  :  *  O  Lord^deliverme  from  the  son  ofAl-Ash^'af,  in  wJiat-
soever  way  it  seemeth  good  tinto  Thee,  because  of  his  open
sedition  and  his  verses^  But  instead  of  adopting  a  straight-
forward course,  he  prompted  his  followers,  as  on  previous
occasions,  to  take  his  life,  by  saying  to  them  :  '  Who  will
ease  me  of  the  son  of  Al-Ashraf?  for  he  troubleth  me.'
Mohammad,  son  of  Maslama,  replied  :  '  Here  am  I  ; — I  will
slay  him.'  Mohammad,  signifying  his  approval,  desired  him
to  take  counsel  with  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh,  chief  of  his  tribe,  the
Aus.  By  the  advice  of  Sa'd,  the  conspirator  chose  four
other  men  from  the  same  clan  as  accomplices,  and,  taking
them  to  Mohammad,  obtained  his  sanction  to  their  plan  of

'  The  following  couplets  are  quoted  in  support  of  the  accusation  : —

Alas  my  heart ! Wilt  thou  pass  on  ? WiH  thou  not  tarry  to  praise  her  ?

Wilt  thou  leave  Um  al-Fadl  deserted  ?
Of  saffron  colour  is  she  :  so  full  of  charms,  that  if  thou  wert  to  clasp  her,  there

would  be  pressed  forth  Wine,  Henna,  and  Katam  ;  *
So  slim  that  her  figure,  from ankle  to  shoulder,  bends  as she  desires  to  stand

upright,  and  cannot.
When  we  met  she  caused me  to  forget  (my  own  wife)  Um  Hallm,  although  the

cord  that  bindeth  me  to  her  is  not  to  be  broken.
Sprung  of  the  Beni  'Amir  my  heart  is  mad  with  the  love  of  her  ;  and  if  she  chose

she  could  cure  Ka'b  of  his  sickness.
She  is  the  Princess  of  women  ;  and  her  father  the Prince  of  his  tribe,  the  Enter-
tainer of  strangers,  the  Fulfiller  of  promises.
I  never  saw  the  sun  appear  by  night,  except  on  one  dark  evening  when  she  came

forth  unto  me  in  all  her  splendour.f

*  The  elements  of  beauty;  rHd,  yellow,  and  black.  t  At-Tabari,  i.  13(39.


XIII.] ASSASSINATION  OF  KA'B,  SON  OF  AL-ASHRAF 247

throwing  the  victim  off  his  guard  by  fair  words  and  pretence
of  unfriendliness  to  the  Prophet's  rule.  Abu  Na'ila,  foster-
brother  of  Ka'b,  being  deputed  to  pave  the  way,  complained
to  him  of  the  calamities  and  poverty  which  the  advent  of
Mohammad  had  brought  upon  them,  and  begged  that  he
would  advance  corn  and  dates  for  the  sustenance  of  himself
and  a  party  like-minded  with  him.  Ka'b,  taken  in  the
snare,  demanded  security ;  Abu  Na'ila  agreed  that  they
should  pledge  their  arms,  and  appointed  a  late  hour  of
meeting  at  the  house  of  Ka'b,  when  the  bargain  would  be
completed.  Towards  evening  the  conspirators  assembled
at  the  house  of  Mohammad.  It  was  a  bright  moonlight
night,  and  the  Prophet  accompanied  them  to  the  outskirts
of  the  town.  As  they  emerged  from  the  low  shrubs  of  the
Muslim  burying-ground,  he  bade  them  god-speed  :  '  Go ! '
said  he ;  '  the  blessing  of  God  be  with  you,  and  assistance
from  on  High!'  The  house  of  Ka'b  was  near  one  of  the
Jewish  suburbs,  two  or  three  miles  from  the  city.  When
they  reached  it  he  had  retired  to  rest.  Abu  Na'ila  called
aloud  for  him  to  come  down,  and  Ka'b  started  from  his
couch.  His  bride  (for  he  had  been  lately  married,  and  the
biographers  omit  nothing  that  adds  to  the  heartlessness  of
the  affair)  caught  him  by  the  skirt,  and  warned  him  not  to
go.  '  It  is  but  my  brother  Abu  Na'ila,'  he  said ;  and,  as  he
pulled  the  garment  from  her,  gaily  added  the  verse :  '  Shall
a  warrior  be  challenged  and  not  respond  ? '  Descending,  he
was  not  alarmed  to  find  the  party  armed,  as  the  weapons
were  to  be  left  with  him  in  pledge.  They  wandered  along,
conversing  on  the  misfortunes  of  Medina,  till  they  reached  a
waterfall,  and  upon  its  bank  they  proposed  to  pass  some
part  of  the  moonlight  night.  Meanwhile,  his  foster-brother,
having  thrown  his  arm  around  Ka'b,  was  familiarly  drawing
his  hand  through  his  long  locks,  and  praising  their  sweet
scent,  which  Ka'b  said  was  that  of  his  bride.  Suddenly  the
traitor  seized  his  hair,  and  dragging  him  to  the  ground,
shouted!  ''Slay  him  I  Slay  the  enemy  of  God!'  Drawing
their  swords,  they  fell  upon  the  victim.  The  wretched  man
clung  so  close  to  his  foster-brother  that  he  was  with  difficulty
put  to  death.  As  he  received  the  fatal  wound  he  uttered
a  fearful  scream,  which  resounded  far  and  near  amongst  the
strongholds  of  the  Jews,  and  lights  were  seen  at  the  windows


assassination


248  THE  YEAR  AFTER  BEDR  [chap.

of  the  affrighted  inhabitants.  The  assassins,  fearful  of  pursuit,
retired  in  haste,  carrying  in  their  arms  one  of  their  number
who  had  received  two  sword-cuts  aimed  at  Ka'b.  As  they
regained  the  burying-ground,  they  shouted  the  well-known
tekbtr,  '  Great  is  the  Lord  ' ;  which  Mohammad  hearing  knew
that  their  work  had  been  successfully  accomplished.  At
the  gate  of  the  Mosque  he  met  them,  saying :  '  Welcome ;
for  your  countenances  beam  of  victory.'  '  And  thine  also,
O  Prophet,'  they  exclaimed,  as  they  cast  the  ghastly  head
of  their  victim  at  his  feet.  Then  Mohammad  praised
God  for  what  had  been  done,  and  comforted  the  wounded
man.
Reflections  I  have  been  thus  minute  in  the  details  of  the  murder  of

on  Ka'b's  Ka'b,  as  it  faithfully  illustrates  the  ruthless  fanaticism  into
which  the  teaching  of  the  Prophet  was  fast  drifting.  It  was
a  spirit  too  congenial  with  the  passions  of  the  Arabs  not  to
be  immediately  caught  up  by  his  followers.  The  strong
religious  impulse  under  which  they  acted  hurried  them  into
excesses  of  barbarous  treachery,  and  justified  that  treachery
by  the  interests  of  Islam  and  approval  of  the  Deity.  I  am
far  from  asserting  that  every  detail  in  the  foregoing  narrative,
either  of  instigation  by  Mohammad,  or  of  deception  by
the  assassin,  is  beyond  question.  The  actors,  indeed,  in
such  scenes  were  not  slow  to  magnify  and  embellish  their
own  services  at  the  expense  of  their  imagination.  There
may  also  have  been  the  desire  to  justify  an  act  of  perfidy
that  startled  even  the  loose  morality  of  the  day,  by  casting
the  burden  of  it  on  the  infallible  Prophet.  But,  after  due
weight  given  to  both  considerations,  enough  remains  to
prove  some  of  the  worst  features  of  assassination,  and  the
presumption  that  these  were  countenanced,  if  not  in  some
instances  directly  prompted,  by  Mohammad  himself.^

1  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  some  Muslims  were  at  times  scandal-
ised by  crimes  like  this  ;  though  it  is  not  in  the  nature  of  tradition  to
preserve  the  record  of  what  they  said.  The  present  is  one  of  the  few
occasions  on  which  such  murmurs  have  come  to  light.  When  Merwan
was  Governor  of  Medina,  he  one  day  asked  Benjamin,  a  convert  from
Ka'b's  tribe,  in  what  manner  Ka'b  met  his  death.  'By  guile  and  perfidy,'
said  Benjamin.  Now  Mohammad,  son  of  Maslama  (the  assassin),  by  this
time  a  very  aged  man,  was  sitting  by.  He  exclaimed:  'What,  O
Merwan  !  could  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord,  thinkest  thou,  be  guilty  of
perfidy? By  the  Lord  ! we  did  not  kill  him  but  by  command  of  the


XIII.]


MURDER  OF  IBN  SUNEINA


>49


On  the  morning  after  the  murder  of  Ka'b,  Mohammad,
exasperated  at  the  opposition  (or,  as  tradition  puts  it,  the
treachery)  of  the  Jews,  accorded  a  general  permission  to  his
followers  to  slay  them  wherever  met.  Accordingly,  Muheisa,
having  encountered  Ibn  Suneina,  a  Jewish  merchant,  slew
him,  though  a  confederate  of  his  tribe.'  The  occurrence
is  alluded  to  by  the  biographers  rather  for  the  purpose  of
explaining  the  sudden  conversion  of  the  assassin's  brother
Huweisa,  than  to  record  the  murder  of  a  petty  Jewish  trader.
When  Huweisa  upbraided  his  brother  for  killing  the  con-
federate Jew,  and  appropriating  his  wealth  ; — '  By  the  Lord  ! '
replied  Muheisa,  '  if  he  that  commanded  me  to  kill  him  had
commanded  to  kill  thee  also,  I  would  have  done  it.'  '  What ! '
Huweisa  cried ;  '  wouldst  thou  have  slain  thine  own  brother
at  Mohammad's  bidding  ?  '  '  Even  so,'  answered  the  fanatic
'  Strange  indeed ! '  Huweisa  responded ;  '  hath  the  new
religion  reached  to  this?  Verily,  it  is  a  wonderful  faith.'
And  Huweisa  was  converted  from  that  very  hour.  The
progress  of  Islam  begins  to  stand  out  in  unenviable  contrast
with  that  of  early  Christianity.  Converts  were  gained  to
the  faith  of  Jesus  by  witnessing  the  constancy  with  which
its  confessors  suffered  death ;  they  were  gained  to  Islam
by  the  spectacle  of  the  readiness  with  which  its  adherents
inflicted  death.  In  the  one  case  conversion  imperilled  the
believer's  life;  in  the  other,  it  was  the  only  means  of
saving  it.

The  Jews  were  now  in  extreme  alarm.  None  ventured
abroad.  Every  family  lived  in  fear  of  a  night  attack  ;  every
individual  dreaded  the  fate  of  Ka'b  and  Ibn  Suneina.  A
deputation  of  their  principal  men  waited  upon  Mohammad
and  complained  that  he  had  treacherously  cut  off  one  of
their chiefs without fault or  apparent cause. '  Had  Ka'b

Prophet.  I  swear  that  no  roof,  save  that  of  the  Mosque,  shall  hereafter
cover  thee  and  me.'  Then,  turning  to  Benjamin,  he  swore  that  if  he  had
had  a  sword  in  his  hand,  he  would  have  cut  off  his  head.  The
unfortunate  Benjamin  could  not  thenceforward  quit  his  house  without
first  sending  a  messenger  to  see  that  Mohammad  was  out  of  the  way  ;
but  one  day  he  was  caught  at  a  funeral  by  Mohammad,  who  seized  a
bundle  of  date  branches  from  a  woman  passing  by,  and  broke  them
every  one  over  the  face  and  back  of  Benjamin.  Thus  were  murmurers
against  such  acts  silenced  in  the  early  days  of  Islam.

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  553  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1372  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  97  f.


Murder
of  Ibn
Suneina,  a
Jew,


Causes  con-
version of
the  mur-
derer's
brother


New  treaty
with  the
Jews


250


THE  YEAR  AFTER  BEDR


[chap.


Mohammad

marries

Hafsa,

A.H.'lII.

November,

A.D.  624


Marriage  of
Fatima  with
'All,  A.D.
624  ;  birth  of
Al-Hasan
and  Al-
ii osein


conducted  himself,'  replied  Mohammad,  *as  ye  have  done,
he  would  not  have  been  cut  off.  But  he  offended  me  by
his  seditious  speeches  and  his  evil  poetry.  And  if  any  one
amongst  you,'  he  added,  '  doth  the  same,  verily  the  sword
shall  be  again  unsheathed.'  At  the  same  time  he  invited
them  to  enter  into  a  fresh  compact  with  him,  such  as  he
might  deem  sufficient  for  the  interests  of  Islam.  So  a  new
treaty  was  written  out  and  deposited  with  'All.  Nevertheless,
adds  Al-Wakidi,  the  Jews  thenceforward  lived  (as  well  they
might)  in  a  state  of  depression  and  disquietude.

Towards  the  close  of  the  year  624  the  Prophet  took  to
himself  a  third  wife,  Hafsa,  the  daughter  of  'Omar,  then
about  twenty  years  of  age.  She  was  the  widow  of  Khoneis,
an  early  convert,  who  had  died  six  or  seven  months  previously.
By  this  marriage  Mohammad  not  only  gratified  the  passion
for  fresh  espousals,  a  leading  feature  of  his  advancing  years,
but  bound  himself  closer  in  friendship  to  her  father  'Omar.
Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar  were  now  connected  equally  with
the  Prophet,  and  through  their  daughters  had_  access  to
his  ear.  There  was  much  rivalry  between  'A'isha  and
Hafsa ;  but  youth,  vivacity,  and  beauty  maintained  the
supremacy  of  'A'isha,

The  marriages  contracted  by  Mohammad  at  Medina  were
all  unfruitful.  But  meanwhile  his  house  was  built  up  in  the
female  line  of  Khadlja's  progeny.  We  hear  of  no  issue,
certainly  of  none  that  survived,  by  his  daughters  Zeinab  and
Um  Kulthum,  though  the  name  of  the  latter  would  imply
maternity.  Rokeiya  bore  'Othman  a  son,  two  or  three  years
before  the  Flight,  but  his  eyes  were  pecked  out  at  Medina
by  a  fowl,  and  he  died  still  a  child.  It  was  through  Fatima
alone  that  the  Prophet's  race,  the  famous  Seiyids  or  nobility
of  Islam,  was  to  be  perpetuated.  'All  was  now  five-and-
twenty  years  of  age.  Though  not  above  middle  stature,  he
was  broad  and  powerful  in  make,  with  a  ruddy  complexion,
and  a  thick  and  comely  beard.  He  had  already  given
proof  of  daring  gallantry  and  prowess  on  the  field  of  Bedr.
Endowed  with  a  clear  intellect,  warm  in  affection,  and
confiding  in  friendship,  he  was  from  boyhood  devoted  heart
and  soul  to  the  Prophet.  Simple,  quiet,  and  unambitious,
when  in  after  days  he  obtained  the  rule  of  half  the  Muslim
world,  it  was  rather  thrust  upon  him  than  sought. Shortly


'^"^•1  'ALT  MARRIES  FATIMA  251

after  the  field  of  Bedr  (some  authorities  say  before  it)
Mohammad  gave  him  the  hand  of  Fatima  his  youngest
daughter,  now  seventeen  or  eighteen  years  of  age  in
marriage.  Within  the  next  twelve  months  she  gave'' birth
to  Al-Hasan,  the  first  grandson  born  to  Mohammad  that
survived,  and  the  year  after  to  Al-Hosein  ;-names  famous
m  Islam.


Koreish
resolve  to
avenge
defeat  at
Bedr


Mohammad
receives
intimation
from  Al-

'Abbas


Koreish
march  from
Mecca.
A.H.  III.
January,
A.D.  621;


CHAPTER XIV

THE BATTLE OF OHOD  ^

Shauwdl,  A.H.  III. —  January,  A.D.  625

/ETAT.  56

The  third  year  of  Mohammad's  life  at  Medina  had  nearly
closed,  and  the  winter  had  again  set  in,  when  a  storm  clouded
the  horizon.  Twelve  months  had  elapsed  since  the  battle  of
Bedr.  The  cry  of  revenge  had  ever  since  resounded  in  the
valley  of  Mecca  ;  and  the  long-suspended  threat  was  now
put  into  execution.

Rumours  of  a  threatened  attack  had  for  some  time  been
reaching  Mohammad ;  but  the  first  authentic  notice  of
impending  invasion  with  a  sealed  letter  placed  in  his  hands,
while  at  the  Mosque  in  Koba,  by  a  messenger  from  Mecca.
It  was  from  his  uncle  Al-'Abbas,  who,  as  usual  holding  with
both  sides,  had  engaged  the  courier,  by  a  high  reward,  to
deliver  it  in  three  days.  The  letter,  read  aloud  on  the  spot,
contained  the  startling  intelligence  that  Koreish,  3,000
strong,  were  on  the  point  of  marching.  Mohammad  enjoined
secrecy ;  but  the  tidings  could  not  be  suppressed.  The
Prophet  communicated  the  news  privately  to  Sa'd,  the
Khazraji  '  Leader,'  and  his  wife  overheard  it.  Whether  thus,
or  otherwise,  the  coming  attack  was  soon  noised  abroad,  and
caused  great  excitement,  especially  among  the  Jews  and
those  who  sympathised  with  them.

The  movement  did,  indeed,  justify  alarm.  Koreish  had
unanimously  agreed  to  devote  the  profits  of  the  caravan,
whose  precious  freight  was  still  retained  in  the  Council- Hall
as  it  were  in  bond,  and  for  which  so  much  blood  had  been

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  555  ff. ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1383  ff. ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  loi  ff. ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  25  IT.

252


CHAP.  XIV] KOREISH  MARCH  AGAINST  MEDINA  253

shed  at  Bedr,  towards  avenging  their  defeat.  These  profits
amply  sufficed  for  the  equipment  and  provisioning  of  a  great
army.  Emissaries  were  despatched  throughout  the  Bedawl
tribes,  connected  with  Koreish  by  alliance  or  descent,
inviting  them  to  join  the  enterprise.  At  length,  in  the
month  of  January,  they  commenced  their  march,  3,000
strong ;  700  were  mailed  warriors,  and  200  well-mounted
cavalry ;  the  remainder  rode  on  camels.  The  Beni  Zuhra
(who  had,  on  the  previous  occasion,  retired  before  reaching
Bedr)  alone  remained  behind  ;  but  the  army  was  reinforced
by  100  men  from  At-Ta'if.  The  chiefs  of  Koreish  all  joined
the  force.  After  a  sharp  discussion,  women  were  allowed  to
accompany  them ;  and  fifteen,  including  two  wives  of  Abu
Sufyan,  availed  themselves  of  the  permission.  Taking
timbrels  in  their  hands,  they  sang  to  their  wild  cadence  songs
of  vengeance  for  kinsmen  slain  at  Bedr.  Foremost,  Hind,
the  wife  of  Abu  Sufyan,  thirsting  for  the  blood  of  Hamza
who  slew  her  father  in  that  field,  had  engaged  an  Ethiopian^
with  his  deadly  javelin,  to  make  sure  of  her  victim.  There
was  also  with  the  army  a  band  of  Medina  citizens  under  Abu
'Amir,  'the  Monk,'  who,  it  will  be  remembered,  went  over  to
Mecca  in  disgust  at  the  enthusiastic  reception  of  Mohammad,
and  now  boasted  that  his  simple  presence  with  the  army
would  produce  an  immediate  reaction  amongst  his  former
fellow-citizens.

The  army  took  the  ordinary  route  by  the  seashore,  and.  And  en
after  ten  days,  reached Dhu'l-Huleifa,  in  the  valley  of  Al- ScSnT'
«Aklk,  about  five miles  west  of  Medina. It  was  Thursday Thursday
morning ; and the  same  day,  fetching  a  circuit  to  the  left,
and  then  marching  northward  for  a  few  miles,  they  encamped
in  the  fertile  plain  beneath  the  hill  of  Ohod. The  corn  was
cut  down  as  forage  for  the  horses  ;  and  the  camels,  set  loose
to  graze,  trampled  the  rich  fields  around. Friday  was  passed Friday
inactively. Between the city and the plain  were several
rocky  ridges,  which  rendered  it  secure  from  direct  attack  on
that  side ;  but  the  Syrian  highway,  sweeping  eastward  under
Ohod,  and  then  south,  reached  the  northern  suburb  by  an
easy  circuit. Koreish  feared  to  advance  by  this  route,  as  the
houses upon it afforded their adversaries a position of
dangerous  offence. They  hoped  rather  to  draw  them  to  the
outskirts,  and  overpower  them  there  by  superior  numbers  upon


254


BATTLE  OF  OHOD


[chap.


Proceedings
in  Medina.
Thursday


Resolution
to  remain
within  the
city.

Friday


equal  ground.  Perhaps,  also,  they  expected  by  delay  to  create
some  dangerous  diversion  in  the  city.

Meanwhile  Mohammad,  by  his  spies,  was  kept  apprised
of  the  enemy's  movements.  Al-Hobab  reconnoitred  their
camp  and  brought  back  an  alarming  estimate  of  its  strength,
which  the  Prophet  desired  him  to  keep  secret.  The  farmers,
with  their  cattle  and  their  stuff,  had  affected  a  timely  retreat;
but  the  destruction  of  their  fields  was  a  trial  sore  to  bear.
Still,  there  was  no  ebullition  of  feeling  against  Mohammad  as
the  cause  of  their  misfortune.  Indeed,  so  great  was  the  hold
he  had  already  gained,  that,  the  elements  of  disaffection  not-
withstanding, he  was  at  once  recognised  throughout  the  city
as  the  leader  and  director  in  its  defence.  Several  chief  men,
with  an  armed  band  of  Citizens,  posted  themselves  at  the
great  Mosque,  and  kept  watch  throughout  the  night  by  his
door.  The  sleep  of  Mohammad  was  troubled.  He  dreamed
that,  securely  clad  in  mail,  he  rode  upon  a  ram,  when
suddenly  his  sword  was  broken  at  its  point,  and  a  steer  was
slaughtered  in  his  sight.

The  next  day,  Friday,  the  people  came  together,  and
Mohammad  discussed  with  them  the  course  to  be  pursued.
He  told  them  of  his  dream.  '  The  fracture  in  my  sword
portendeth  an  injury  to  myself,'  he  said  ;  '  the  slaughter  of
the  steer,  some  damage  to  the  people ;  riding  upon  the  ram
signifieth  carnage  amongst  the  enemy ;  and  the  impenetrable
coat  of  mail  is  Medina  fortified  and  safe.  Within  the  city
we  are  secure:  without  it  there  is  risk  and  danger.'  In  this
opinion  the  men  of  years  and  wisdom,  both  Citizens  and
Refugees,  agreed.  'Abdallah  ibn  Obei,  who,  notwithstanding
his  jealousy  of  Mohammad,  was  equally  concerned  in  the
defence,  strongly  supported  the  views  of  Mohammad :  '  O
Prophet !  Our  city,'  he  said,  '  is  a  virgin  inviolate.  Quitting
it,  we  have  ever  suffered  loss  :  remaining,  we  have  beaten
back  attack.  Leave  Koreish  alone.  If  they  remain,  it  will
be  in  evil  case.  At  length,  frustrated  in  their  designs,  they
will  retire.'  It  was  resolved  accordingly  to  bring  all  outlying
inhabitants  within  the  walls,  and,  if  Koreish  should  venture
near,  to  drive  them  back  by  a  galling  discharge  of  arrows
and  stones  from  the  walls  and  house-tops.

The  decision  was  displeasing  to  the  younger  and  more
impetuous  Citizens. '  Shall  we  sit  quietly  here,'  they  asked


XIV.] DECISION  TO  GIVE  BATTLE  TO  KOREISH  255

indignantly, 'a  laughing-stock  to  all  Arabia,  and  look  on  in Set  aside  by
patience  while  our  possessions  are  ravaged  all  around  ? Dis-  youngs"
grace  will  cleave  to  us  ever  after,  and  the  enemy,  emboldened,  converts
will  repeat  the  insult. Nay,  we  will  go  forth  and  smite  our
foes,  even  as  we  did at Bedr.'^ There  were not  wanting
men  even  among  the Refugees  who sided  with  this  party,
and  their  ardour  was  so  great  that  Mohammad  against  his
better judgment at last gave way, and announced his
readiness  to offer battle. Ascending the pulpit for the
weekly  service  (the  day  was  Friday)  he  stirred  up  the  people,
in  his  discourse,  to  fight  courageously:  'If ye  be  steadfast,'
he  said,  '  the  Lord  will  grant  you  victory.' Then  he  com-
manded to  make  ready  for  the  battle. The  most  part  re-
joiced greatly,  but  some  were  grieved  that  the  first  decision
had  been  set  aside.

By  the  time  the  afternoon  prayer  was  ended,  the  people Mohammad
had  assembled  in  the  court  of  the  Mosque,  armed  for  battle, l"^^^^  .^'^
Mohammad  then  retired  with  Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar,  to  make
ready. In  a  little  while  he  issued  from  his  chamber  clad  in

^  As  usual,  we  are  overwhelmed  with  anecdotes  of  believers  bent  on
martyrdom,  and  dreams  and  pious  anticipations  of  rewards  to  be  enjoyed
in  Paradise.  These  are  the  growth  of  after  years  ;  the  halo  pictured  by
tradition  around  the  martyr's  head.  There  were  nevertheless  worldly
motives  enough  to  justify  this  party  in  their  desire  to  go  forth.  The
Citizens  were  grieved  at  the  occupation  of  their  fields  ;  the  barley  crops
were  being  destroyed,  and  the  season  for  sowing  was  passing  away.
Even  Hamza  joined  them  on  political  considerations.  '  We  fear,'  he  said,
'lest  Koreish  should  attribute  our  backwardness  to  cowardice,  and  that
it  will  embolden  them  ever  after.  We  were  but  few  at  Bedr,  and  we  are
many  now.  Verily,  this  is  the  day  we  have  longed  and  prayed  to  the
Lord  for  ;  and  now  He  hath  driven  the  enemy  as  a  prey  into  our  very
midst.'

Some  specimens  of  the  martyr  spirit  may  interest  the  reader.  One
said  to  Mohammad  :  'The  slaughtered  steer  thou  sawest  was  an  emblem
of  the  dead  amongst  thy  followers,  and  verily  I  shall  be  of  the  number  ;
wherefore,  hinder  me  not  from  Paradise.  Let  us  go  forth  ;  surely,  by  the
one  God !  I  shall  quickly  enter  therein.'  Again,  Khaithama  told
Mohammad  that  his  son,  whom  he  had  lost  at  Bedr,  appeared  to  him  in
his  sleep  ; — 'A  goodly  appearance  truly  he  had  ;  he  described  to  me  the
blessedness  of  Paradise  ;  all  is  true  that  our  Lord  hath  promised  ;  and  he
besought  me  to  come  quickly,  and  be  his  companion  there.  And  now,
verily,  I  am  old,  and  long  for  the  meeting  with  my  Lord.  Pray,  there-
fore, that  God  would  grant  me  martyrdom,  and  reunite  me  with  my  son.'
So  Mohammad  prayed  ;  and  Khaithama  was  slain  at  Ohod.  Such  are
the  tales  which  tradition  delights  to  embellish  or  haply  to  create.


256  BATTLE  OF  OHOD  [chap.

mail  and  helmet,  his  sword  hanging  from  a  leathern  girdle,'^
and  shield  slung  over  his  shoulder.  The  Citizens,  seeing  him
thus  accoutred,  repented  of  their  rash  remonstrance,  and
prayed  that  he  would  even  now  do  as  seemed  good  to  him.
But  it  was  too  late.  '  I  invited  you  to  this,'  he  said,  '  and  ye
would  not.  It  becometh  not  a  prophet,  when  once  he  hath
girded  himself  to  the  battle,  to  lay  his  armour  down  again
until  the  Lord  hath  decided  betwixt  him  and  his  enemies.
Wait,  therefore,  on  the  Lord.  Only  be  steadfast,  and  He
will  send  you  victory.'
Marches  So  saying,  he  called  for  three  lances,  and  fixed  banners

from  Medina,  ypQj^  them. One  for  the  Refugees  he  gave  to  Mus'ab,  the

and  halts.  ^ ,  , ,  . ,  , i i  r i  a  i tVi  •

Friday  night  second  and  third  to  the  leaders  ot  the  Aus  and  Khazraj.
'Abdallah  ibn  Um  Mektum  (the  blind  man  of  whom  we
read  at  Mecca)  was  appointed  to  command  the  city,  and
lead  the  public  prayers.  Just  then  the  bier  of  a  Citizen
was  brought  into  the  Mosque.  Mohammad  pronounced  over
it  the  usual  service ;  then  mounting  his  horse,  and  surrounded
by  his  followers,  he  took  the  road  to  Ohod.  There  was  but
one  other  horse  with  the  Muslim  army.  Arrived  at  an
eminence,  the  Prophet  turned  round  and  saw  following,  amid
the  palm  plantations  on  the  right,  a  rude  and  disorderly
band  of  men,  and  being  told  that  they  were  the  Jewish
confederates  of  'Abdallah  ibn  Obei,  he  commanded  that  they
should  go  back ;  '  for,'  said  he,  '  ye  shall  not  seek  the  aid  of
Unbelievers  to  fight  against  the  unbelieving.'  He  then
passed  onwards  to  Esh-Sheikhain,  half-way  to  Ohod,^  and
having  reviewed  the  force,  and  sent  back  some  striplings
unequal  to  the  fight,  there  halted  for  the  night.  'Abdallah
ibn  Obei,  with  his  followers,  encamped  near  at  hand ;  but,
displeased  at  the  rejection  of  his  advice,  and  also  at  the
unfriendly  treatment  of  his  Jewish  friends,  kept  sullenly
aloof.  Mohammad  passed  the  night  with  the  Beni  an-Najjar,
and  a  guard  of  faithful  followers  was  stationed  over  him.
Mohammad,  son  of  Maslama,  patrolled  the  camp  with  fifty

^  This  girdle  was  preserved  and  handed  down  in  the  family  of  Abu
Rafi',  Mohammad's  servant.

2  Burckhardt  notices  it  as  'a  ruined  edifice  of  stones  or  bricks,' a  mile
from  the  town,  'where  Mohammad  put  on  his  coat  of  mail' ;  i.e.  on  the
following  morning.  '  Farther  on,'  he  tells  us,  there  is  a  stone  where  the
Prophet  'leaned  for  a  few  minutes  on  his  way  to  Ohod.'


XIV.]  MOHAMMAD  HALTS  AT  OHOD  257

men.  A  similar  duty  was  performed  for  Koreish  by  'Ikrima
with  a  troop  of  horse ;  these  approached  close  enough  to
alarm  the  Muslims  by  their  neighing,  but  did  not  venture
over  the  ridge  which  still  separated  the  two  armies.

At  early  dawn  the  army  of  Medina,  1,000  strong,  was  in Mohoammad
motion. In  the  dim morning  light they  marched,  by  the ohoj'^an?
nearest  path,  through  the  intervening  fields  and gardens,^  draws  up
and emerged upon  the  sandy  plain  beneath the  peaks  of  ^^^^°^
Ohod. The  vicinity  owes  its  verdure  to  a  watercourse,  which Saturday,
carries  off  the  drainage  of  the  country  lying  to  the  south  and January
east The  hill  of  Ohod,  three  miles  distant  from  Medina,  is A.n.  624
a rugged and almost insulated offshoot  of  the  mountain
range,  projecting  eastward  for  three  or  four  miles  into  the
plain. The  torrent,  sometimes  swollen  so  as  quite  to  inun-
date the  adjacent  tract,  sweeps  along  its  southern  and  western
face,  and  discharges  its  flood  into  the  GJidba,  or  low  basin
lying  beyond. Now  dry,  its  course  was  marked  only  by  deep
sand and  scattered stones. On  the  farther  bank,  upon  a
slightly  sloping  plain,  bare  and  stony,  over  which,  as  Burton
tells us,  'the seared  and jagged  flanks  of  Ohod  rise  like
masses  of  iron,'  Mohammad  halted  his  army. By  this  time
it  was  daylight,  and,  although  the  columns  of  the  enemy  were
in  sight,  the  cry  for  morning  prayers  was  raised  by  Bilal,  and
the whole army,  led by the Prophet,  prostrated itself  in
worship. 'Abdallah ibn Obei at this moment wheeled
suddenly round, and, deserting the army with his 300
followers,  took  the  road  back  to  the  city. Mohammad  was
thus  left  with  but  700  followers,  of  whom  only  a  hundred
were  clad  in  mail ;  but  they  were  all  true  men,  and,  fighting
in  what  they  believed  to  be  the  cause  of  God,  they  boldly
faced a well-appointed enemy four times their number.
Advancing,  they  occupied  the  rising  ground  in  front ;  their

1  As  he  passed  through  one  of  these  gardens,  its  owner,  a  blind  man,
murmured  at  the  injury  to  his  property,  and  cast  dust  at  Mohammad.
One  of  the  Aus  sprang  up  and  beat  him.  A  chief  of  the  Khazraj  resented
the  affront,  and  a  fierce  contention  arose.  It  was  ended  by  a  savage
threat  from  Oseid,  the  Ausite  '  Leader,'  who  said  that  had  he  not  known
that  it  would  be  displeasing  to  Mohammad,  he  would  have  cut  the  blind
man's  head  off.  There  must,  no  doubt,  have  been  difficulty  in  keeping
down  these  intestine  quarrels  and  jealousies,  though,  in  the  hands  of  a
skilful  administrator  like  Mohammad,  they  were  really  elements  of
power.

R


2s8


BATTLE  OF  OHOD


[chap.


Army  of

Mecca

advances


Battle  opens
with  single
combats


rear  was  thus  protected  by  the  frowning  heights  of  Ohod,
excepting  on  the  left,  where  the  rocks,  receding,  afforded  the
enemy  a  dangerous  opening,  suited  to  the  movements  of  the
Koreishite  horse,  Mohammad,  therefore,  posted  on  an  ad-
joining eminence  the  flower  of  his  archery,  and  gave  their
leader  stringent  orders  on  no  possible  contingency  to  quit
the  spot,  but  steadily  to  check  any  attempts  which  Koreish
might  make  to  turn  his  flank  :  '  Guard  our  rear,'  he  said,
'and  stir  not  from  this  spot:  if  ye  see  us  pursuing  and
plundering  the  enemy,  join  not  with  us :  if  we  be  pursued
and  even  worsted,  do  not  venture  to  our  aid.'  Then  he  drew
out  his  line,  facing  towards  Medina ; — Mus'ab,  with  the
Refugee  standard,  being  in  the  centre,  and  the  Aus  and
Khazraj  clans  forming  either  wing.  He  forbade  his  followers
to  engage  the  enemy  till  he  gave  command  ;  for  he  knew
that  the  strength  of  his  position  would  be  sacrificed  by  a
premature  advance.  Having  thus  disposed  his  force,  he  put
on  a  second  coat  of  mail,  and  calmly  awaited  the  enemy's
approach.

Meanwhile  Abu  Sufyan,  as  hereditary  leader,  brought  up
the  Meccan  army  ;  and,  facing  Ohod,  marshalled  it  in  front  of
the  Muslim  line.  The  banner,  which  had  been  duly  mounted
on  its  standard  in  the  Council-Hall  at  Mecca,  was  borne
by  Talha,  grandson  of  *Abd  al-'Ozza.^  The  right  wing  was
commanded  by  Khalid  ;  the  left  by  'Ikrima,  son  of  Abu  Jahl.
'Amr  ibn  al-*As  (the  famous 'Amr)  was  over  the  Koreishite
horse.  The  women  at  first  kept  to  the  front,  and  beat  their
timbrels  to  shrill  martial  song  ;  but  as  the  line  advanced,  they
fell  to  the  rear.

The  battle  opened  by  the  inglorious  advance  of  the  exile
Abu  'Amir,  who  vainly  expected  his  fellow-citizens  of  Medina

'  This  Talha  is  to  be  distinguished  from  Talha,  son  of  'Obeidallah,  who
stood  by  Mohammad  in  the  battle.  The  Talha  in  the  text  was  of  the
family  of  'Abd  ed-Dar,  which  retained  the  right  of  carrying  the  Koreishite
standard  {vide  p.  xcvi.).  Abu  Sufyan  desired  not  only  to  lead  the  army,
but  to  carry  the  standard,  or  at  least  to  raise  a  second  banner  ;  but  the
descendants  of  'Abd  ed-Dar  would  hear  of  no  encroachment  on  their
ancestral  privilege.  There  is  a  tradition  that,  as  the  enemy  drew  near,
Mohammad  inquired  who  bore  their  standard.  On  being  told  that  it  was
one  of  the  house  of  'Abd  ed-Dar,  he  exclaimed:  'Our  side  is  more
worthy  of  the  honour ; '  and,  calling  for  Mus'ab  (who  was  of  the  same
lineage),  he  placed  the  standard  in  his  hands.


XIV.]  SINGLE  COMBATS  259

to  fraternise  with  him.  He  was  received  with  a  shower  of
stones,  and  forced  with  his  band  of  followers  to  retire ;
Talha  crying  out  indignantly  : — '  Get  to  the  rear,  ye  slaves  !
Guard  the  camp, — a  fitting  employment  for  you!'  Then,
flourishing  the  Koreishite  banner,  Talha  advanced  alone,
and  challenged  the  enemy  to  single  combat,  shouting  these
words : —

The  standard-bearer  hath  the  right

To  dye  its  shaft  in  blood.

Till  it  be  broken  in  his  hand.

'All  stepped  forth,  and,  rushing  on  him,  with  one  blow  of  his
sword  brought  him  to  the  ground.^  Mohammad,  who  had
intently  watched  the  rapid  combat,  exclaimed  with  loud  voice,
Great  is  the  Lord !  and  the  cry,  taken  up  all  round,  arose  in
an  overwhelming  shout  from  the  whole  Muslim  army.
Talha's  brother,  'Othman,  who  was  in  charge  of  the  women,
then  ran  forward  and  seized  the  banner  which  lay  by  the  life-
less body. The  women  beat  their  timbrels  loudly,  as  they

sang : —

Daughters  of  the  brave  are  we,
On  carpets  step  we  delicately  ;
Boldly  advance,  and  we  embrace  you  !
Turn  your  backs  and  we  will  shun  you, —
Shun  you  with  disdain.

Hamza  responded  to  'Othman's  challenge,  and,  after  a  brief
encounter,  brought  him  also  lifeless  to  the  ground.  Then
striding  proudly  back  to  the  Muslim  ranks,  he  shouted  :  *  I
am  the  son  of  him  that  gave  the  pilgrims  drink,' — meaning
of  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  who  had  held  that  office.  One  after
another,  the  family  of  Talha,  two  brothers  and  three  sons,
seized  the  standard ;  one  after  another,  they  fell  in  single
combat.^

^  Mohammad  declared  that  thus  was  fulfilled  that  part  of  his  vision  in
which  he  appeared  to  ride  upon  a  ram. Talha  was  the  ram.

2  One  of  the  sons  was  wounded  by  an  arrow,  shot  by  'Asim,  The
wounded  lad  was  carried  to  his  mother  Sulafa,  at  the  rear.  She  asked
him,  as  he  was  breathing  his  last,  who  killed  him.  He  said  that  as  his
foe  shot  the  arrow,  he  heard  him  cry  :  '  Take  that  from  me,  the  son  [that
is,  grandson]  of  Al-Aklah  ! '  'By  the  Lord  ! '  Sulafa  said,  '  it  was  'Asim,
one  of  our  own  kin '  ;  and  she  vowed  she  would  yet  drink  wine  out  of
'Asim's  skull.  The  savage  vow  was  nearly  being  fulfilled,  as  we  shall  see
hereafter.


26o


BATTLE  OF  OHOD


[chap.


Koreish  are
pressed,  and
waver


Day

changed  by
charge  of
Khalid,  and
army  of
Medina
routed


This  Arab  custom  of  single  combat  put  the  two  armies
on  an  equaUty  for  the  time.  So  long  as  it  went  on,  the
Koreish  derived  no  advantage  from  their  superior  numbers ;
and  the  rapid  destruction  of  their  standard-bearers  carried
dismay  into  their  ranks.  A  general  engagement  ensued ;
and,  pressed  by  the  fierce  ardour  of  the  Muslims,  the  Meccan
army  began  to  waver.  Their  horse  sought  repeatedly  to  turn
the  left  flank  of  Mohammad  ;  but  they  were  each  time  forced
back  by  the  galling  archery  of  the  little  band  which  Moham-
mad had  posted  there.  The  same  daring  contempt  of  danger
was  displayed  as  at  Bedr.  The  Meccan  ranks  might  be  seen
to  quiver  as  Abu  Dujana,  distinguished  by  a  red  kerchief
round  his  helmet,  swept  along  the  enemy's  ranks,  and,  with
a  sword  given  him  by  Mohammad,  dealt  death  on  every
hand.^  Hamza,  conspicuous  from  his  waving  ostrich  feather  ;
*AlI,  known  by  his  long  white  plume,  and  Az-Zubeir,  by  his
bright  yellow  turban,  like  heroes  of  the  Iliad, — carried  con-
fusion wherever  they  appeared.  Such  were  the  scenes
in  which  were  reared  the  great  leaders  of  the  Muslim
conquests.^

But  now  the  Muslims  pressed  too  hotly  their  success.
Their  line  lost  form  and  order ;  and  a  portion,  piercing  the
enemy's  ranks,  fell  to  plundering  his  camp.  The  archers,
who  had  hitherto  held  the  Meccan  horse  in  check,  saw  from
their  height  the  tempting  opportunity,  and,  casting  the  Pro-
phet's strict  injunction  to  the  winds,  as  well  as  the  earnest
expostulation  of  their  leader,  hurried  to  the  spoil.  The  ready
eye  of  Khalid  saw  the  chance,  and  he  hastened  to  retrieve
the  day. Wheeling  his  cavalry  round  the  enemy's  left,  and

^  There  is  a  mass  of  tradition  about  Abu  Dujana's  prodigies  of  valour.
At  the  commencement  of  the  action  Mohammad  held  up  his  sword,  and
said:  'Who  will  take  this  sword,  and  give  to  it  its  due?'  'Omar,
Az-Zubeir,  &c.,  one  after  another,  came  forward  and  were  rejected  ;  last
of  all  Abu  Dujana  offered,  and  Mohammad  gave  it  to  him;  'And  he
clave  therewith  the  heads  of  the  Unbelievers.'

After  the  battle,  'All,  giving  his  bloody  sword  to  Fatima  to  wash,
said  :  'Take  this  sword,  for  it  is  not  to  be  despised,'  alluding  to  his  own
acts  of  prowess  that  day.  Mohammad  added:  'If  thou  hast  done  well,
O  'All !  verily  Al-Harith  and  Abu  Dujana  have  done  well  also.'  Ibn
Hisham,  p.  588.

2  For  example,  in  this  battle  we  have  Sa'd  and  Abu  'Obeida  on  the
side  of  Mohammad,  and  Khalid  and  'Amr  on  the  side  of  Koreish  ;  all
famous  in  after  days.


wounded


XIV.]  MOHAMMAD  WOUNDED  261

sweeping  from  the  rising  ground  the  few  remaining  archers,
he  suddenly  appeared  in  rear  of  the  Muslims  and  charged
into  their  ranks.  The  surprise  was  fatal,  and  the  discomfiture
complete.  Mus'ab  was  slain,  and  his  banner  disappeared.^
Hind's  wild  negro,  VVahshi,  who  had  been  watching  for
Hamza,  now  singled  out  his  victim,  and  swinging  his  javelin
with  unerring  aim,  brought  him  lifeless  to  the  ground.
Koreish  now  raised  their  war  cry  of  Yd  lal-Ozza  I  Yd  la-
Hubal I  and  advanced  with  rapid  step.  The  Muslims  broke
at  every  point,  and  fled  for  refuge  to  the  heights  of  Ohod.

It  was  a  moment  of  peril  for  Mohammad,  He  was  still  Mohammad
in  the  rear  watching  from  a  rising  ground  the  first  success,
when  he  narrowly  escaped  the  sweeping  charge  of  Khalid's
horse.  Marvellous  tales  are  given  of  his  prowess,  as  well  as
of  repeated  signal  escapes.  With  the  staff  of  followers  who
surrounded  him,  he  joined  in  discharging  arrows  till  his  bow
was  broken  ;  and  then  he  betook  himself  to  casting  stones.
He  is  even  said  to  have  inflicted  a  deadly  wound  on  one  of
Koreish,  who  pressed  madly  forward  to  cut  him  down.  When
the  Muslim  ranks  were  broken  and  forced  back,  he  tried  to
stay  their  flight,  crying  aloud  :  Whither  away  ?  Come  back  !
I  am  the  Apostle  of  God!  Return!  But  still  they  fled.  The
enemy  soon  bore  down  upon  the  Prophet  himself;  and  if
a  party  of  devoted  followers  (seven  Citizens  and  seven
Refugees)  had  not  rallied  round  the  spot,  he  surely  had  been
slain.  Koreish  scoured  the  field  in  special  quest  of  their  arch
enemy.  Suddenly,  Ibn  Kami'a,  the  hero  who  had  just  slain
Mus'ab,  and  others,  came  upon  the  little  group.  Stones  and
arrows  flew  thick  around.  A  missile  wounded  the  Prophet's
under  lip  and  broke  one  of  his  front  teeth.^  Another  blow
drove  the  rings  of  his  helmet  deep  into  his  cheek,  and  made
a  gash  in  his  forehead.  The  sword  of  Ibn  Kami'a  was  barely
warded  off  his  head  by  the  naked  hand  of  Talha,  son  of
'Obeidallah, whose  fingers were thereby  for life disabled.

^  Tradition  tells  it  was  seized  by  an  angel.  'The  angels,'  it  is  added,
'though  present,  did  not  fight  that  day  ;  but  had  the  Believers  stood  fast
they  would  have  fought.'

'^  The  spot  of  Mohammad's  misfortunes  is  marked  by  a  Cupola,
Kubbat  elh-Thendyd,  the  dome  of  the  teeth,  'nearer  the  foot  of  the
mountain '  than  the  graves  of  Hamza,  &c.  The  print  of  a  tooth  is  still
shown  there.


262  BATTLE  OF  OHOD  [chap.

Mohammad  fell  to  the  ground,  and  Ibn  Kami'a  returned  to

Ciythat his  comrades  exclaiming  that  he  had  killed  him. The  cry

is  slain  was taken  up  all  round,  and  resounded  from  the  rocks  of

Ohod.i It spread consternation among his followers ; —

*  Where  now,'  they  cried,  *  the  promise  of  his  Lord  ? ' At  the

same  time,  however,  the  rumour  checked  the  ardour  of  the

enemy's  pursuit. Their controversy  was  with Mohammad

rather than Medina. If  he were killed,  their  object  was

accomplished,  their  revenge  fulfilled.

Mohammad  But  Mohammad  was  only  stunned. The  cliffs  of  Ohod

u^u^^i^^"^^ were  close  behind. Talha  (himself  in  several  places  wounded)

behind  rocks  . . ^^  r  /

of  Ohod  raised  him  gently,  and,  with  one  or  two  others  affording
support,  helped  him  to  climb  the  rocks  where  the  greater
part  of  his  army  had  already  found  secure  retreat.  The  joy
of  his  followers  was  unbounded  at  finding  their  Prophet  still
alive.  Ka'b  ibn  Malik  met  him  on  the  way,  and  began  to
call  aloud  the  good  news ;  but  Mohammad,  feeling  that  he
was  not  yet  beyond  the  reach  of  danger,  motioned  him  to  be
silent.  When  they  had  found  shelter  in  a  cave,^  the  first
care  of  his  followers  was  to  remove  the  helmet  from  his  head.
Two  of  its  rings  were  so  firmly  imbedded  in  his  cheek  that
Abu  'Obeida  lost  two  teeth  in  the  endeavour  to  extract  them.
The  blood  flowed  copiously  from  the  Prophet's  wounds.  'All
ran  to  a  hollow  in  the  rock,  and  brought  some  water  in  his
shield.  Mohammad  could  not  drink  of  it,  but  only  rinsed  his
mouth.  As  the  blood  was  being  washed  off  his  face,  he
cried  out :  How  shall  a  people  prosper  that  treat  tJiiis  their
Prophet  who  calleth  them  unto  the  Lord!  Let  the  wrath  of
God  burn  against  the  men  that  have  besprinkled  the  face  of  His
Apostle  with  his  own  blood  1^ He  then  put  on  the  yellow

^  As  usual,  it  is  the  Devil  who  is  accused  of  this  piece  of  malice.  In
the  shape  of  Ibn  Suraka  (see  ante,  p.  235  note),  he  screamed  aloud  that
Mohammad  was  dead.  [This  idea  of  Satan  as  Ju'al  ibn  Suraka  is,  of
course,  not  found  in  either  Ibn  Hisham  or  At-Tabari,  but  is  common  in
Al-Wakidi.]

^  It  is  still  shown  to  the  pilgrims.  Burton,  ii.  248.  There  are  some
stories  of  Mohammad's  party  having  been  pursued  up  the  hill.  Also  that
they  were  in  danger  of  being  shot  upon  by  their  own  people,  who  mistook
them  for  the  enemy. But  they  seem  embellishments.

^  '  He  cursed  those  that  inflicted  the  wounds,  saying  :  Let  not  the  year
pass  over  them  alive ;  and  it  came  to  pass  that  not  one  of  those  that  shot
at  the  Prophet  survived  beyond  the  year.' Compare  Luke  xxiii.  34.


XIV.]


KOREISH  RETIRE


263


Colloquy
between
Abu  Suf3-an


helmet  of  Ka'b  in  place  of  his  own  broken  one  ;  and,  joining
the  rest  of  his  followers,  watched  thus  the  movements  of
Koreish  in  the  plain  below.  Many  of  the  Muslim  warriors,
wearied  with  the  struggle,  fell  asleep.  And  so  mid-day
passed  away.

The  leaders  of  Koreish  were  now  busy  on  the  field  of
battle.  They  sought  for  the  body  of  Mohammad,  and,  not
finding-  it,  begfan  to  doubt  his  death.  Many  acts  of  barbarous  and  'Omar,
mutilation  were  committed  on  the  slain.  Hind  gloated  over  j.g°^re
the  body  of  her  victim  Hamza,  Tearing  out  his  liver,  she
chewed  it,  fulfilling  thus  a  savage  vow,  and  she  strung  his
nails  and  pieces  of  his  skin  together  to  bedeck  her  arms  and
legs.^  When  Koreish  had  spent  some  time  thus,  and  had
leisurely  disposed  of  their  own  dead,  Abu  Sufyan  drew  near
to  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and,  raising  his  voice,  called  aloud  the
names  successively  oi Mohammad,  Abu  Bekr,  ''Omar.  Receiv-
ing no  reply  (for  the  Prophet  enjoined  silence)  he  cried  again  :
*  Then  all  are  slain,  and  ye  are  rid  of  them  ! '  'Omar  could
contain  himself  no  longer.  '  Thou  liest ! '  he  exclaimed  ;
'  they  are  all  alive,  thou  enemy  of  God,  and  will  requite  thee,
yet.'  'Then,'  rejoined  Abu  Sufyan,  'This  day  shall  be  a
return  for  Bedr.  Fortune  alternates,  even  as  the  bucket.
Hearken !  ye  will  find  mutilated  ones  upon  the  field :  this
was  not  by  my  desire,  but  neither  am  I  displeased  thereat.
Glory  to  Al-'Ozza  !  Glory  to  Hubal!  Al-'Ozza  is  ours;
not  yours  ! '  ^  At  the  bidding  of  Mohammad,  'Omar  replied  :
The  Lord  is  ours  ;  He  is  not  yours.^  Abu  Sufyan  said  :  '  We
shall  meet  after  a  year  again  at  Bedr.'  '  Be  it  so,'  answered
'Omar.  With  these  words  Abu  Sufyan  turned  to  go,  and  the
Meccan  army  began  its  homeward  march.

As  soon  as  the  enemy  was  out  of  sight,  Mohammad  and Number  of
his  followers  descended  from  their  retreat. The  full  extent
of  the  overthrow  was  now  apparent. Seventy-four  corpses
were strewn upon the plain, — four were Refugees,^ and

^  But  tradition  delights  to  abuse  Hind,  as  it  did  Abu  Jahl  ;  and  we
must  beware  of  the  patent  tendency  to  exaggerate.

^  A  play  on  the  word,  which  signifies  glory  as  well  as  the  idol  of  the
goddess  Al-'Ozza.

^  One  Refugee,  being  mortally  wounded,  was  carried  to  Upper
Medina,  where  he  died  ;  but  his  body,  by  desire  of  Mohammad,  was
carried  back  to  Ohod,  and  buried  there.  The  tombs  of  the  four  Refugees
are  still  shown  to  pilgrims  and  maintained  in  repair.


slain


264  BATTLE  OF  OHOD  [chap.

seventy  citizens  of  Medina. Indeed,  it  was  evident  that  the

destruction of  the whole force was  only averted by the

foresight  of  Mohammad  in  keeping  a  secure  place  of  refuge

in  his  rear. On  the  enemy's  side  the  loss  was  but  twenty.

The  news The  news  of  the  discomfiture  reached  Medina,  with  rumours

reaches  of  the  death  of  Mohammad  ;  and  the  road  was  soon  covered

with  men  and  women  hastening  to  nurse  the  wounded  or

search  for  the  dead. The  disaffected  citizens  did  not  conceal

their  satisfaction,  and  some  even  talked  of  an  embassy  to

Abu  Sufyan.

Dressing  of  Arrived  at  the  field  of  battle,  Fatima  dressed  the  gash  on

Mohammad's  ^^^  father's  temple,  staunching  the  blood  with  the  ash of
wounds  ^ '  ^

some  burned  matting. This  added  to  the  ghastly  appearance

of  the  wound,  which  was  deep,  and  did  not  fully  heal  for

Safiya  above a month. Saflya, the Prophet's aunt, was fondly

mourns  over  attached  to  her  brother  Hamza  ;  and  Mohammad,  fearful  of

her  brother  ,  . , , .,■-,.  , , ' .  • i i

Hamza  the  effect  which  the  sight  ot  his  mangled  remains  might  have

upon  her,  had  desired  her  son  Az-Zubeir  to  keep  her  aside
till  the  body  was  buried ;  but  she  was  not  to  be  kept  back.
'  Where  is  my  brother  ?  '  she  eagerly  inquired  of  Mohammad.
*  Among  the  people,'  he  replied.  '  I  will  not  go  back,'  she
cried,  '  until  I  see  him.'  So  he  led  her  to  the  spot,  saying  :
'  Leave  her  to  her  grief  alone.'  She  sat  down  with  Fatima
by  the  body,  and  both  sobbed  aloud.  Mohammad  wept  also.
His  spirit  was  stirred  within  him  at  Safiya's  anguish  and  the
disfigured  remains  of  the  noble  dead.  Seizing  his  beard  and
pulling  it  angrily,  as  when  grieved  and  agitated  he  was  wont
to  do,  he  swore  that  he  would  mutilate  the  bodies  of  thirty
of  Koreish  in  Hamza's  stead.^  To  comfort  Saflya,  he  told
her  that  her  brother's  name  was  already  enrolled  in  Paradise
as  the  Lwn  of  God  and  of  his  Apostle.  He  spoke  comfort-
ingly also  to  the  women  of  Medina,  who  were  wailing  over
their  dead.  The  graves  being  now  ready,  and  the  bodies
laid  out  in  order,  he  prayed  over  them,  and  commanded
that they  should be buried by twos and threes in each

1  But  he  afterwards  thought  better,  and  forbade  the  savage  practice.
The  passage  is  at  the  end  of  Sura  xvi.,  which,  however,  is  a  Meccan  one,
and  does  not  bear  very  plainly  on  the  occasion  here  referred  to.  How-
ever this  may  be,  there  is  no  doubt  that  Mohammad  abolished  the
practice  of  mutilation,  and  it  is  to  the  credit  of  his  humanity  that  he
did  so.


XIV.]


NIGHT  OF  DISTRESS  AT  MEDINA


265


grave.^  The  obsequies  ended,  he  mounted  his  horse,  and  the
whole  company,  turning  sadly  from  Ohod,  took  the  homeward
road.

The  Meccan  army,  though  withdrawn  from  the  field  of
battle,  might  still  have  fallen  upon  Medina,  uncovered  as  it
was  by  the  absence  of  the  Muslim  army.  Mohammad  and
his  followers  trembled  for  the  safety  of  their  families.  On
descending  from  the  heights,  the  Prophet  had  despatched
Sa'd,  son  of  Abu  Wakkas,  to  watch  the  movements  of  the
enemy.  When  they  reached  the  valley  of  Al-'Aklk,  Koreish
paused  there  awhile.  Their  counsels  were  divided.  Some
urged  to  follow  up  their  success  by  a  blow  on  the  defenceless
city.  Others  pointed  to  the  danger  of  entanglement  and  loss
in  the  outskirts  and  narrow  streets,  and  contended  that  they
should  rest  content  with  their  signal  victory.  The  opinions
of  the  latter  prevailed  ;  mounting  their  camels,  and  leading
their  horses,"  they  slowly  wended  their  way  through  the
defiles  that  led  back  to  Mecca.  Sa'd,  hurrying  at  once  to
Mohammad,  cried  aloud  the  joyful  news.  '  Gently,'  said
Mohammad  ;  '  let  us  not  appear  before  the  people  to  rejoice
at  the  departure  of  the  enemy  ! '  The  intelligence,  neverthe-
less, brought  intense  relief  both  to  Mohammad  and  his
people ;  for  the  crestfallen,  crippled  army  of  Medina  could  ill
have  ventured  on  a  second  struggle.

As  Mohammad  and  his  followers  reached  the  foot  of  the
intervening  ridge,  the  whole  company,  at  his  command,  fell
into  two  lines,  with  the  women  ranged  behind,  and  there
offered  up  prayer  to  God.  As  they  entered  the  city,  the
voice  was  heard  all  round  of  women  wailing  for  their  dead :
'And  Hamza!'  cried  Mohammad,  'alas  for  Hamza  !  who  is
there  to  wail  for  him  ! ' The  wounded  here  received  permis-

^  They  were  not  washed.  'Wind  them,'  said  the  Prophet,  'as  they
are,  in  their  wounds  and  in  their  blood.  I  will  be  surety  for  them;'
alluding  to  the  necessity  for  legal  ablution.  Hence  the  angels  are  said
to  have  washed  Hamza  and  Hanzala.  Some  of  the  traditions,  to  the
effect  that  the  latter  was  in  a  state  of  legal  impurity,  can  hardly  be
quoted.

-  This  was  the  sign  given  by  Mohammad  to  Sa'd  :  '  If  they  mount
their  horses,'  said  he,  'and  lead  their  camels,  then  they  meditate  an
advance  on  Medina  ;  if  they  mount  the  camels,  and  lead  the  horses,  then
they  are  going  home.'  The  camel  was  their  working  animal.  Ibn
Hishfim,  p.  583.


Mohammad

returns  to
Medina


Koreish,
after  hesi-
tation, take
route  to
Mecca


Night  of
distress  and
insecurity
at  Medina


266


BATTLE  OF  OHOD


[chap.


Mohammad
makes  de-
monstration
in  pursuit  of
Koreish


sion  to  go  to  their  homes.  The  rest  followed  Mohammad  to
the  Mosque,  which  they  reached  in  time  for  the  sunset  prayer.
It  was  a  night  of  mourning,  A  sense  of  insecurity  still  pre-
vailed, for  Koreish  might  even  yet  return,  and  so  the  chief
men  again  kept  watch  at  the  Prophet's  door.  Some  of  the
wounded  were  laid  near  the  Mosque,  and  the  fires  kindled
for  them  cast  a  fitful  and  lurid  light  around  its  courts.
Mohammad  slept  heavily,  and  did  not  answer  the  call  of
Bilal  for  eventide  prayer.  Shortly  afterwards  he  awoke,  and,
rising,  asked  who  it  was  that  wailed  so  loudly  near  the
Mosque.  It  was  the  wailing  of  the  women,  who  had  heard
his  plaintive  words  regarding  Hamza,  and  came  there  to
mourn  for  him.  Mohammad  blessed  them,  and  sent  them
to  their  homes.  And  so  it  grew  to  be  a  custom  at  Medina
for  the  women,  when  they  mourned  for  their  dead,  first  to
wail  for  Hamza.

On  the  morrow,  Mohammad  commanded  Bilal  to  proclaim
through  the  city  that  he  was  about  to  start  in  pursuit  of
Koreish,  but  that  none  should  accompany  him  excepting
those  who  had  been  present  at  the  battle  of  Ohod.  It  was
intended  thus  to  raise  the  spirits  of  his  followers,  remove  the
impression  of  defeat,  and  show  Koreish  that  an  attack  upon
the  city  would  have  been  vigorously  repelled.  As  the
warriors  assembled  at  the  Mosque,  Talha  came  up  :  '  What
thinkest  thou,'  inquired  Mohammad  of  him  ;  '  how  far  have
Koreish  by  this  time  reached  on  their  journey  homewards?'
'  To  the  valley  of  Seiyala,'  he  answered,  one  long  march  from
Medina.  '  So  was  I  thinking  also,'  rejoined  Mohammad ;
'  but,  Talha !  they  will  never  again  inflict  upon  us  such  a
disaster  as  we  suffered  yesterday, — no,  not  till  we  wrest
Mecca  from  them.'  The  white  flag  of  the  Refugees  was  not
recovered  from  the  field  of  battle ;  but  one  of  the  other
banners  stood  in  the  Mosque  yet  unfurled,  and  the  Prophet
placed  it  in  the  hands  of  Abu  Bekr.^  Stiff  and  disfigured  as
he  was,  he  mounted  his  horse,  and  set  out  on  the  Meccan
road.  Two  scouts,  whom  he  sent  in  advance,  fell  into  the
enemy's  hands,  and  were  put  to  death ;  their  bodies  were
found  at  Hamra  al-Asad,  a  little  way  short  of  As-Safra,
which  Mohammad  reached  the  day  after  it  was  evacuated  by

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  588  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1427  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  149  f. ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  34.


XIV.]


PURSUIT  OF  KOREISH


267


Koreish.  At  this  spot  the  force  spent  three  days,  and  regaled
themselves  with  fresh  dates,  a  plentiful  harvest  of  which  had
just  been  gathered.  Having  kindled  five  hundred  fires  on
the  adjoining  heights,  to  make  Koreish  believe  that  the
pursuing  force  was  very  large,  Mohammad,  contenting  him-
self with  this  demonstration,  returned  to  Medina,  after  an
absence  of  five  or  six  days.

At  Hamra  al-Asad  Mohammad  made  prisoner  one  of  the
enemy,  the  poet  Abu  'Azza,  who  had  loitered  behind  the
rest.  He  had  been  taken  prisoner  at  Bedr,  and,  having  five
daughters  dependent  on  him,  had  been  freely  released  on  the
promise  that  he  would  not  again  bear  arms  in  the  war  against
the  Prophet.  He  now  sought  for  mercy  :  '  O  Mohammad  ! '
he  prayed, '  forgive  me  of  thy  clemency  ! '  *  Nay,  verily,'  said
the  Prophet,  '  a  Believer  may  not  twice  be  bitten  from  the
same  hole.  Thou  shalt  never  return  to  Mecca ;  stroke  thy
beard,  and  say,  /  have  again  deceived  Mohammad.  Lead  him
forth  to  execution  ! '  So  saying,  he  motioned  to  a  bystander,
who  with  his  sword  struck  off  the  captive's  head.

Another  Koreishite,  Mu'awiya,  son  of  Al-Moghira,  perished
by  too  great  confidence  in  the  generosity  of  his  enemy.
When  quitting  Ohod,  he  missed  his  way,  and  passed  the
night  near  Medina.  Next  morning  he  ventured  to  the  house
of  'Othman,  the  Prophet's  son-in-law,  who  procured  for  him
a  three  days'  truce,  and,  having  found  him  a  camel  and
provisions  for  the  way,  joined  Mohammad  on  his  march  to
Hamra  al-Asad.  The  Koreishite  incautiously  lingered  at
Medina  till  the  last  day  of  his  term  of  grace,  when  he  set  out
for  Mecca.  In  the  endeavour  to  avoid  the  returning  Muslim
force,  he  again  lost  his  way;  and  Mohammad,  hearing  of  his
delay,  sent  men  upon  his  track,  who  came  up  with  him,  and
killed  him.


Abu  'Azza,
a  prisoner,
put  to  death


Another,
after  three
days'  truce,
pursued  and
killed


The  field  of  Ohod  came  before  long  to  be  invested  with  a Halo  of
special  interest. A  flood  of  glory  crowns  the  memory  of  the  fj^g'^MaTt^rs  "^
dead. Mohammad  used  to  visit  the  scene  once  a  year,  and of  Ohod
bless  the  martyrs  buried  there. ^  Peace  be  on  you  ! '  he  would  say,
*  for  that  which  ye  endured, — and  a  blessed  Futurity  above  !  '
The  citizens,  as  they  passed  to  and  fro,  visiting  their  fields  at
Al-Ghaba,  would  invoke  blessing  on  the  souls  of  the  warriors
buried  by  the  way  ;  and,  to  the  invocation  '  Peace  be  upon


268


BATTLE  OF  OHOD


[chap.


But  Mo-
hammad's
prestige
affected  at
the  time


Line  of
argument
by  which
Mohammad
obviated  its
ill  effect


you,'  would  conjure  up  the  audible  response,  '  And  on  you  be
peace  ! '  We  are  also  told  that,  half  a  century  after,  a  great
flood  having  ploughed  up  the  banks  of  the  torrent  and
uncovered  many  graves,  the  bodies  of  the  martyrs  were  seen
reclining  in  the  attitude  of  sleep,  fresh  as  the  day  of  their
interment,  and  blood  still  trickling  from  their  wounds.

Thus  a  halo,  in  course  of  time,  settled  on  the  '  Martyrs  of
Ohod '  and  glorified  their  memory.  But  at  the  present
moment  humiliation  and  not  glory  overshadowed  the  battle-
field. Murmurs  at  the  inglorious  retreat  were  rife  throughout
the  city.  Tradition  passes  lightly  over  the  uncongenial
subject,  and  dwells  complacently  on  the  ignominious  manner
in  which  'Abdallah  ibn  Obei,  and  the  Jews  who  hazarded
remarks  disparaging  to  the  Prophet,  were  treated,  and  on  the
boastful  threats  of 'Omar  against  them.  But  the  Kor'an  tells
a  different  story.  We  there  find  that  even  the  adherents  of
Mohammad  were  staggered  by  the  reverse.  It  was  natural
that  they  should  be.  The  success  at  Bedr  had  been  assumed
as  proof  of  divine  support :  and,  by  parity  ot  reasoning,  the
defeat  at  Ohod  was  subversive  of  the  prophetic  claim.  The
Jews  broadly  advanced  this  stubborn  argument.^  It  required
all  the  address  of  Mohammad  to  avert  the  dangerous  imputa-
tion, sustain  the  credit  of  his  cause,  and  reanimate  his
followers.  This  was  done  by  a  message  from  Heaven,
forming  now  the  latter  half  of  the  third  Sura.^  A  lofty  tone
of  assurance  pervades  the  studied  explanation  and
remonstrance  of  the  Prophet.  Stress  is  laid  on  the  marvellous
interposition  which  brought  victory  at  Bedr,  But  the  reverse
at  Ohod  was  necessary  to  sift  true  Believers  from  such  as
were  Hypocrites  at  heart.  The  light  afflictions  of  the  day
were  a  meet  prelude  to  the  eternal  glories  of  Paradise.  The
faithful,  coveting  the  blessed  state  of  the  martyrs  at  Bedr,  had
longed  for  the  same  fortune  ;  and  now,  when  death  presented
itself,  they  fled  before  its  terrors  ! The  slaughter,  anywise,

*  'How  can  Mohammad  pretend  now,'  they  asked,  'to  be  anything
more  than  an  aspirant  to  the  kmgly  office?  No  true  claimant  of  the
prophetic  dignity  hath  ever  been  beaten  in  the  field,  or  suffered  loss  in  his
own  person  and  that  of  his  followers,  as  Mohammad  hath.' — Al-Wakidi.

2  The  third  Siira  is  a  collection  of  passages  belonging  to  various
periods.  We  have  in  it  portions  revealed  shortly  after  Bedr,  a.h.  ll.  ;
after  Ohod,  A.H.  in.  ;  after  the  second  Bedr  A.H.  iv. ;  also  after  an
interview  with  the  Nejran  Christians,  A,H.  ix.


XIV.]  MOHAMMAD'S  PRESTIGE  AFFECTED  269

could  not  have  been  averted  by  following  the  counsels  of
those  who  stayed  at  home  ;  for  the  hour  of  death  is  fixed  for
every  one,  and  is  inevitable.  Future  success  was  largely
promised,  if  Believers  would  but  remain  steadfast  and
courageous.  The  Lord  had  already  at  Ohod  placed  victory
within  their  reach,  when  by  cowardice  and  disobedience  they
drew  defeat  upon  themselves.  Even  if  Mohammad  had  been
killed  in  battle,  what  then  ?  he  was  but  the  Messenger  of
God,  like  other  Apostles  who  had  died  before  him.  The  cause
itself  was  immortal  and  divine.  Such  is  the  line  of  argument,
mingled  with  comfort,  reproof,  and  exhortation.  Whatever
the  Disaffected  might  say  of  the  Prophet's  reasoning,  it
served  to  reassure  his  loyal  followers,  and  while  these  were
with  him  heart  and  soul,  his  position  at  Medina  was  secure.

The  style  and  tenor  of  this  remarkable  chapter  so  fully Passa_^es
and  curiously  illustrate  the  present  situation  of  Mohammad ^.!P™  ^"''^

*  111.  on  tuG

that  the  reader  will  not,  I  think,  object  to  a  somewhat  lengthy subject
extract : —

Remember  when  thou  wentest  forth  from  thy  family  in  the  early  v.  117  ff.
morning  to  secure  for  the  Faithful  an  encampment  for  the  battle  ;  .  .  .
And  when  two  companies  of  you  ^  became  anxious,  so  that  ye  lost  heart ;
and  God  is  the  Patron  of  both,  and  in  God  let  the  Believers  put  their
trust.  And,  truly,  God  helped  you  at  Bedr,  when  ye  were  fewer  in  number
.  .  .  When  thou  saidst  to  the  Believers  :  What !  doth  it  not  suffice  you
that  your  Lord  should  aid  you  with  3,000  Angels  sent  dow7t  ?  Nay,  if  ye
persevere,  and  fear  God,  and  this  Enemy  were  to  come  suddenly  upon
you,  your  Lord  would  help  you  with  five  thousand  Angels  attired  for
battle  ; — And  God  made  this  promise  none  otherwise  than  as  glad
tidings  for  you,  and  that  your  hearts  might  be  stayed.  Victory  cometh
from  God  alone,  the  Glorious,  the  Wise,  that  He  may  cut  off  the  utter-
most part  of  the  unbelievers.  *  *  *  *  *

Be  not  cast  down,  neither  be  ye  grieved.  Ye  shall  be  yet  victorious  v.  133  ff.
if  ye  are  true  Believers.  If  a  wound  hath  befallen  you,  verily  a  wound
like  unto  it  hath  befallen  your  enemy.  This  various  success  We  cause
to  alternate  among  men,  that  God  may  know  those  that  believe,  and  may
have  witnesses  amongst  you  .  .  .  that  God  might  prove  them  that
believe,  and  annihilate  the  Infidels.  What !  did  ye  think  to  enter
Paradise,  while  as  yet  God  knew  not  those  that  fight  for  Him,  and  knew
not  the  persevering  ones  amongst  you  ?  And  truly  ye  were  longing  for
death before ye faced it. And verily ye saw it and looked on.

^  Meaning  apparently  both  Refugees  and  Citizens;  though  the  com-
mentators refer  it  to  the  two  wings  the  Aus  and  the  Khazraj,  in  whose
minds  an  ill  impression  had  arisen  by  the  desertion  of  'Abdallah  ibn
Obei.


270  BATTLE  OF  OHOD  [chap.

Sura  iii.  Mohammad  is  no  more  than  an  Apostle,  as  other  Apostles  that  have

Battle  of  gone  before  him.  What !  if  he  were  to  die  or  be  killed,  must  ye  needs
Ohod  j.,jj.j^ back upon your heels? He that turneth back  upon his heels

injureth  not  God  in  the  least  degree  ;  but  God  will  reward  the  thankful.
Furthermore,  no  soul  dieth  but  by  the  permission  of  God,  as  it  is  written
and  predestined.  *  *  *  How  many  Prophets  have  fought  against  those
that  had  multitudes  on  their  side.  And  they  were  not  cast  down  at
that  which  befell  them  fighting  in  the  way  of  God,  neither  did  they
become  weak,  nor  make  themselves  abject ;  and  God  loveth  the
persevering.  *****
V.  144  fF.  We  will  surely  cast  terror  into  the  hearts  of  the  Infidels,  because  they

have  associated  with  God  that  which  He  hath  nowise  authorised.  Their
resting-place  shall  be  the  Fire  :  wretched  is  the  abode  of  the  trans-
gressors !  And  truly  the  Lord  had  already  made  good  unto  you  His
promise  at  what  time  ye  were,  by  His  permission,  cutting  them  to  pieces  ;
— until  ye  lost  heart  and  fell  to  variance  in  the  matter,  and  disobeyed.^
Amongst  you  were  those  that  desired  the  present  Life,  and  amongst
you  those  that  desired  the  Life  to  come.  Then  He  caused  you  to  flee
from  before  them,  that  He  might  prove  you  (but  now  He  hath  pardoned
you,  for  God  is  gracious  unto  the  Believers),  when  ye  made  for  the
mountain  (Ohod),  and  looked  not  back  on  any  one,  though  the  Apostle
was  calling  unto  you, — even  unto  those  of  you  that  were  behind.  Where-
fore He  caused  grief  to  overtake  you  upon  grief,  that  ye  may  not  be
afflicted  hereafter  at  that  which  ye  lose,  nor  at  that  which  shall  befall
you  :  for  God  knoweth  what  ye  do.  Then  He  caused  to  descend  upon
you  after  the  grief,  Security,  even  slumber  which  covered  a  part  of  you  ;  ^
and  a  part  of  you  were  troubled  in  your  own  souls, — questioning  about
God  that  which  is  not  the  truth, — a  questioning  of  ignorance  ; — In  that
ye  said.  What!  Is  there  any  reality  in  this  matter  unto  us  7"^  Say: —
Verily  the  matter  belongeth  wholly  unto  God,  They  concealed  in  their
hearts  that  which  they  did  not  open  unto  thee.  They  say, — Had  there
been  any  reality  ift  the  matter,  we  had  ?iot  been  slaiit  here.  Say, —  If  ye
had  been  in  your  own  houses,  verily  those  would  have  gone  forth  for
whom  fighting  was  decreed,  unto  the  places  of  their  death  ; — and  (so  it
came  to  pass)  that  the  Lord  might  prove  what  is  in  your  hearts,  for  God
knoweth  the  breast  of  Man.  Verily  they  amongst  you  who  turned  their
backs  on  the  day  when  the  two  armies  met,  Satan  caused  them  to  slip
for  some  part  of  that  which  they  had  wrought :  but  God  hath  forgiven
them,  for  God  is  Forgiving  and  Merciful.

Blessedness  The  blessed  state  of  the  Martyrs  is  thus  described  : —

Martyrs.  Think  not  in  anywise  of  those  killed  in  the  way  of  the  Lord,  as  if  they
Sura  iii.  were  dead.  Yea,  they  are  alive,  and  are  nourished  with  their  Lord, —
163  f.  .

1  The  disobedience  of  the  archers  who  quitted  their  post.

2  Those  who  fell  asleep  on  finding  refuge  on  the  mountain.

^  I.e.  questioning  the  truth  of  Mohammad's  mission,  and  his  promise
of  divine  interposition  and  victory.


XIV.]


REFERRED  TO  IN  THE  KOR'AN


!7l


exulting  in  that  which  God  hath  given  them  of  His  favour,  and  rejoicing
on  behalf  of  those  who  have  not  yet  joined  them,  but  are  following  after.
No  terror  afiflicteth  them,  neither  are  they  grieved.^

The  reader  may  picture  to  himself  the  now  venerable  Mohammad
Prophet  delivering,  as  the  spokesman  of  the  Almighty,  these  Lopirin^
pregnant  messages.  He  is  about  to  issue  from  one  of  the  Mosque
apartments  which,  built  for  his  increasing  harim,  form  the
eastern  side  of  the  Mosque.  Under  its  rude  but  spacious
roof  of  palm-branches,  the  Citizens  and  Refugees  assemble  at
mid-day  for  the  weekly  service,  throng  around  the  pulpit,  and
occupy  the  long  space  in  front  of  it.  As  Mohammad  appears,
the  hum  and  bustle  cease  (for  it  was  the  hall  of  business  and
politics,  as  well  as  the  house  of  worship),  and  the  whole
congregation  fall  into  the  ranks  for  prayer.  Mohammad
advances  to  the  foot  of  the  pulpit,  and  with  his  face  turned
toward  the  holy  temple  of  Mecca,  and  his  back  to  the  people,
goes  through  the  stated  ritual.  The  assembly,  arrayed  in
rows  behind,  follow  every  motion  of  their  leader,  as  a  Muslim
congregation  at  the  present  day  follow  the  genuflexions  and
prostrations  of  their  Imam.  The  prayers  ended,  the  Prophet,
with  grave  step,  ascends  the  slightly  elevated  pulpit,  and  in  a
solemn  voice,  and  accents  suited  to  the  measured  cadence  of
the  revelation,  delivers  to  the  audience  the  message  which  he
says  that  he  has  received  from  Heaven.  Fear  creeps  over
the  heart.  It  is  as  if  the  Deity  were  present  by  some  visible
token,  like  the  cloud  overshadowing  the Tabernacle. The

1  To  secure  the  crown  of  martyrdom,  it  sufficed  to  make  at  the  very
last  moment  the  simplest  and  most  formal  profession  of  faith  in  God  and
Mohammad.  Thus  'Amr  ibn  Thabit  had,  up  to  the  day  of  Ohod,  been
an  open  unbeliever.  He  accompanied  the  Muslim  army  and  was
mortally  wounded  on  the  field.  His  comrades  asked  him  regarding  his
creed  ;  with  his  dying  breath  he  whispered  in  reply  that  it  was  for  Islam
he  had  fought,  and  that  he  believed  in  God  and  in  his  Prophet.  When
this  was  told  to  Mohammad,  he  blessed  his  memory,  and  said  that  he
was  already  an  inheritor  of  Paradise.  On  the  other  hand,  any  amount  of
bravery  without  such  formal  profession  was  of  no  avail.  Thus,  a  Jew
named  Kozman,  who  was  numbered  among  the  Disaffected,  showed
incredible  valour  at  Ohod,  killing  with  his  own  hands  seven  or  eight  of
Koreish.  When  expiring  on  the  field,  and  being  congratulated  on  the
prospect  of  Paradise,  he  said,  with  his  last  breath,  that  he  had  been
fighting  not  for  the  faith,  but  for  his  people,  and  in  defence  of  his  native
city.  Mohammad,  when  told  of  it,  declared  that  in  spite  of  his  services
he  was  'a  child  of  hell-fire.' — Ibn  Hisham,  p.  578.


272


BATTLE  OF  OHOD


[chap.


Execution  of
Al-Harith
for  the
murder  of

Al-Mujedh-
dhar


Disaffected  may  scoff  elsewhere,  and  the  Jew  in  his  own
assembly  curse  the  upstart  Prophet ;  but  at  this  moment,
disaffection  and  treason  vanish,  for  the  dread  sense  of
immediate  communication  with  the  Almighty  overwhelms  all
other  feelings.  And  now  the  rhetoric  of  Mohammad  comes
into  play.  In  his  oration  are  mingled  rebuke,  exhortation,
encouragement,  in  pure  and  nervous  eloquence,  such  as  no
Arab  could  hear  without  emotion.  Hell,  with  its  flaming
gates,  and  the  gardens  and  joys  of  Paradise,  are  conjured  up
as  vivid  and  close  realities  before  the  hearer  ;  for  the  hour,
the  present  life  fades  into  insignificance,  excepting  as  the
means  of  escaping  the  one,  and  of  winning  the  other.  Thus  did
Mohammad  wield  at  will  the  awe-stricken  assembly,  and  wind
his  enchantments  in  inextricable  folds  around  them.  Thus  he
moulded  to  his  purpose  the  various  elements  about  him,  and
even  under  adversity  and  misfortune  maintained  his  influence
supreme.

In  close  connection  with  the  field  of  Ohod  was  the  execu-
tion of  a  stern  judicial  sentence.^  Al-Mujedhdhar,  a
confederate  of  the  Aus  party,  had  a  few  years  previously  in
the  pre-Islamite  disputes,  slain  Suweid,  a  chief  of  the  Khazraj.
The  battle  of  Bo'ath  ensued  ;  but  the  blood  there  shed  did
not  efface  the  memory  of  the  murder,  Al-Harith,  son  of
Suweid,  had  long  sought  to  avenge  his  father's  death  ;  at  last,
he  found  his  opportunity  at  Ohod.  In  the  confusion  of  that
reverse,  he  treacherously  drew  near  to  Al-Mujedhdhar,  and
killed  him.  A  comrade,  who  was  witness  of  the  deed,
reported  it  to  Mohammad.  An  investigation  was  held,  and
the  crime  brought  home  to  Al-Harith.  Shortly  after  his
return  from  Hamra  al-Asad,  the  Prophet  called  for  his  ass,
and  rode  forth  to  Koba.  It  was  not  one  of  the  days
(Saturday  and  Monday)  on  which  he  ordinarily  repaired  to
that  suburb,  and  the  men  of  Upper  Medina  boded  no  good
from  his  visit.  He  entered  their  mosque  and  received  the
salutation  of  the  chief  inhabitants  of  the  vicinity.  At  length
the  culprit  himself,  clothed  in  a  yellow  dress,  and  little
anticipating  the  event,  came  up.  Perceiving  him  approach,
Mohammad  called  aloud  to  'Oweim,  chief  of  the  Aus  to  which
the  murdered  man  belonged  :  Take  Al-HdritJi  son  of  Suweid
unto  tlie  gate  of  the  mosque,  and  there  strike  off  his  head,
^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  579  (not  in  At-Tabari)  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  140.


XIV  J  THE  LAW  OF  INHERITANCE  273

because  of  al-MnjcdJidhar  wJiom  lie  slew  on  tJie  day  of  Ohod.
'Oweim  prepared  to  obey,  when  Al-Harith  desired  leave  to
speak,  and  hastening  towards  Mohammad  laid  hold  of  his
stirrup  as  he  was  about  to  mount  his  ass.  He  begged  for
mercy,  and  promised  to  expiate  the  crime  by  any  sacrifice
the  Prophet  might  direct,  Mohammad  turned  from  him,
and  reiterated  the  order  of  execution.  Seeing  the  decree  to
be  irrevocable,  'Oweim  dragged  Al-Harith  back  to  the  gate,
and  there  beheaded  him,  in  the  presence  of  Mohammad,  the
sons  of  Al-Mujedhdhar,  and  the  assembled  chiefs.  The
assumption  of  supreme  authority  was  unquestioned,  and  is
evidence  of  the  absolute  command  now  exercised  by  the
Prophet  over  the  whole  city.

Another  scene which occurred  shortly after  the  battle Widow  of
of Ohod illustrates the manner in which the oracles of  fa^n^^Mcf/'
Mohammad  were  given  forth,  and  the  incidental  way  in  which  hammad  at
the  political  and  social  code  that  still  rules  the  Muslim  world  ^  ^^^*
grew  up. Among  the  slain  was  Sa'd,  son  of  Ar-Rabl*,^  who
left  a  widow  and  two  daughters,  but  whose  brother,  according
to  the  practice  of  the  times,  took  possession  of  the  whole
inheritance. The  widow  was  grieved  at  this  ;  and,  being  a
discreet  and  prudent  person,  pondered  how  she  might  obtain
redress. She invited Mohammad to a  feast, with some
twenty of  his chief  companions. He agreed to  go. A
retired  spot  among  the  palm-trees  of  her  garden  was  sprinkled
with  water,  and  the  repast  there  spread. Mohammad  arrived
and with his followers seated himself upon the carpets
prepared  for  them. He  spoke  kindly  to  the  widow  of  her
husband's  memory,  so  that  the  women  wept,  and  the  eyes  of
the  Prophet  also filled  with tears. The supper  was then
eaten,  and  a  feast  of  fresh  dates  followed. When  the  repast
was  over,  the  widow  arose,  and  thus  disclosed  her  grief:  '  Sa'd,
as  thou  well  knowest,  was  slain  at  Ohod, His  brother  hath
seized the  inheritance. There is nothing  left for  the  two
daughters  ; and how shall they be married without a
portion?' Mohammad,  moved  by  the  simple  tale,  replied:
'The  Lord  shall decide regarding  the inheritance;  for  no Origin  of
command  hath  been  yet  revealed  to  me  in  this  matter. Come  ^^^  law  of

t  T 1 11 1  female  in-

again unto  me  when  I  shall  have returned  home.' So  he heritance

^  Al-Wakidi,  p.  146  f. The  same  who  allowed  'Abd  ar-Rahman,  when
he  lodged  with  him  on  his  arrival,  to  choose  one  of  his  two  wives.

S


274  BATTLE  OF  OHOD  [chap.  xiv.

departed.  Shortly  after,  as  he  sat  at  his  door  surrounded  by
companions,  symptoms  of  inspiration  came  upon  him  ; — he
was  oppressed,  and  drops  of  sweat  fell  like  pearls  from  his
forehead.  Then  he  commanded  that  the  widow  of  Sa'd  and
his  brother  should  be  summoned,  and  when  they  came,  he
thus  addressed  the  latter :  '  Restore  unto  the  daughters  of
Sa'd  two-thirds  of  that  which  he  hath  left  behind  him,  and
one-eighth  part  unto  his  widow :  the  remainder  is  for  thee.'
The  widow,  overjoyed,  uttered  the  Tekbir :  'God  is  most
great'  Such  was  the  origin  of  one  of  the  main  provisions  of
the  Mohammadan  law  of  inheritance.^

^  See  Sura  iv.  8  ff. Supplementary  rules  are  added  at  the  close  of
the  Sura.


CHAPTER  XV

FROM  THE  BATTLE  OF  OHOD  TO  THE  EXPULSION  OF  THE
BENI  AN-NADlR.


A.H. IV.— A. D. 625


/ETAT. 57


KOREISH  were  satisfied  with  the  punishment  they  had
inflicted  upon  Mohammad.  Abu  Sufyan,  on  his  return  home,
went  straight  to  the  Ka'ba,  where  he  rendered  thanks  to
HUBAL  for  the  victory,  shaved  his  head,  and  returned  to  his
home  absolved  from  his  vows  of  abstinence.  Medina  enjoyed
a  long  respite  from  the  designs  of  Koreish.  But  the  prestige
of  Mohammad  had  been  seriously  shaken  among  the  Arab
tribes ;  and  these,  emboldened  by  his  late  defeat,  or  it  may
be  instigated  by  Koreish,  gave,  from  time  to  time,  fresh
trouble  and  anxiety.  The  early  intelligence,  however,  which
he  secured  by  means  of  an  effective  espionage,  enabled
him  to  anticipate  these  movements,  and  generally  to  dis-
perse the  gatherings  without  serious  loss.  But  there  were
exceptions.

The  first  two  months  after  the  battle  were  passed  in  tran-
quillity ;  but  with  the  opening  of  the  fourth  year  of  the
Hijra,  rumours  reached  Mohammad  from  various  quarters  of
gatherings  being  organised  against  him,  and  he  hastened  to
take  the  initiative.  The  Beni  Asad,  a  powerful  tribe,  con-
federates of  Koreish,  ranged  over  an  extensive  territory  in
the  central  desert  Intelligence  was  received  that  their
chief,  Toleiha,  had  assembled  a  force  of  cavalry  and  rapid
camel-riders  to  make  a  raid  upon  Medina.  Mohammad
forthwith  despatched  150  men,  Citizens  and  Refugees
indifferently,  under  Abu  Selama,  with  instructions  to  march
at  night  by  an  unfrequented  route,  and  conceal  themselves

275


Satisfaction
of  Koreish
at  the  victory
of  Ohod


Beni  Asad
dispersed.
A.H.  IV.
April,  A.D.
625


276 ASSASSINATION  OF  CHIEF  OF  BENI  LIHYAN [chap.

by  day,  so  as  to  take  the  hostile  camp  by  surprise.^  They
were  so  far  successful  as  to  fall  unexpectedly  upon  a  large
herd  of  camels,  which,  with  three  of  the  herdsmen,  they
captured,  and,  having  ravaged  the  country  far  and  wide,
returned  after  eleven  days  with  their  booty  to  Medina,  The
usual  share  of  the  plunder,  with  one  of  the  captives,  having
been  set  apart  for  Mohammad,  the  remainder  was  divided
amongst  the  soldiers.  The  Beni  Asad  were  effectually
dispersed  for  the  present ;  but  they  reserved  their  hostility
for  a  future  occasion.  This  Toleiha  is  the  same  who  at  a
later  period  set  himself  up  as  a  prophet  in  antagonism  to
Mohammad.  Abu  Selama  had  signalised  himself  at  Bedr,
and  there  received  a  deep  wound.  It  broke  out  afresh  on
this  expedition,  and  in  the  end  proved  fatal,  as  we  shall  see.
Chief  of  Another  gathering  took place  at  'Orana  [or  Nakhla],  a

Sn^T  spot  between  Mecca  and  At-Ta'if^  The  Libyan,  a  branch
A.H.  IV.  of  the  Hudheil  (which  inhabited,  as  they  still  do,  a  territory
^  pn ,  A.D.  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  Mecca),  and  other  neighbouring  tribes,
rallied  round  Sufyan  ibn  Khalid,  their  chief,  with  the  avowed
intention  of  following  up  the  late  victory  at  Ohod.  Moham-
mad, knowing  that  their  movements  depended  solely  upon
Sufyan  ibn  Khalid,  despatched  'Abdallah  ibn  Oneis,  with
instructions  to  assassinate  him.  'Abdallah  joined  Sufyan  ibn
Khalid  as  a  volunteer,  fell  upon  him  unawares  while  no  one
was  near,  and,  having  cut  off  his  head,  carried  it  away  with
him.  He  eluded  pursuit,  and,  reaching  Medina  in  safety,
presented  himself  before  Mohammad  in  the  Mosque.  The
Prophet  welcomed  him,  and  asked  the  issue  of  his  adventure.
'Abdallah  replied  by  displaying  the  head  of  his  victim.
Mohammad,  in  token  of  his  gratification,  presented  'Abdallah
with  his  staff:  '  This'  said  he,  'shall  be  a  token  betwixt  thee
and  me  on  the  day  of  resurrection.  Verily,  few  on  that  day
shall  have  wherewithal  to  lean  upon.'  '  Abdallah  joined  the
precious  memorial  to  his  sword,  and  wore  it  by  his  side  till
the  day  of  his  death,  when  it  was  buried  with  him.  The
murder  of  Sufyan  ibn  Khalid  broke  up  the  assemblage  at

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  975  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1759  (under  the  year  x.  A.H.) ;
Al-Wakidi,  p.  151  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  35.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  9S1  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1760  [in  both  which  the  chief  is
called  Khalid  ibn  Sufyan]  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  224  f.  [in  the  year  VI.]  ;  Ibn
Sa'd,  p.  35.


XV.]  DISASTER  AT  AR-RAJI'  VJ^

'Orana ;  and  probably,  from  the  laxity  of  Arab  morals,  the
outrage  did  not  much  affect  the  reputation  of  the  Prophet ;
but  Mohammad  had  no  right  to  complain  when  he  shortly
afterwards  paid  the  penalty  in  the  loss  of  several  of  his
followers  by  an  act  no  worse  than  'Abdallah's.

In  the  following  month,  Mohammad  despatched  six  of  Mi?hap  at
his  followers  in  the  direction  of  Mecca.  The  object  is  ^.h.  iv!'
variously  stated.  The  most  likely  is  that  they  were  simply  May,  a.d.
spies  sent  to  gain  information  of  the  intentions  of  Koreish.
But  the  tradition  most  generally  received  is,  that  they  were
deputed  for  the  instruction  of  two  small  tribes,  which,  at  the
instigation  of  the  Beni  Libyan,  pretended  a  desire  to  embrace
Islam.^  The  party  were,  with  one  exception,  Citizens.
When  they  had  journeyed  as  far  as  Ar-Rajl',  a  stage  or  two
from  Mecca,  they  were  treacherously  surrounded  and  over-
powered by  an  armed  band  of  the  Libyan,  who  thirsted  to
avenge  the  assassination  of  their  chief.  Three  died  fighting
bravely :  -  the  other  three  were  seized  and  bound  as  prisoners
to  be  sold  at  Mecca.  One  succeeded  in  loosening  his  bands
and  had  nearly  escaped  when  he  was  crushed  by  pieces  of
rock  hurled  down  upon  him  ;  his  tomb  is  preserved  and  visited
to  the  present  day  at  Marr  az-Zahran.  The  only  survivors,
Zeid  and  Khobeib,  were  purchased  by  the  heirs  of  two  chiefs
of  Koreish  slain  at  Bedr.  They  were  kept  till  the  sacred
month  of  Safar  had  expired ;  and  then  taken  to  At-Tan'im,
beyond  the  limits  of  the  holy  territory,  where,  in  presence  of
a  large  concourse  from  Mecca,  they  were  put  to  death.  The  Martyrdom
scene  is  memorable.  The  two  '  martyrs,'  for  such  to  the  cause  Khobeib  "
of  Islam  they  really  were,  refused  their  liberty  at  the  price  of
recantation.  The  curse  of  Khobeib  was  not  easily  forgotten
by  the  witnesses  of  the  spectacle.  After  praying  briefly,
while  they  bound  him  to  the  stake,  he  called  out  with  a  loud
voice:  '(9  Lord!  number  these  men  one  by  one,  and  destroy
them  utterly. Let  not  one  escape  !  ' At  this  imprecation,  the

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  638  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1431  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  156  f.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  39  f.

-  One  of  these  was  'Asim,  out  of  whose  skull  Sulafa,  whose  two  sons
he  had  slain  at  Ohod,  swore  that  she  would  drink  wine.  See  an/e,  p.
259  n.  The  Beni  Libyan  were  about  to  cut  off  the  head  of  'Asim  and
carry  it  to  Sulafa,  but  a  swarm  of  bees  interposed,  and  when  the  people
went  to  seek  for  it  afterwards,  the  Lord  had  swept  it  away  with  a  flood,
and  thus  frustrated  the  vow  of  Sulafa.


278  MARTYRDOM  OF  ZEID  AND  KHOBEIB  [chap.

multitude,  thinking  to  avoid  its  potency,  fell  with  their  chil-
dren flat  upon  the  ground.  Then,  with  daggers  put  into  the
hands  of  children  whose  fathers  had  fallen  at  Bedr,^  they
stabbed  the  bodies  of  their  victims.  And  thus  ended  the
wretched  tragedy.^
Muslim  In  the  same  month  another  and  more  serious  catastrophe

party  cut  to took  place.^ The  Bcui 'Amir,  and  their  neighbours  the  Beni

pieces  at  '^  '  _  °  .  , ,  . ,

Bi'r  Ma'una.  Suleim,  belonged  to  the  great  Hawazin  tribe  in  Nejd,  which
Ma'  ^AD  some  time  before  had  fought  against  Koreish.  They  were
625  under  the  leadership  of  two  chiefs,  Abu  Bera  and  'Amir  ibn

at-Tofail.  The  former,  from  great  age  relieved  from  active
command,  paid  a  friendly  visit  to  Mohammad  about  this
time.*  He  came  with  a  present  of  two  horses  and  two
riding-camels.  These  the  Prophet  refused  to  receive,  unless
Abu Bera  would embrace  Islam. This he declined ; but

1  To  keep  up  the  fiction  that  it  was  //le  children  who  slew  the  victims
in  retaliation  for  their  parents'  death.

^  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  the  main  facts  of  the  story,  although  in
the  details  much  of  the  marvellous  has  been  superadded.  Thus  Khobeib,
when  in  confinement,  was  supplied  by  supernatural  visitants  with  large
bunches  of  grapes,  not  a  single  grape  being  at  the  season  to  be  had  else-
whei-e.  At  his  execution  he  bade  his  salutation  to  be  sent  to  Mohammad,
and  there  being  none  to  take  it,  Gabriel  himself  carried  it  to  the  Prophet,
who  returned  the  salutation  in  the  hearing  of  his  companions.  When
imprisoned,  the  only  requests  he  made  were  to  be  furnished  with  sweet
water,  to  have  no  food  that  had  been  offered  to  idols,  and  to  be  told
beforehand  of  the  time  of  his  execution.  The  day  before  he  was  put  to
death,  he  desired  a  razor  to  shave  himself  with,  which  a  female  attendant
sent  by  her  little  boy.  He  asked  the  child  whether  he  did  not  fear  that
he  would  kill  him  with  it,  out  of  revenge.  The  mother  was  alarmed,  and
then  Khobeib  said  :  '  Nay,  fear  not.  I  would  never  kill  your  son  ;  for
treachery  is  not  allowable  in  our  religion.'  When  they  had  bound  him
to  the  stake,  they  said  :  '  Now  abjure  Islam,  and  we  will  let  thee  go.'
'  Not  so,'  he  said  ;  'I  would  not  abjure  Islam  if  it  were  to  get  me  the
whole  world  in  return.'  'Wouldst  thou  not  that  Mohammad  were  in  thy
place,  and  thou  sitting  in  security  at  home?'  'I  would  not,'  he  replied,
'that  I  should  have  deliverance,  and  Mohammad  suffer  the  pain  even  of
a  thorn.'  Similar  stories  are  told  of  Zeid.  They  embraced  each  other
when  they  came  to  the  place  of  execution.

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  648  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1441  f  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  153  f.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  36.

*  Abu  Bera  (called  also  'Amir  ibn  Malik)  at  a  later  period  consulted
Mohammad  regarding  an  internal  disease  from  which,  in  his  old  age,  he
was  suffering.  It  is  possible  that  this  visit  also  may  have  had  a  similar
object.


XV.] MASSACRE  OF  MUSLIMS  AT  BI'R  MA'UNA  279

said :  '  If  thou  wilt  send  a  company  of  thy  followers  to  my
people,  the  Beni  'Amir,  I  have  hopes  that  they  will  accept  thy
call.'  Mohammad  replied,  that  he  feared  for  the  safety  of  his
people  among  the  treacherous  tribes  of  Nejd,  some  of  whom
were  in  immediate  alliance  with  Koreish.  But  Abu  Bera
declared  that  he  would  himself  be  responsible  for  their
safety.  Trusting  to  this  pledge,  Mohammad  despatched  forty
(by  some  accounts  seventy)  of  his  followers,  mostly  Citizens
of  Medina,  with  a  letter  to  the  Beni  'Amir.^  After  four  days,
they  reached  a  fountain  called  Bi'r  Ma'una,  lying  between
the  Beni  'Amir  and  Suleim.  Here  they  halted,  and  despatched
a  messenger  with  the  letter  to  'Amir  ibn  at-Tofail.  This
chief,  without  reading  the  letter,  put  the  messenger  to  death,
and  called  upon  his  tribe  to  attack  the  rest  of  the  party  ;  but
they  refused  to  break  the  pledge  of  Abu  Bera.  'Amir  then
sought  the  aid  of  the  Beni  Suleim,  who,  having  lost  some  of
their  kinsmen  at  Bedr,  were  bitterly  hostile  to  Mohammad.
Joined  by  a  large  body  of  these,  he  proceeded  to  Bi'r  Ma'una
and  fell  upon  the  party  still  waiting  the  return  of  their
messenger.  They  were  all  cut  to  pieces,  excepting  two  men,
one  who  was  left  for  dead  on  the  field,  and  another  'Amr  ibn
Omeiya,  who,  having  been  absent  with  the  camels  at  the
time  of  the  slaughter,  was  spared  on  his  'return  by  the  chief,
in  fulfilment  of  a  vow  made  at  his  mother's  grave.^

The  news  of  this  disaster,  following  immediately  on  that Mohammad's

grief  and

^  They  are  described  as  chiefly  Citizens  who  spent  the  day  in  hewing  piayer
wood  and  drawing  water  for  Mohammad's  family,  and  at  night  slept  in
the  Mosque.  But  there  were  several  Refugees  ;  and  among  them  'Amir
ibn  Fuheira,  the  freedman  of  Abu  Bekr,  who  accompanied  his  master  and
the  Prophet  in  their  flight  from  Mecca.  The  number  seventy  is  a
favourite  one  ;  Al-Wakidi  remarks  that  seventy  men  of  Medma  were
killed  at  Ohod  ;  seventy  at  Bi'r  Ma'una  ;  seventy  at  Al-Yemama  ;  and
seventy  at  Jisr  Abi  'Obeid,  or  the  battle  of  the  Bridge.

2  Al-Mundhir,  the  leader,  escaped  the  massacre  and  was  offered
quarter,  which  he  refused.  Mohammad,  on  hearing  this,  declared  that
he  embraced  death ;  which  expression  has  been  magnified  into  meaning
that  he  proceeded  on  the  expedition  with  a  sure  presentiment  of  his  end.
When  'Amir  ibn  at-Tofail  went  over  the  field,  he  asked  his  prisoner  to
identify  the  dead  bodies.  This  he  did,  but  the  corpse  of  'Amir  ibn
Fuheira  was  nowhere  to  be  seen  ;  whereupon  one  of  the  tribe  declared
that  when  Ibn  Fuheira  was  stabbed  he  heard  him  call  out,  '/  have
gaitied  Paradise,'  and  saw  him  straightway  ascend  in  the  air  to  heaven.
There  is  a  multitude  of  such  traditions.


28o


MOHAMMAD'S  COMMINATORY  PRAYER  [chap.


Mohammad
pays  blood-
money  for
two  men,
wrongly
killed  as
reprisals


of  Ar-Rajr,  greatly  afflicted  Mohammad.  Next  day,  when
concluding  the  morning  prayer,  he  invoked  the  Divine
vengeance  on  the  perpetrators  of  both  these  massacres,
saying  :  '  0  Lord !  in  thine  indignation  trample  under  foot  the
Beni  Li/iydn,  Beni  Ri'l^  Bent  DJiakwdn'  (and  so  on,  naming
the  several  tribes  in  succession)  ;  *  make  their  years  like  unto
the  years  of  JosepJi}  for  that  they  have  rebelled  against  God  and
rebelled  against  His  Prophet ! '  This  commination  was  offered
up  with  the  daily  prayers  in  public  for  a  month.  The  Prophet
professed  also  to  have  received  through  Gabriel  the  following
message  from  the  martyrs  of  Ma'una  :  '  Acquaint  our  People
that  we  have  met  our  Lord.  He  is  well  pleased  with  us,  and
we  are  well  pleased  with  Him.'  ^

'Amir  ibn  Omeiya,  on  his  way  home  from  the  disaster,  fell
in  with  two  men  belonging  to  a  branch  of  the  Beni  'Amir,
and  slew  them  while  asleep  as  a  reprisal  for  the  massacre  at
Bi'r  Ma'una.  But  it  turned  out  that  these  men  were
returning  from  Mohammad,  with  whom  they  had  just  entered
into  terms.  When  'Amir,  therefore,  reported  what  he  had
done,  instead  of  being  praised,  he  was  rebuked  by
Mohammad,  who  declared  his  intention  of  paying  blood-
money  for  the  two  murdered  men.  The  act,  indeed,  being
a  breach  of  truce,  was  so  contrary  to  the  international  code
of  the  Arabs,  that  'Amir  ibn  at-Tofail  himself  sent  a  despatch
to  Mohammad,  complaining  of  it.  Accordingly,  full  com-
pensation for  both  was  transmitted  to  the  tribe,  together
with  the  booty  taken  from  them.

^  Alluding  to  the  seven  bad  years  in  Pharaoh's  dream.  The  tribes
named  after  the  Beni  Libyan  were  the  clans  of  the  Beni  Suleim  who
joined  in  the  attack.

2  This  formed  a  verse  of  the  Kor'an  ;  but,  for  some  reason  not
apparent,  it  was  'cancelled'  and  removed.  On  receiving  the  message,
Mohammad  prayed :  '  O  Lord  !  guide  the  Beni  'Amir  to  the  truth.  I
seek  unto  thee  for  protection  from  'Amir  ibn  at-Tofail ! '  The  visit  of
Abu  Bera,  and  what  immediately  follows,  show  that  there  had  been
some  friendly  communication  between  the  parties.  Perhaps  there  were
divided  opinions  in  the  tribe.  The  mode  in  which  tradition  treats  the
massacre,  and  Mohammad's  having  almost  immediately  after  entered
into  communication  with  'Amir  ibn  at-Tofail  on  the  subject  of  a  claim  for
blood-money,  look  as  if  the  attack  was  not  so  gratuitous  as  might  appear.
Mohammad  at  first  attributed  it  to  Abu  Bera  ;  but  Abu  Bera  cleared
himself.  His  son  attacked  'Amir  with  a  spear,  to  show  that  his  father
disowned  the  transaction.


XV.]  BENI  AN-NADTR  ordered  INTO  EXILE  281

The  tragedy  of  Bi'r  Ma'una  involved  a  still  graver  issue.^ Beni
The  Beni  an-NadIr,  one  of  the  Tevvish  tribes  in  the  vicinity,  ^^-^^^'r

'  •'_  ■'  ' ordered  into

were  confederate  with  the  Beni  'Amir.  Mohammad  thought  exile,  a.h.
it  right,  perhaps  on  account  of  the  ill-treatment  he  had  ^^^^  62^'
received  from  their  allies,  that  they  should  aid  in  defraying
the  blood-money  for  the  two  men  murdered  by  'Amir.
Attended  by  a  few  followers,  he  visited  their  settlement,
distant  two  or  three  miles  from  Koba,  and  laid  his  request
before  their  chiefs.  They  answered  courteously,  promised
assistance,  and  invited  him  to  sit  down  while  they  made
ready  a  repast.  After  sitting  thus  for  a  little  while,  he  arose
abruptly  and  walked  out  of  the  assembly.  His  followers
waited  long,  expecting  his  return.  But  they  waited  in  vain  ;
at  length  they  got  up,  and  went  back  to  Medina.  To  their
surprise,  they  found  that  Mohammad  had  returned  straight-
way to  the  Mosque,  and  given  out  that  his  hasty  departure
was  due  to  a  divine  monition  that  the  chiefs  of  the  Nadir  had
formed  a  plot  to  ascend  the  roof,  and  roll  down  great  stones
upon  him.  But  as  he  makes  no  mention  of  this  in  the
Kor'an  (which  dwells  at  some  length  on  the  siege),  and  there
had  been  nothing  to  excite  the  suspicion  of  his  companions,
the  story  is  somewhat  doubtful.  However  this  may  be,
Mohammad  resolved  that  the  tribe  should  no  longer  remain
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Medina.  Mohammad,  son  of
Maslama  (the  assassin  of  Ka'b),  was  immediately  commis-
sioned to  deliver  this  command :  '  Tims  saitJi  the  Prophet  of
the  Lord,  Ye  shall  go  forth  out  of  my  land  within  the  space  of
ten  days :  whosoever  after  that  remainetJi  behind  shall  be  put  to
deaths  Startled  and  alarmed,  '  Oh  Mohammad  !' they  said,
'  we  did  not  think  that  thou,  our  friend,  or  any  other  of  the
Aus,  would  ever  have  consented  to  be  the  bearer  of  a
message  such  as  this.'  ^Hearts  are  cJia^iged  now!  was  his
only  reply,  as  he  turned  and  left  them  in  dismay.

They  hesitated. At  first  they  began  their  preparations They  refuse.
to  depart. But  it  was  a  grievous  prospect  to  be  exiled  from tesie^t^ed
the  home  of  their  fathers,  from  their  fertile  fields  and  choice
date-groves. 'Abdallah  ibn  Obei,  and  others  who  had not
yet  forgotten  the  close  and  ancient  obligations  which  bound
them  to the Jews,  were displeased at the  order  for  their

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  652  f. ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1448  flf.  ;  Al-Wukidi,  p.  160  ff.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  40  f.


282  THEY  REFUSE,  AND  ARE  BESIEGED  [chap.

banishment.  'Abdallah  at  first  strove  to  bring  about  a
reconciliation.^  Failing  in  this,  he  accused  Mohammad  of
having  invented  the  charge  of  treachery  against  the  Jews,
and  promised  himself  to  stand  by  them  with  his  own  people
and  with  allies  from  Nejd.  Reassured  by  this  hope,  and
trusting  to  the  strength  of  their  fortress,  they  resolved  to
hold  fast.  So  they  sent  to  Mohammad,  saying:  'We  shall
not  depart  from  our  possessions ;  do  what  thou  wilt  against
us.'  '■Allah  Akbarf  cried  the  Prophet,  when  he  heard  it,
unable  to  conceal  his  delight:  ^  The  Jeivs  are  gohig  to  Jight !
Great  is  the  Lord T  and  the  cry,  taken  up  by  his  companions,
re-echoed  through  the  courts  of  the  Mosque.  Arming  at
once,  they  marched  forth,  'All  carrying  the  standard,  to
invest  the  stronghold  of  the  rebellious  tribe.  The  besiegers
were  kept  at  a  distance  by  arrows  and  stones ;  but  the
Nadir  looked  in  vain  for  succour  either  from  Medina  or  from
the  tribes  of  Nejd.  The  Beni  Koreiza,  the  only  remaining
Jewish  tribe,  either  swayed  by  ancient  jealousies  or  fearful
of  incurring  the  Prophet's  wrath,  pretended  that  they  could
not  break  their  treaty  with  him,  and  held  aloof.  It  would
have  been  better  for  them  now  to  have  perished  on  the  field
than  to  have  had  to  rue  the  day  two  years  later  on.  Notwith-
standing these  disappointments,  the  Nadir  held  bravely  out,
and  gallantly  defied  all  the  attempts  of  their  enemy.
Mohammad  became  impatient,  and  at  last,  to  hasten  their
departure,  had  recourse  to  an  expedient,  unusual,  if  not  un-
Theirdate-  warranted,  by  the  laws  of  Arab  warfare.  He  cut  down  the
surrounding  clumps  of  palm-trees,  and  burned  the  choicest  of
them  to  the  roots  with  fire.  The  Jews  remonstrated  against
this  proceeding  as  not  only  barbarous  in  itself  but  specially
forbidden  by  the  law  of  Moses  ;  and  Mohammad,  sensible  of
the  reproach,  had  to  justify  the  act  by  divine  command.^

^  That  'Abdallah  really  broke  faith  with  the  Jews  in  promising  them
aid,  and  then  holding  back,  is  questionable,  for  tradition  delights  to  cast
contempt  and  abuse  upon  'Abdallah  as  the  impersonation  of  disaffection
and  hypocrisy.  The  accusation,  however,  appears  in  the  Kor'an,  as  will
be  seen  below.  The  position  of  'Abdallah  was  trying.  The  new  faith  had
penetrated  into  every  branch  of  the  Medina  tribes,  and  rendered  any
combined  opposition  to  Mohammad  impossible.  He  probably  found  it
impracticable  to  fulfil  his  promise.

^  The  Beni  Nadir,  on  their  palm-trees  being  cut  down,  called  out
from  their  ramparts : '  O  Mohammad  ! thou  wert  heretofore  wont  to


trees  are
burned


XV.]


BENI  AN-NAD!R  exiled


283


When  the  siege  had  now  lasted  for  two  or  three  weeks,
the  unfortunate  Jews,  seeing  no  prospect  of  relief,  sent  to  say
that  they  were  now  ready  to  lay  down  their  arms  and
abandon  the  lands  which  had  already  lost  to  them  their
special  value.  Mohammad  was  glad  to  accede  to  the  offer ;
for  the  siege  might  still  have  been  indefinitely  prolonged,
and  there  were  dangerous  elements  around  him.  They
submitted,  moreover,  to  the  stipulation  that  they  should  leave
their  weapons  behind  them.  Upon  this,  the  besieging  force
retired  ;  and  the  Nadir,  having  laden  their  property,  even  to
their  doors  and  lintels,  upon  camels,  set  out,  with  tabrets  and
music,  on  the  road  to  Syria.  Some  of  them,  with  their  chiefs
Huyei  and  Kinana,  turned  aside  at  Kheibar.  The  rest  went
on  to  Jericho  and  the  highlands  south  of  Syria.  Two  only  of
their  number  abandoned  their  ancestral  faith,  and,  having
embraced  Islam,  were  maintained  in  the  possession  of  their
fields  and  property.  Thus  early  were  temporal  inducements
brought  to  bear  on  the  aggrandisement  of  Islam.

The  spoil  consisted  of  fifty  coats  of  mail,  fifty  stand  of
armour,  and  three  hundred  and  forty  swords.  But  of
greater  importance  was  the  fertile  tract  now  at  the  disposal
of  Mohammad.  This,  by  a  special  revelation,  was  exempted
from  the  usual  law  of  distribution,  because  it  had  been  gained
without  actual  fighting ;  and  he  divided  it  at  his  discretion.
A  portion  of  the  confiscated  lands  was  kept  for  the  support
of  his  own  family  and  for  the  relief  of  the  poor.  Two  indi-
gent Citizens  who  had  distinguished  themselves  in  the  field
also  received  grants,  but  with  this  exception  the  remainder
was  given  entirely  to  the  Refugees,  who  were  now  enabled  to
dispense  with  the  bounty  of  their  neighbours,  and  promoted
to  a  position  of  independence  and  affluence.  Abu  Bekr,
'Omar,  Az-Zubeir,  and  other  chief  Companions,  are  named
among  the  persons  endowed  thus  with  valuable  estates.

The  expulsion  of  the  Nadir  was  a  material  triumph  for
Mohammad.  One  by  one  he  was  breaking  up  the  Jewish
settlements,  and  weakening  the  cause  of  disaffection;  for  a
combination  at  any  time,  between  the  Jews  and  the  other
enemies  of  Islam,  would  have  proved  critical  to  his  safety  at

forbid  injustice  on  the  earth,  and  to  rebuke  him  that  committed  it.
Wherefore,  then,  hast  thou  cut  down  our  palm-trees,  and  burned  them
with  fire?' — Ibn  Hisham,  p.  653. The  prohibition  is  iu  Deut.  xx.  19.


They  sub-
mit to  ex-
patriation


Two  rene-
gades


Fields  of

the  Beni

an-Nadir

divided

among

Refugees


Importance
of  victory
over  the
Beni  an-

Nadlr


284  THEIR  EXILE  NOTICED  IN  THE  KOR'AN [chap.

Notices  of Medina. An entire Sura is devoted to the victory now
IV"-  achieved, which is ascribed to the terror struck by the

Kor  an  '  ■'

Almighty  into  the  Jewish  heart. The  following  are  extracts  : —

Sura  lix.  I  f.  All  that  is  in  the  Heavens  and in the Earth praiseth God — the

Mighty  and  the  Wise.  He  it  is  that  hath  driven  forth  the  unbelieving
Jews  from  their  habitations  to  join  the  former  exiles.  Ye  thought  not
that  they  w^ould  go  forth ;  and  they  themselves  thought  that  their
Strongholds  would  defend  them  against  God.  But  God  visited  them
from  a  quarter  on  which  they  counted  not,  and  cast  terror  into  their
hearts.  They  destroyed  their  houses  with  their  own  hands,  and  with  the
hands  of  the  Believers.  Take  warning,  therefore,  ye  that  have  eyes.
And  if  God  had  not  decreed  against  them  expatriation.  He  had  verily
punished  them  otherwise  in  this  World  ;  and  in  the  World  to  come  there
is  prepared  for  them  the  punishment  of  Fire.  This  because  they  set
themselves  up  against  God  and  his  Prophet ;  and  whosoever  setteth
himself  up  against  God, — verily  God  is  strong  in  Vengeance.  That
which  thou  didst  cut  down  of  the  Date-trees,  or  left  of  them  standing
upon  their  roots,  it  was  by  the  command  of  God, — that  He  might  abase
the  evildoers.  And  that  which  God  gave  unto  his  Prophet  as  booty  from
them  ; — ye  did  not  march  horses  or  camels  against  them  ;  but  God
giveth  unto  His  Prophet  dominion  over  whom  He  pleaseth  ;  and  God  is
over  all  things  Powerful.  That  which  God  hath  given  unto  His  Prophet
from  the  inhabitants  of  the  Villages  (thus  surrendering),  is  for  God  and
the  Prophet,  and  his  Kindred,  and  the  Orphan  and  the  Destitute,  and
the  Wayfarer,  that  the  turn  (of  booty)  be  not  confined  unto  the  Rich
amongst  you.  That  therefore  which  the  Prophet  giveth  unto  you,  receive
it  :  and  that  which  he  withholdeth  from  you,  withhold  yourselves  from
the  same  ;  and  fear  God,  for  God  is  strong  in  vengeance.  It  is  for  the
poor  of  the  Refugees, — those  who  have  been  driven  forth  from  their
homes  and  from  their  properties,  desiring  the  grace  of  God  and  His
favour,  and  assisting  God  and  His  Apostle.  These  are  the  sincere  ones.
They  that  were  before  them  in  possession  of  the  City  (Medina)  and  the
faith,  love  those  that  have  taken  refuge  with  them,  and  find  not  in  their
breasts  any  want  of  the  spoil : '  they  prefer  (their  Guests)  before  them-
selves, even  if  they  themselves  be  destitute.  *  *  *  *

V.I  iff.  Hast thou not observed the Disaffected?- They say unto their

Brethren, — the  unbelieving  People  of  the  Book:  ^  If  ye  be  driven  forth,
we  will  surely  go  forth  with  you.  We  will  never  submit  concerning  you
unto  a7iy  one:  and  if  ye  be  attacked  we  shall  certainly  aid  you.'  But
God  is  witness  that  they  are  liars.  If  such  are  driven  forth,  these  will
not  go  forth  with  them  ;  and  if  they  be  attacked,  they  will  not  assist
them  ;  and  if  they  were  to  assist  them,  they  would  surely  turn  their
backs,  and  then  they  would  be  bereft  of  aid.  Verily  ye  are  the  stronger,
because  of  the  terror  cast  into  their  breasts  from  God ; — this,  because

^  That  is,  the  Citizens  of  Medina  had  no  grudge  against  the  Refugees
because  the  booty  was  appropriated  to  them.

^  Referring  to  'Abdallah's  promise  of  assistance.


XV.]


ZEID,  MOHAMMAD'S  SECRETARY


285


they  are  a  People  devoid  of  understanding.  Tliey  shall  never  fight
against  you  unitedly,  excepting  in  fenced  towns,  or  from  behind  walls.
Their  warlike  strength  is  mighty  among  themselves  ;  ye  think  they  are
united,  but  their  hearts  are  divided,  because  they  are  a  people  that  doth
not  comprehend.

They  are  like  unto  those  that  shortly  preceded  them  [i.e.  the  Beni
Kainuka')  ;  they  have  tasted  the  grievous  punishment  of  their  under-
taking. They  are  like  unto  Satan  when  he  said  unto  Man  :  '  Become  an
hifidel ;''  and  when  he  had  become  an  Infidel,  the  Tempter  said  :  '  Verily^
I  am  clear  of  thee  !  Verily^  1  fear  the  Lord  of  all  Worlds.^  Wherefore
the  end  of  them  both  is  that  they  are  cast  into  the  Fire,  dwelling  for  ever
therein  ! That  is  the  reward  of  the  transgressors.

The  Sura,  catching  (as  the  oracle  every  here  and  there
still  does)  something  of  its  early  fire,  closes  with  a  splendid
peroration  : —

He  is  the  Lord.  Beside  Him  there  is  no  God.  It  is  He  that  knoweth
both  the  Seen  and  the  Unseen.  The  Merciful,  the  Compassionate.
There  is  no  God  but  He  ;  the  King,  the  Holy,  the  Giver  of  Peace,  the
Faithful,  the  Guardian,  the  Glorious,  the  Almighty,  the  Most  High.  Far
exalted  is  the  Lord  above  that  which  they  associate  Him  with, — God,  the
Creator,  the  Maker,  the  Framer.  Most  goodly  are  His  names.  All  that
is  in  the  heavens  and  in  the  earth  praiseth  Him.  He  is  the  Glorious,
the  Wise.

Mohammad  had  hitherto  trusted  Jewish  amanuenses  with
the  transcription  of  such  despatches  as  were  needed  in  the
Hebrew  or  Syriac  tongues.  But  his  relations  were  gradually
expanding  northwards,  and  he  could  no  longer  trust
documents  of  political  importance  in  the  hands  of  any  one
belonging  to  a  people  whom  he  had  so  deeply  injured.
About  this  time,  therefore,  he  desired  a  youth  of  Medina,
Zeid,  the  son  of  Thabit,  to  learn  the  Hebrew  and  Syriac
languages.  He  had  already  been  taught  to  write  Arabic  by
one  of  the  prisoners  of  Bedr.  Mohammad  now  made  use  of
him  as  secretary,  both  for  his  vernacular  and  his  foreign
despatches.  It  is  the  same  Zeid  who  was  afterwards
employed  by  Abu  Bekr  in  collecting  the  scattered  Suras  and
fragments  of  the  Kor'an  into  one  volume ;  and  was  also
appointed  controller  of  the  syndicate  charged  with  its
recension  in  the  Caliphate  of 'Othman.^

^  He  was  eleven  years  old  when  Mohammad  arrived  in  Medina.,  and
was  now  therefore  fifteen  or  sixteen.  He  learned  Hebrew  (or  Syriac)  in
half  a  montJi^  it  is  said.  Mohammad  used  to  tell  him  to  stick  his  pen
behind  his  ear,  'for  this  will  bring  to  remembrance  that  which  the
distracted  mind  is  seeking  after.'


V.  16  ff


Peroration
on  the  Deity


v.  23  ff.


Zeid

qualifies
himself  as
secretary
by  learning
Hebrew
and  Syriac


CHAPTER XVI


Bedr  the
Second.
Mohammad
marches  to
Bedr.
Koreish
remain  at
home.
A.H.  IV.
February,
March,  A.D.
625


THE FOURTH AND FIFTH YEARS OF THE HIJRA  ;

OR, FROM THE MIDDLE OF A.D. 625 TO THE END OF A.D. 626

^TAT. 57, 58

For  about  a  year  and  a  half  after  the  expulsion  of  the  Beni
Nadir,  Medina  was  little  disturbed  by  the  hostile  sound  of
arms  at  home.  The  summer  and  autumn  of  the  fourth  year
of  the  Hijra  passed  in  peace.  But  at  last  the  winter  came
round  when,  by  appointment,  the  forces  of  Mecca  and  Medina
were  again  to  meet  at  Bedr.^  The  year  being  one  of
drought,  Abu  Sufyan  was  desirous  that  the  expedition
should  be  deferred  to  a  more  plentiful  season.  Accordingly,
Koreish  engaged  No'eim,  of  a  neutral  tribe,  to  repair  to
Medina,  and  there  give  forth  an  exaggerated  account  of  the
•preparations  at  Mecca,  in  the  hope  that,  with  the  field  of
Ohod  yet  fresh  in  memory,  the  Muslims  might  be  deterred
from  setting  out.  Koreish  eventually  marched  from  Mecca
with  2,000  foot  and  50  horse ;  but  after  one  or  two  days,  the
scarcity  of  provender  forced  them  to  retrace  their  steps.
The  report  of  No'eim  alarmed  the  inhabitants  of  Medina,
and  a  disinclination  appeared  in  some  quarters  again  to  meet
the  enemy.  But  Mohammad,  indignant  at  this  cowardly
spirit,  or  it  may  be  better  informed  of  the  real  counsels  of
Koreish,  declared  with  an  oath  that  he  would  go  forth  to
Bedr,  even  if  he  went  alone.  His  bold  front  inspired  such
confidence  that  1,500  men,  a  force  double  the  number  he  had
as  yet  commanded,  rallied  round  his  standard ;  and  they
carried  with  them  a  great  store  of  wares  and  merchandise
for  the  annual  fair. They  maintained  a  standing  camp  at

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  666  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1457  ff. ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  167  ff. ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  42.


CHAP.  XVI.]


BEDR  THE  SECOND


287


Sura  iii,
166  fi


Bedr  for eight days in defiance  of Koreish, and, having
bartered their goods to advantage, returned to Medina,
Mohammad  was  much  pleased  at  the  result  of  the  campaign, Mohammad
which  is  named  the  Second  Bedr,  and  the  divine  approbation fu^^^ u^
was  signified  in  a  special  revelation  : —

Those  that  responded  to  the  call  of  God  and  His  Proohet,  after  the
wound  which  they  had  received — to  such  of  them  as  are  virtuous  and
fear  God,  there  shall  be  a  great  reward.  Certain  men  said  unto  them,  •
^Verily  the  people  Jiave  gathered  ihcinselves  against  you;  whei'efore  be
afraid  of  them.'  But  it  increased  their  faith,  and  they  saXd,- -'' God
sufficeth  for  as :  He  is  the  best  PatronJ  Therefore  they  returned  with  a
blessing  from  God,  and  favour.  No  evil  touched  them.  They  followed
after  that  which  is  well  pleasing  unto  God  :  and  God  is  possessed  of
boundless  grace.

Verily  this  deviP  would  cause  you  to  fear  his  friends  ;  but  fear  Me
if  ye  be  Believers.

Koreish,  mortified  at  this  triumph,  projected  another  grand
attack  against  Mohammad.  But  a  year  elapsed  before  the
design  was  carried  into  execution :  meanwhile  Medina
enjoyed  a  respite.

In  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  year,  a  party  of  400  men,
commanded  by  Mohammad  himself,  set  out  to  disperse
certain  tribes  of  the  Beni  Ghatafan,  assembled  with  suspicious
purpose  at  Dhat  ar-Rika'.-  They  fled  to  the  mountains  at
his  approach.  Mohammad  advanced  unexpectedly  upon
their  habitations,  and  carried  off  some  of  their  women.
After  an  absence  of  fifteen  days  the  party  returned  to
Medina.^ It  was  in  this  short  campaign  that  the  '  Service  of

'  Applied  by  some  to  Abu  Sufyan  ;  by  others,  with  more  likelihood,  to
No'eim.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  661  iif.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1454  ff.  ;  Al-Wilkidi,  p.  172  f.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  43  f.

^  A  story  illustrative  of  the  kind  and  unbending  manner  by  which
Mohammad  engaged  the  affections  of  his  followers  may  be  briefly
recounted  here,  as  it  relates  to  the  present  expedition.  Jabir,  a  poor
Citizen,  son  of  a  man  slain  at  Ohod,  was  mounted  on  a  wretched  camel,
which  Mohammad  (after  miraculously  transforming  it  from  a  slow  into
a  very  rapid  walker)  said  he  would  buy  from  him.  He  spoke  to  Jabir
kindly  concerning  his  father,  and  five-and-twenty  times  invoked  mercy  on
him.  Then  in  a  livelier  strain:  'Hast  thou  married  lately?'  Jabir
replied,  'Yes.'  'A  maiden,  or  one  that  had  before  been  married  ? '  'The
latter,'  said  Jabir.  'And  why  not  a  young  damsel,  who  would  have
sported  with  thee,  and  thou  with  her?'  'My  father,'  he  explained,  'left
seven  daughters,  so  I  married  a  woman  of  experience,  able to guide


Koreish
mortified


Expedition
to  Dhat  ar-
Rika'.
A.H.  V.
May,  A.D
626


'  Service  of
danger  '


288


FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  YEARS  OF  HIJRA  [chap


Kor'an,  a
vehicle  for
'  general
orders '


Sura  iv.
1 02  f.


Campaign
Dumat
al-Jandal,
A.H.  V.
July,  A.D.
636


Danger '  was  introduced.  Fearing  that  the  enemy,  who  held
the  fastnesses  above  the  Muslim  army,  might  attempt  a
surprise  to  rescue  their  women,  a  part  of  the  force  was  kept
constantly  under  arms.  The  public  prayers  were  therefore
repeated  twice, — one  division  watching  while  the  other
prayed.  The  revelation  sanctioning  this  practice  is  quoted
less  for  its  own  interest,  than  to  illustrate  the  tendency  of  the
revelation  to  become  the  vehicle  of  military  commands.  In
the  Kor'an,  victories  are  announced,  success  promised,  actions
recounted  ;  failure  is  explained,  bravery  applauded,  cowardice
or  disobedience  chided  ;  military  or  political  movements  are
directed  ; — and  all  this  as  an  immediate  communication  from
the  Deity.  The  passage  resembles  what  one  might  expect
to  find  in  the  'General  Orders'  of  some  Puritan  leader,  or
Commander  of  a  crusade  in  the  Holy  Land  : —

When  ye  march  abroad  in  the  earth,  it  shall  be  no  crime  unto  you
that  ye  shorten  your  prayers,  if  ye  fear  that  the  Unbelievers  may  attack
you  ;  for  the  Unbelievers  are  an  open  enemy  unto  you.  And  when  thou
art  amongst  them,  and  leadest  their  prayers,  let  one  Division  of  them
arise  to  prayer  with  thee,  taking  their  weapons  with  them,  and  when
they  have  worshipped,  let  them  remove  behind  you.  Then  let  the  other
Division  come  up  that  hath  not  prayed,  and  let  them  pray  with  thee,  and
let  them  take  their  due  precaution  and  their  weapons.  The  Unbelievers
would  that  ye  should  neglect  your  weapons  and  your  baggage ;  then
would  they  fall  upon  you  with  one  onset.  It  shall  be  no  crime  unto  you,
if  ye  be  incommoded  by  rain,  or  if  ye  be  sick,  that  ye  lay  down  your
weapons  ;  but  take  your  due  precaution.  Verily  God  hath  prepared  for
the  Unbelievers  an  ignominious  punishment.

to  During  the  summer,  another  campaign  was  undertaken
by  Mohammad.^  It  was  in  the  direction  of  Dijma,  an  Oasis
and  entrepot  on  the  borders  of  Syria  midway  between  the
Red  Sea  and  the  Gulf  of  Persia,  where  marauding  bands,
driven  to  violence  by  the  prevailing  famine,  were  plundering

them.'  'Thou  hast  done  well,'  rejoined  Mohammad;  (he  might  here
himself  have  learned  a  lesson  from  his  humble  follower) — 'Now  when
we  reach  thy  home,  we  shall  kill  a  camel  and  rest  there,  and  thy  wife
will  hear  of  it  and  will  spread  carpets  for  us.'  'But,  O  Prophet !  I  have
not  any  carpets.'  '  We  shall  get  them  for  thee:  do  therefore  as  I  have
said.'  On  Mohammad's  returning  home,  Jabir  took  his  camel  to
Mohammad,  who  not  only  gave  him  its  full  price,  but  also  returned  to
him  the  camel  itself  Jabir,  thus  set  up  in  life,  prospered  greatly.
Al-Wakidi,  p.  173  [not  in  Ibn  Hisham  nor  At-Tabari]

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  668  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1462  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  174  f.  ;  Ibn
Sa'd,  p.  44.


XVI.] MOHAMMAD'S  FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  WIVES  289

travellers,  and  even  threatened  a  raid  upon  Medina.
Mohammad  stopped  short  a  march  or  two  from  Duma,  and
contented  himself  with  capturing  the  herds  which  grazed  in
the  neighbourhood.  The  robbers  fled  without  offering  any
opposition.  This  expedition  is  touched  upon  very  lightly  in
a  brief  notice  of  two  or  three  lines  ;  but  it  was  in  reality  most
important.  Mohammad,  followed  by  a  thousand  men,  had
reached  the  confines  of  Syria  ;  distant  tribes  learned  the  terror
of  his  name  ;  the  political  horizon  was  extended  ;  the  lust  of
plunder  in  the  hearts  of  the  Muslims  acquired  a  wider  range,
and  they  were  inured,  at  the  hottest  season  of  the  year,  to  long
and  fatiguing  marches.  The  army  was  absent  for  nearly  a
month.  On  his  way  back  Mohammad  entered  into  a  treaty
with  'Oyeina,  chieftain  of  the  Fezara,  for  the  right  to  graze
on  certain  tracts  of  tableland  to  the  east  of  Medina,  where,
notwithstanding  the  drought,  forage  was  still  procurable.^

We  now  turn  to  what  was  passing  within  the  home  of  Mohammad
Mohammad. Since his marriage with Hafsa — that is for ["^"'^^  a

■  o  • .  fourth  wife,

above  a  year — Mohammad  had  been  content  with  the  three Zemab  bmt
inmates  of  his  harim. He  now  added  to  the  number  two f t'^f^f'^*

A.H. IV,

other  wives. The  first  was  Zeinab,  daughter  of  Khozeima, January,  626
widow  of  his  cousin  'Obeida,  killed  at  Bedr, Noted  for  her
charity,  she  gained  the  title  of  Mother  of  the  Poor. She
survived but a year or two, being the only one of  the
Prophet's  wives  (excepting  Khadija)  who  died  before  him.-

Within  a  month  of  this  marriage,  he  sought  the  hand  of  And  a  fifth,
a  fifth  wife. Urn  Selama  was  the  widow  of  Abu  Selama,  to ^IJ^  f,f  ^"'='-

'  A.H.  IV.

whom  she  had  borne  several  children.  Both  had  been  exiles  February,
to  Abyssinia,  from  whence  they  returned  to  Medina,  At  ^
Ohod,  Abu  Selama  was  wounded ;  but  he  had  so  far
recovered  as  to  take  the  command  against  the  Beni  Asad,
when  the  wound  broke  out  afresh.  Mohammad  visited  his
death-bed.  He  was  breathing  his  last,  and  the  women
wailed  loudly.  '  Hush ! '  said  the  Prophet  as  he  entered.
'  Invoke  not  on  yourselves  aught  but  what  is  good  ;  for  verily
the  angels  are  present  with  the  dying  man,  and  say  Amen  to
that which ye pray. O Lord!  give unto  him  zvidth  and  Prayer  at

death-bed
^  At-Tabari,  i.  1463  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  45.  of  her  previ-

'^  At-Tabari,  i.  1441  and  1460,  &c.  Reihana,  the  Jewess,  also  died  a
year  before  him ;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  she  was  ever  more  than  his
concubine.

T


290


FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  YEARS  OF  HIJRA [chap.


Mohammad
marries
Zeinab  bint
Jaksh,
divorced  by
his  adopted
son,  Zeid.
A.H.  V.
June,  A.M.
626


comfort  in  his  grave :  Lighten  his  darkness :  Pardon  his  sins  :
Raise  him  to  Paradise:  Exalt  his  rank  among  the  Blessed;
and  raise  lip  faitJiful  followers  from  his  seed !  Ye  indeed  are
looking  at  the  fixed  eyes,  but  the  sight  itself  hath  already
followed  the  dead.'  So  saying  he  drew  the  palm  of  his  hand
over  the  eyes  of  his  departed  friend,  and  closed  them.  It
was  eight  months  after  being  wounded  at  Ohod  that  Abu
Selama  died  ;  and  four  months  afterwards  Mohammad  made
proposals  of  marriage  to  his  widow,  who  though  not  young
was  very  beautiful.  She  at  first  excused  herself  on  the  score
of  her  age  and  rising  family ;  but  the  Prophet  removed  her
objection  by  saying  that  he  too  was  well  advanced  in  years,
and  that  her  children  should  be  his  care.  After  the  marriage
he  tarried  three  days  with  his  bride — a  precedent  followed
by  Muslim  husbands  when  adding  fresh  inmates  to  their
harlms. Her  son  'Omar  was  brought  up  by  Mohammad.

Mohammad  was  now  near  threescore  years  of  age ;  but
weakness  for  the  sex  seemed  but  to  grow  with  age ;  and  the
attractions  of  his  increasing  harim  instead  of  satisfying
appear  rather  to  have  stimulated  desire  after  new  and  varied
charms.^  Happening  one  day  to  visit  his  adopted  son  Zeid,
he  found  him  absent.  As  he  knocked,  Zeinab  his  wife,  now
over  thirty  years  of  age,  but  fair  to  look  upon,  invited  him  to
enter ;  and,  starting  up  in  her  loose  and  scanty  dress,  made
haste  to  array  herself  for  his  reception.  But  the  beauties  of
her  figure  through  the  half-opened  door  had  already  unveiled
themselves  too  freely  before  the  admiring  gaze  of  Mohammad.
He  was  smitten  by  the  sight :  *  Gracious  Lord  !'  he  exclaimed  ;
'  Good  Heavetis  !  hoiv  Thou  dost  turn  the  hearts  of  men  I '  The
rapturous  words,  repeated  in  a  low  voice  as  he  turned  to  go,
were  overheard  by  Zeinab,  who  perceived  the  flame  she  had
kindled,  and,  proud  of  her  conquest,  was  nothing  loth  to  tell
her  husband  of  it.  Zeid  went  straightway  to  Mohammad,
and  declared  his  readiness  to  divorce  Zeinab  for  him.  This
Mohammad  declined  :  '  Keep  thy  wife  to  thyself,'  he  said,
'  and  fear  God.'  But  Zeid  saw  probably  that  the  admonition
proceeded  from  unwilling  lips,  and  that  the  Prophet  had  still
a  longing  eye  for  Zeinab.  Perhaps  he  did  not  care  to  keep
her,  when  he  found  that  she  desired  to  leave  him,  and  was
ambitious  of  the  new  and  distinguished  alliance.  And  so  he
1  At-Tabari,  i.  1460  fit.


XVI.]


MOHAMMAD  MARRIES  ZEINAB


29  T


formally  divorced  her.  Mohammad  still  hesitated.  There
might  be  little  scandal  according  to  Arab  morals  in  seeking
the  hand  of  a  married  woman  whose  husband  had  no  wish  to
keep  her  ;  but  the  husband  in  the  present  case  was  Moham-
mad's adopted  son,  and  even  in  Arabia  such  a  union  was
unlawful.  The  flame,  however,  would  not  be  stifled  ;  and  so,
casting  his  scruples  to  the  winds,  he  resolved  at  last  to  have
her.  Sitting  by  'A'isha,  the  prophetic  ecstasy  appeared  to
come  over  him.  As  he  recovered,  he  smiled  joyfully  and
said  :  '  Who  will  go  and  congratulate  Zeinab,  and  say  that
the  Lord  hath  joined  her  unto  me  in  marriage?'  His  maid
Selma  made  haste  to  carry  the  glad  news  to  Zeinab,  who
showed  her  delight  by  bestowing  on  the  messenger  all  the
jewels  she  had  upon  her  person.  Mohammad  made  no  delay,
but  hastened  to  fulfil  the  divine  behest ;  and,  having  made  a
great  feast  in  the  court  of  the  Mosque,  took  thus  a  second
Zeinab  to  be  his  wife.^

The  marriage  caused  no  small  obloquy,  and,  to  save  his And  supports
reputation,  Mohammad  had  to  fall  back  upon  the  Oracle. A the  marriage

.  .  .  ^  by  divine

revelation  appeared,  in  which  a  divine  warrant  is  given  for command
the  union,  the  objections  on  the  score  of  adoptive  affinity  are
disallowed,  and the Prophet is even reprehended for his
hesitation  and  fear  of  men  : —

God  hath  not  given  to  a  man two hearts  within  him.  *  *  * Nor Sura  xxxiii,
hath  He  made  your  adopted  sons  your  (real)  sons. This  your  speech 4  f-

'  Zeid,  her  previous  husband,  was  short  and  not  well  favoured,  having
a  pug-nose  ;  but  he  was  ten  years  younger  than  the  Prophet.

Zeinab  was  industrious,  and  could  tan  leather  and  make  shoes.  What
she  made  in  this  way,  even  after  her  marriage  with  the  Prophet,  was
given  away  to  the  poor. She  survived  Mohammad  ten  or  eleven  years.

At-Tabari  is  the  fullest  of  the  earliest  authorities  on  this  passage,  and
in  the  text  I  have  followed  him  closely.  He  gives  a  second  narrative,
differing  only  in  this,  that,  as  Mohammad  waited  at  Zeid's  door,  the
wind  blew  aside  the  curtain  of  Zeinab's  chamber  and  disclosed  her  in  a
scanty  undress.  After  Zeid  had  divorced  her,  Mohammad  asked  him
whether  he  had  ever  seen  anything  to  dislike  in  her.  '  Nothing,'  he
replied,  'only  good.'  'A'isha  relates  that  strange  misgivings  arose  in
her  heart  when  she  heard  the  divine  message  commanding  the  marriage,
and,  mindful  of  the  beauty  of  Zeinab,  feared  lest  she  should  glory  over
the  other  wives  of  Mohammad  as  his  divinely  appointed  bride.  We
learn  from  tradition  that  Zeinab  did  thus  vaunt  herself,  saying  that  Goii
had  give7i  her  in  marriage  to  His  Prophet^  whereas  his  other  wives  were
given  to  him  by  their  relatives.


292


FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  YEARS  OF  HIJRA [chap.


Sura  xxxiii.


V.  37  f.


V.  40.


Scandal  of
the  trans-
action thus
removed


proceedeth  from  your  mouths  ;  but  God  speaketh  the  Truth  ;  and  He
directeth  in  the  right  way.  Let  your  adopted  sons  go  by  their  own
fathers'  names. This  is  more  just  with  God.  *  *  *

And  when  thou  saidst  to  him  on  whom  God  hath  bestowed  favours,
and  upon  whom  thou  too  hast  bestowed  favours  :  ^  '  Keep  thy  ivife  to
thyself  and  fear  God  ;^  and  thou  didst  conceal  in  thy  breast  that  which
God  was  minded  to  make  known,  and  thou  fearedst  man — whereas  God
is  more  worthy  to  be  feared.  And  when  Zeid  had  fulfilled  her  divorce,
We  joined  thee  with  her  in  marriage,  that  there  might  hereafter  be  no
offence  to  Believers  in  marrying  the  Wives  of  their  adopted  sons,  when
they  have  fulfilled  their  divorce  ;  and  the  command  of  God  is  to  be
fulfilled.  .  .  .  Mohammad  is  not  the  father  of  any  man  amongst  you.
Rather  he  is  the  Apostle  of  God,  and  the  Seal  of  the  Prophets  ;  and  God
knoweth  all  things.

Strange  to  say,  the  scandal  was  removed  by  this  revela-
tion, and  Zeid  was  thenceforward  called  not  '  the  son  of
Mohammad,'  as  heretofore,  but  by  his  proper  name,  '  Zeid,
the  son  of  Haritha.'  We  hear  of  no  doubts  or  questionings,
and  can  only  attribute  the  confiding  spirit  of  his  followers  to
the  absolute  ascendancy  of  his  powerful  mind  over  all  who
came  within  its  influence.


Veil  and
other  re-
strictions
imposed  on
Moham-
mad's wives


Siira  xxxiii.
53.


The  seclusion  of  the  Veil  or  curtain  was  at  this  time
enjoined  upon  the  wives  of  Mohammad.  Himself  well  stricken
in  years,  surrounded  by  six  wives,  some  of  them  sprightly,
young,  and  beautiful,  and  with  a  continual  concourse  of
courtiers,  visitors,  and  suitors,  such  a  restriction  was  not  un-
needed.  Indeed,  he  had  himself  proved  in  the  case  of  Zeinab
the  danger  that  might  arise  from  the  too  free  admission  of
friends  or  strangers  ;  and  his  followers  could  hardly  expect  to
be  freer  from  temptation  than  the  Prophet  himself.  No  one
unless  bidden  was  to  enter  his  wives'  apartments  ;  they  were
not  to  be  spoken  to  but  from  behind  a  curtain  ;  and  to  slake
the  last  embers  of  jealousy  (or  uneasiness  as  it  is  euphemisti-
cally called),  an  interdict  is  declared  against  their  ever  marry-
ing again,  even  after  his  death.  Henceforward  they  were
known  as  ^  the  Mother's  of  the  Faithful^  Here  is  the  passage.
How  has  the  fine  gold  become  dim  ! —

O  ye  Believers  !  Enter  not  the  apartments  of  the  Prophet,  except
ye  be  called  to  sup  with  him,  without  waiting  his  convenient  time. When

^  Meaning  Zeid,  whom  Mohammad,  after  freeing,  had  adopted.  In
the  following  verse  he  is  mentioned  by  name,  a  singular  instance,  for  no
Other  follower  is  named  in  the  Kor'an.


XVI.]


THE  VEIL


293


V.  6.


Muslim
women  to  be
partly  veiled
when  walk-
ing: abroad


Sura  xxxiii.
59  ff-


ye  are  bidden,  then  enter  ;  and  when  ye  have  eaten,  then  disperse.  And
stay  not  for  familiar  converse  ; — for  verily  that  giveth  uneasiness  to  the
Prophet.  It  shameth  him  to  say  this  unto  you  :  but  God  is  not  ashamed
of  the  Truth.  And  when  ye  ask  anything  of  the  Prophet's  wives,  ask  it
of  them  from  behind  a  curtain  ;  this  will  be  more  pure  for  your  hearts
and  for  their  hearts.  It  is  not  fitting  that  ye  should  give  uneasiness  to
the  Apostle  of  God,  nor  that  ye  should  marry  his  Wives  after  him  for
ever.  Verily  that  would  be  a  grievous  thing  in  the  sight  of  God.  *  *  *
The  Prophet  is  nearer  unto  the  Believers  than  their  own  souls,  and  his
Wives  are  their  Mothers.

Certain  restrictions,  but  of  a  less  stringent  nature,  were
about  the  same  time  placed  upon  the  dress  and  demeanour  of
all  believing  women.  These  were  exposed  in  their  walks
abroad  to  the  rude  remarks  of  disaffected  and  licentious
Citizens  ;  they  were  therefore  commanded  to  throw  their
garments  around  them  so  as  partially  to  veil  their  persons,
and  conceal  their  ornaments.  The  men  who  thus  troubled
the  Muslim  females  were  threatened  with  expulsion  and  with
a  general  slaughter,  thus  : —

O  Prophet !  Speak  unto  thy  wives  and  thy  daughters,  and  the  wives
of  the  Believers,  that  they  throw  around  them  a  part  of  their  mantles.
This  will  be  more  seemly,  that  they  may  be  known  (as  women  of  reputa-
tion) and  may  not  be  subject  to  annoyance  ;  for  God  is  gracious  and
merciful.  And  truly,  if  the  Disaffected,  and  they  in  whose  hearts  is
disease  (of  incontinency),  and  the  propagators  of  falsehoods  in  the  city,
hold  not  back.  We  shall  surely  stir  thee  up  against  them.  Then  they
shall  not  be  permitted  to  live  near  unto  thee  therein  but  for  a  little.
Accursed  !  wherever  they  are  found,  they  shall  be  taken  and  killed  with
a  great  slaughter.  This  is  the  wont  of  God  concerning  those  that  have
gone  before. And  these  shall  not  find  in  the  wont  of  God  any  variation.

And  elsewhere : —

Speak  unto  the  Believing  women  that  they  restrain  their  eyes,  and  Sura  xxiv.  31
preserve  their  modesty  ;  and  display  not  their  ornaments,  except  what
appeareth  thereof;  and  let  them  throw  their  veils  over  their  bosoms;
and  let  them  not  display  their  ornaments  except  to  their  husbands,
fathers  (and  so  on,  enumerating  a  number  of  relations,  and  ending  with
slaves,  eunuchs,  and  children).  And  let  them  not  shake  their  feet  that
their  hidden  ornaments  be  discovered.

Rules  and  precautions  were  also  prescribed  to  regulate  Rules  for

the  visits  of  strangers  to  their  neighbours'  houses,  and  to  ^q^^I^\

prevent  the  privacy  of  Believers  being  intruded  upon  with-  of  neighcours
out  due  warning.^

^  Believers  are  forbidden  to  enter  any  house  but  their  own  (even  if
there  be  no  one  inside)  until  they  have  first  asked  leave  and  saluted  the


294


FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  YEARS  OF  HIJRA  [chap


Restrictions
rendered
necessary  by
loose  code
of  Kor'an


Out  of  these  commands  have  grown  the  stringent  usages
of  the  Harim  and  Zenana,  which,  with  more  or  less  seclusion,
prevail  throughout  the  Muslim  world.  However  degrading
and  austere  these  usages  may  appear,  yet  with  the  loose  code
of  polygamy  and  divorce  some  restraints  of  the  kind  are
almost  indispensable  in  Islam,  if  only  for  the  maintenance  of
decency  and  social  order.^

A  goodly  row  of  modest  dwellings,  one  for  each  of  the
'  Mothers  of  the  Faithful,'  now  formed  the  Eastern  side  of  the
Mosque  and  of  its  court.  Mohammad  shared  his  attentions
equally  amongst  his  wives,  spending  thus  a  day  and  night  in
the chamber of  each successively. Thus their turn was

family.  During  three  periods  of  the  day — i.e.  before  morning  prayer,
at  the  time  of  the  siesta,  and  after  evening  prayer— even  slaves  and
young  children  (who  are  otherwise  excepted)  must  ask  permission  before
entering  an  apartment.  Women  past  child-bearing  may  alone  dispense
with  the  outer  garment.  The  sick,  and  certain  near  relatives,  are  also
exempted  from  the  prohibition  of  dining  familiarly  in  each  other's  inner
apartments. — Sura  xxiv.  62,  53  f.

^  European  manners  and  customs  in  this  respect  would  be  altogether
unsuited  to  Mohammadan  society.  The  tendency  of  the  system  without
its  present  checks  would  certainly  be  unfavourable  to  morality.  Let  the
laxity  of  manners  be  conceived,  if  with  unrestricted  social  intercourse
there  existed  also  under  the  sanction  of  divine  revelation  the  practice  of
polygamy,  divorce,  and  remarriage  ;  if  the  marriage  bond  were  simply
at  the  discretion  of  the  husband  to  hold  or  to  break  ;  if  any  man  might
look  upon  any  married  woman  (relatives  excepted)  as  within  his  reach  by
marriage;  and  if  every  married  woman  felt  like  Zeinab,  that  she  might
become  the  lawful  wife  of  any  other  man  who  could  persuade  her
husband  to  pronounce  a  divorce  !  The  foundations  of  society  would  be
broken  up.

Burckhardt  tells  us  of  an  Arab,  forty-five  years  old,  who  had  had
fifty  wives.  And  as  regards  the  sacred  city  itself,  we  have  the  evidence
of  a  keen  observer,  the  late  reigning  Begum  of  Bhopal,  herself  an
orthodox  follower  of  the  Prophet.  After  performing  the  pilgrimage  a
few  years  ago,  her  Highness  tells  us:  'The  women  frequently  contract
as  many  as  ten  marriages,  and  those  who  have  been  only  married  twice
are  few  in  number.  If  a  woman  sees  her  husband  growing  old,  or  if  she
happen  to  admire  any  one  else,  she  goes  to  the  Sherif,  and,  after  having
settled  the  matter  with  him,  she  puts  away  her  husband,  and  takes  to
herself  another,  who  is  perhaps  young,  good-looking,  and  rich.  In  this
way,  a  marriage  seldom  lasts  more  than  a  year  or  two.'  It  may  be
remarked  that  the  wife  (excepting  under  a  few  rare  conditions)  has  not
legally  the  power  of  divorce  ;  but  the  impression  on  the  Begum's  mind
from  personal  intercourse  with  the  upper  society  of  Mecca  sufficiently
proves  the  laxity  of  morals  prevailing  there.


XVI.]


MOHAMMAD  AND  HIS  WIVES


295


known  as  'the  day  of  Sauda,  the  day  of  Zeinab,'  and  so  on.
Yet  'A'isha  maintained  her  pre-eminence ;  and,  however
much  there  may  have  been  the  formal  circuit  reducing
nominally  her  portion  to  one  day  in  six,  still  hers  was  the
most  frequented  of  all  the  houses,  and  best  deserved  the
name  of  home.  The  irregularity  of  his  attentions  at  length
provoked  a  natural  discontent ;  and  Mohammad  was  by  a
divine  dispensation  released  from  the  obligation  of  consorting
with  his  wives  equally  and  in  undeviating  order : —

Postpone  the  turn  of  such  as  thou  mayest  please  ;  and  admit  unto Sura  xxxiii.
thyself  her  whom  thou  choosest,  as  well  as  her  whom  thou  mayest  desire S^-
of  those  whom  thou  hadst  put  aside  ;  it  will  be  no  offence  in  thee. This
will  be  easier,  that  they  may  be  satisfied,  and  not repine, but be all
content  with  that  thou  givest  unto  them.'

The  command  was  incorporated  in  the  Kor'an  (whether
Mohammad  intended  that  it  should  be  so,  we  have  no  means
of  judging) ;  and  to  this  day  it  is  recited  in  its  course,  as  part
of  the  Word  of  God,  in  every  Mosque  throughout  Islam.


We  gladly  turn  to  other  matters. Some months  after Mohammad
his  return  from  Duma,  rumours  reached  the  Prophet  of  new ^^^^1%  ca^ptive
projects  against  him  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mecca. ^ The the  Beni
Beni'l-Mustalik,  a  branch  of  the  Khoza'a  hitherto  friendly  to a!^"^!''^''^"
his  cause,  were  now  raising  forces  with  the  view  of  joining December,
Koreish  in  their  long-talked-of  attack  on  Medina. Having
inquired  into  these  reports  through  a  Bedawi  spy  who  ingra-
tiated himself  with  the  hostile chief,  Mohammad  at once
resolved  by  a  bold  inroad  to  anticipate  their  design. Besides

'  A  passage  follows  probably  of  a  later  stage,  for  in  this  Sura  are
collected  a  great  variety  of  precepts,  of  different  periods,  relating  to  the
treatment  of  women  :  '  No  more  Women  are  lawful  unto  thee  after  this  :
nor  that  thou  shouldest  exchange  any  of  thy  wives  for  others,  even  though
their  beauty  fascinate  thee,  excepting  such  (slaves)  as  thy  right  hand
may  possess,  and  God  observeth  all  things.'  Some  commentators  think
that  this  prohibition  was  abrogated  by  a  preceding  verse,  which  makes
lawful  to  the  Prophet  in  marriage  any  of  his  maternal  or  paternal
cousins,  and  'any  believing  woman  who  might  willingly  give  herself  to
him  in  case  he  desired  to  take  her  to  wife.'  Others  say  that  the  passage
was  revealed  after  his  number  of  nine  wives  was  completed.  In  the
latter  case,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  cohabitation  with  slaves  as  concubines,
in  addition  to  his  regular  wives,  is  still  permitted.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  725  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  151 1  ff. ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  175  ff.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  45  f.


296  FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  YEARS  OF  HIJRA  [cHAP.

his  own  adherents,  many  of  the  Citizens  hitherto  lukewarm
towards  Islam,  with  'Abdallah  ibn  Obei  at  their  head,  desirous
to  maintain  a  friendly  appearance,  or  allured  by  the  hope  or
plunder,  joined  his  standard.  Mohammad  could  now  muster
thirty  well-appointed  horse.^  After  eight  days  he  encamped
by  the  seashore  at  the  wells  of  Al-MoraisI',  some  marches
short  of  Mecca.  Here  he  had  a  tent  of  leather  pitched  for
himself  and  for  'A'isha  and  Um  Selama,  his  companions  in
the  campaign.  The  tidings  of  his  approach  struck  terror  into
the  Beni'l-Mustalik,  and  caused  their  allies  to  fall  away.  The
force  advanced,  and,  after  a  brisk  discharge  of  archery,  closed
so  rapidly  on  the  tribe,  that  they  were  all  surrounded  and
taken  prisoners  with  their  families,  herds,  and  flocks.  Of  the
enemy  ten  were  killed,  while  Mohammad  lost  but  one  man,
and  that  from  an  erring  shot  by  a  Muslim.  Two  hundred
families,  2,000  camels,  and  5,000  sheep  and  goats,  besides  much
household  goods,  formed  the  booty.  It  was  divided  in  the
usual  manner.^
Altercation  The  army  having  encamped  for  several  days  at  the  wells

between ^f  Al-MoraisI',  an  altercation  sprang  up  between  a  Citizen

tnc  (citizens  ^

and  Refugees  and  'Omar's  servant,  a  Refugee.  The  latter  struck  the
Citizen  a  blow,  and  the  men  of  Medina  rushing  in  to  avenge
their  comrade's  insult,  the  Refugee  cried  loudly  on  his  fellows
for  aid.  High  words  passed  on  both  sides,  swords  were
drawn,  and  the  result  might  have  been  serious,  had  not  the
Citizen  been  induced  to  withdraw  his  complaint  and  forgive
the  injury.  During  the  quarrel,  the  disaffected  party  gave
free  expression  to  their  disloyal  feelings : — '  This,'  said
'Abdallah  ibn  Obei  openly,  'ye  have  brought  upon  yourselves,
by  inviting  these  strangers  to  come  amongst  us.  Wait  till
we  return  to  Medina ;  then  the  Mightier  shall  surely  expel
the  Meaner ! '
Mohammad  Mohammad no  sooner  heard  of  the  strife,  and  of  the

immediate violent  language  of  'Abdallah,  than  he  gave  orders  for  an

™^'''^"  1  Of  the  thirty  horse,  twenty  belonged  to  citizens  and  ten  to  Refugees.

The  standard of  the Refugees was held by  Abu Bekr, that of  the
Citizens  by  Sa'd  ibn  'Obada.

^  The  household  stuff  was  sold  to  the  highest  bidder.  In  the  division
a  camel  was  reckoned  equal  to  ten  sheep  or  goats.  Each  horseman  had
three  times  the  share  of  a  footman,  two  being  reckoned  for  the  horse.
Mohammad  desired  by  this  rule  to  encourage  the  development  of  cavalry
in  his  army.


XVI.] 'ABDALLAH  AND  HIS  PARTY  REPRIMANDED 297

immediate  march.  The  discontent  of  the  Citizens  and
momentary  antagonism  betwixt  them  and  the  Refugees,  if
allowed  to  spread,  would  have  been  dangerous ;  indeed,  it
was  the  one  thing  he  had  to  dread  as  fatal  to  his  cause.
By  breaking  up  the  camp,  and  at  once  ordering  a  long  and
wearisome  march,  he  would  divert  attention  from  the  events
of  the  morning  and  make  the  quarrel  to  die  away.  There-
fore, though  the  hour  was  early  and  unseasonable,  and  amity
had  apparently  been  re-established,  Mohammad  started  with-
out delay,  and  kept  the  army  marching  the  whole  of  that  day
and  night  and  the  following  day,  till  the  sun  was  high.  Then
he  halted,  and  the  force,  overpowered  with  fatigue,  was  soon
asleep.  From  thence  they  proceeded  home  by  regular
marches.

Before  the  army  moved,  'Abdallah  protested  that  he  had 'Abdallah
not  made  use of  the  expressions  attributed  to him  ; and Effected"
Mohammad,  although  some  of  his  followers  counselled  severe Citizens  re-
and decisive measures, received with civility his excuse,  fn  Kor'an
When  'Abdallah  was  being  hardly  handled  by  his  own  fana-
tical son,  who  tried  to  extort  from  him  the  confession  that
he was the  Meaner,  and Mohammad the Mightier^ the
Prophet,  chancing  to  pass  by,  interfered  and  said ! '  Leave
him  alone  1 For,  by  my  life !  so  long  as  he  remaineth  with
us,  we  shall make  our  companionship  pleasant  unto him.'
Still,  when  he  returned  to  Medina,  and  found  himself  again
firmly  fixed  in  the  affections  of the  Citizens, the Prophet
deemed it necessary  to administer to 'Abdallah and his
followers  a  public  reprimand. The  heavenly  message  contains

^  There  are  worse  speeches  than  this  attributed  to  'Abdallah's  son.
He  offered  to  bring  his  father's  head,  if  Mohammad  desired  it ;  saying  :
'If  he  is  to  be  killed,  I  will  do  it  myself.  If  any  other  man  commits  the
deed,  the  Devil  will  tempt  me  to  avenge  my  father's  blood  :  and  by
killing  a  Believer  for  an  Unbeliever,  I  shall  go  to  hell.  Suffer  me  to
kill  him  myself!'

'Omar  also  is  said  to  have  counselled  Mohammad  at  Al-Moraisi'
to  put  'Abdallah  to  death.  But  Mohammad  replied:  "Omar!  How
will  it  be  if  men  should  say  that  Mohammad  killeth  his  own  followers?
nay,  but  let  us  give  orders  for  an  immediate  march.'  In  after  days  when
'Abdallah's  authority  waned,  and  he  was  treated  without  reverence  even
by  his  own  people,  Mohammad  reminded  'Omar  of  his  advice  on  this
occasion,  and  asked  whether  it  was  not  far  better  to  have  reserved  him
for  this  fate,  than  to  have  put  him  to  death.  'Omar  confessed  the
wisdom  of  the  Prophet.


298


FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  YEARS  OF  HIJRA  [chap.


Mohammad
marries  the
captive
Juweiriya,
his  seventh
wifs


a  curse  against  the  insincere  and  disafifected  professors  of
Islam  ;  while  the  quotation  of  'Abdallah's  very  words  points
the  rebuke,  notwithstanding  his  denial,  against  him.i

The  captives  of  the  Beni'l-Mustalik  having  been  carried
to  Medina  with  the  rest  of  the  booty,  men  from  their  tribe
soon  arrived  to  make  terms  for  their  release.  One  of  them
was  Juweiriya,  a  damsel  of  birth  and  beauty,  about  twenty
years  of  age,  and  married  to  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  tribe.
She  fell  to  the  lot  of  a  citizen,  who,  taking  advantage  of  her
rank  and  comeliness,  fixed  the  ransom  at  nine  ounces  of
gold.^  Despairing  to  raise  so  large  a  sum,  she  ventured  into
the  presence  of  the  Prophet  while  seated  in  the  apartment  of
'A'isha,  and  pleaded  for  some  remission.  A  qualm  passed
over  'A'isha,  as  she  saw  the  Prophet  listening  to  the  fair  and
winning  suppliant,  and  soon  perceived  that  the  conqueror
had  become  the  captive  of  his  prisoner.  '  Wilt  thou
hearken,'  he  said,  '  to  something  that  may  be  better  than
what  thou  askest  of  me  ?  '  Marvelling  at  his  gentle  accents,
she  asked  what  that  might  be.  '  Even  that  I  should  pay  thy
ransom,  and  take  thee  for  myself! '  The  maiden  was  nothing
loth.  And  so  the  ransom  was  paid.  Mohammad,  taking  her
at  once  to  wife,  built  a  seventh  house  for  her  reception.  As
soon  as  the  marriage  was  noised  abroad,  the  people  said  that,
the  Beni'l-Mustalik  having  now  become  their  relatives,  they


*  The  following  is  the  passage  : — When  the  Disaffected  come  before
thee,  they  say  :  We  testify  that  thou  art  the  Prophet  of  God :  and  God
knoweth  that  thou  art  his  Prophet,  and  God  testifieth  that  the  Disaffected
are  liars.  This  because  they  believed,  and  afterwards  disbelieved ;
Wherefore,  their  hearts  are  sealed,  and  they  understand  not.  When
thou  seest  them,  thou  admirest  their  outward  man  ;  but  when  they
speak,  thou  listenest  to  their  words,  as  if  of  logs  set  up  (against  the
wall)  ;  they  fancy  every  cry  is  against  themselves.  Beware  of  them  !
God  curse  them  !  How  are  they  turned  unto  lies  ! '  And  when  it  is  said
unto  them  :  Come !  let  the  Prophet  of  God  ask  pardon  for  you,  they
avert  their  heads,  and  ye  see  them  turn  aside,  puffed  up  with  pride.  .  .  .
These  are  they  which  say  :  Withhold  your  Wealth  from  those  that  are
with  the  Prophet  of  Cod,  and  so  they  will  disperse : — Whereas  unto  God
belong  the  treasures  of  the  Heavens  and  of  the  Earth  :  But  the  Dis-
affected understand  not.  They  say :  When  we  return  unto  Medina,
verily  the  Mightier  shall  expel  from  thence  the  Meaner : — Whereas
Might  belongeth  to  God  and  His  Prophet,  and  to  the  Believers  :  but  the
Disaffected  do  not  comprehend.' — Sura  Ixiii.  i  ff.,  7  f.

2  The  ordinary  ransom  of  a  woman  or  child  was  ten  camels.


XVI.]  MISADVENTURE  OF  'A'ISHA  299

would  let  the  rest  of  the  prisoners  go  free  as  Juweiriya's
dower  ;  '  and  so,'  'A'isha  used  in  after  days  to  say, '  no  woman
was  ever  a  greater  blessing  to  her  people  than  this  Juweiriya.'

But  a  severer  trial  than  the  advent  of  a  new  rival  was  at  'A'ishas
that  moment  hanging  over  'A'isha.^  Her  virtue  was  about  ^j'^^^  sTf^v^'n^
to  be  called  in  question.  The  wives  of  Mohammad,  when
they  marched  with  him,  travelled  each  in  a  camel  litter
which,  since  the  order  for  the  veil,  was  carefully  shrouded
from  the  public  gaze.  At  the  hour  of  marching,  the  litter
was  brought  up  and  placed  close  to  the  door  of  the  lady's
tent ;  at  her  convenience  she  would  enter  and  close  the
curtain,  when  the  servants  would  approach,  and,  lifting  the
litter,  fasten  it  upon  the  camel's  back.  When  alighting  the
same  privacy  was  observed.  When  the  army  returned  to
Medina  from  the  expedition  against  the  Beni'l-Mustalik,  the
litter  of  'A'isha  was  set  down  at  the  door  of  her  house  near
the  Mosque  ;  but  when  opened  it  was  found  to  be  empty.
Some  little  time  after,  Safwan,  one  of  the  Refugees,  appeared
leading  his  camel,  with  'A'isha  seated  upon  it.  Her  explana-
tion of  the  misadventure  was  this.  On  the  previous  night,
just  before  the  hour  to  march,  she  had  occasion  to  go  to  some
little  distance  from  her  tent,  when  she  dropped  her  necklace
of  Yemen  beads.  On  returning  to  enter  her  litter,  she
missed  the  necklace,  and  went  back  to  seek  for  it.  Mean-
while the  bearers  came  up,  and,  imagining  'A'isha  to  be
within  the  litter  (for  she  was  of  light  and  slender  figure),
lifted  it  into  its  place,  and  so  led  the  camel  away.  On  her
return,  'A'isha  was  astonished  to  find  the  litter  and  tent  both
gone,  and  no  one  left  anywhere  in  sight.^  So,  expecting
that  the  mistake  would  be  discovered,  and  the  litter  brought
back  for  her,  she  wrapped  her  clothes  around  her,  sat
patiently  on  the  ground  and  fell  fast  asleep.  Towards
morning,  Safwan,  who  had  been  also  accidentally  detained,
passed  by,  and,  recognising  'A'isha,  expressed  surprise  at
finding  one  of  the  Prophet's  wives  in  this  predicament.  She
did  not  answer  him.  No  other  words  (so  'A'isha  declared)
passed  between  them,  excepting  this,  that  Safwan  brought
his  camel  near  her,  and  turning  his  face  away  so  as  not  even

' Ibn  Hisham,  p.  731  fF.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1517  ff.

'  The  tent,  being  small  and  light,  was  easily  taken  down  and  carried
olif  immediately  she  was  supposed  to  have  entered  the  litter.


3O0  FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  YEARS  OF  HIJRA  [chap.

to  see  her,  desired  her  to  mount. Then  he  approached,  and,

holding  the  halter,  led  the  camel  towards  Medina. Though

he  made  every  haste,  he  could  not  overtake  the  army ;  and

thus, some  time  after  the  others  had  alighted  and  pitched

their  camp,  'A'isha,  led  by  Safwan,  entered  the  city  before

the  gaze  of  all.

Moham-  The scandal-loving Arabs were not slow in drawing

"^f^  ^ ^  sinister  conclusions  from  the  inopportune  affair,  and  spread-
estrangement  '^'^  J  ^

from  'A'isha  ing  them  abroad.  These,  reaching  the  ears  of  Mohammad,
caused  him  much  uneasiness.  'A'isha  felt  his  change  of
manner  towards  her,  and  (though  professing  ignorance  till
some  time  after  of  the  cause)  it  preyed  upon  her  mind.  She
fell  sick ;  and  learning  at  length  from  a  friend  the  rumours
affecting  her  character,  obtained  permission  to  return  to  her
father's  house.  The  estrangement  of  Mohammad  from  his
Scandal  favouritc  wife  strengthened  the  grounds  of  defamation.  Her
occasioned ^g^jj ^^^ gloried over by those who bore  no love  to  the

in  Medina  ="  •'

Prophet,  and  became  a  topic  of  malicious  conversation  even
among  some  of  his  staunch  adherents.  At  the  head  of  the
former  was  'Abdallah  ibn  Obei ;  and  foremost  among  the
latter  were  Mistah  (a  relative  and  dependent  of  Abu  Bekr),
the  poet  Hassan,  and  Hamna,  daughter  of  Jahsh,  who
rejoiced  over  the  dishonour  of  her  sister  Zeinab's  rival.^
Mohammad  When  matters  had  gone  on  thus  from  bad  to  worse  for

followe!^s^  several  weeks,  Mohammad  resolved  to  put  an  end  to  the
for  meddling  scandal.  He  mounted  the  pulpit,  and  sharply  upbraided  his
followers  : — '  O  ye  people  ! '  he  said,  '  what  concern  is  it  of
others  that  they  should  disquiet  me  in  affairs  touching  my
family,  and  unjustly  blame  them  !  Whereas,  I  myself  know
naught  but  that  which  is  good  concerning  them.  And  more-
over ye  have  traduced  Safwan,  a  man  regarding  whom  like-
wise I  know  not  ought  but  what  is  good.'  Then  Oseid,  a
leader  of  the  Aus,  arose  and  swore  that  he  would  punish
the  delinquents,  even  to  the  death,  if  Mohammad  would  but
give  command.  On  this  an  altercation  sprang  up  between
him  and  the  Khazraj,  to  whom  the  chief  offenders  amongst

^  'A'isha  says  :  '  Now  Hamna  took  up  the  scandal,  because  she  was
sister  of  Zeinab,  daughter  of  Jahsh  (the  former  wife  of  Zeid)  ;  and  there
was  none  that  dared  to  put  herself  in  competition  with  me  but  Zeinab
only.  She  herself  said  nothing  bad  ;  but  her  sister  did  so,  envying  me
because  of  my  superiority  to  Zeinab.'


in  the
matter


XVI.]  'A'ISHA  JUSTIFIED  BY  A  REVELATION  301

the  Citizens  belonged.  The  quarrel  was  with  some  difficulty
appeased  by  Mohammad,  who  then  left  the  Mosque  and
proceeded  to  the  house  of  Abu  Bekr.  There,  having  called  He  consults
to  him  Osama  ^  and  'Ah,  he  asked  counsel  of  them.  Osama,  i^^"^^  ^"
declared  his  utter  disbelief  of  the  slanderous  report.  'All,
with  greater  caution,  recommended  the  examination  of
'A'isha's  maid  ;  and  the  maid  when  called  could  only  give
testimony  which,  if  anything,  was  in  her  mistress's  favour.^

Mohammad  then  went  to  the  chamber  where  'A'isha  her-  '^'^^^^, ,
self  was  sitting.  From  the  time  she  had  first  learned  the  revelation
imputation  on  her  character,  she  abandoned  herself  to  from  heaven
excessive  grief.  Her  mother  used  to  exhort  her  to  patience :
*  Assuage  thy  sorrow,  my  daughter ! '  she  would  say ;  *  it  is
seldom  that  a  beautiful  woman  is  married  to  one  who  loves
her  and  has  other  wives  besides,  but  these  multiply  scandal
against  her;  and  so  do  men  likewise.'  But  she  ever  refused
to  be  comforted,  and  continued  to  pine  away.  When
Mohammad  now  entered,  with  her  father  and  mother,  he  sat
down  beside  her,  and  said  :  'A'isha !  thou  hearest  what  men
have  spoken  of  thee.  Fear  God.  If  indeed  thou  art  guilty,
then  repent  toward  God,  for  the  Lord  accepteth  the  repent-
ance of  His  servants.'  She  held  her  peace,  expecting  (as  she
tells  us)  that  her  parents  would  reply  for  her ; — but  they  too
were  silent.  At  last  she  burst  into  a  passionate  flood  of  tears,
and  exclaimed  :  '  By  the  Lord  !  I  say  that  I  will  never  repent
towards  God  of  that  which  ye  speak  of.  I  am  helpless.  If  I
confess,  God  knoweth  that  I  am  not  guilty.  If  I  deny,  no
one  believeth  me.  All  I  can  say  is  that  which  Joseph's
father  said, — Patience  becomcth  nie^  and  the  Lord  is  my
helper  r^ Then,  as  all  sat  silent,  Mohammad  appeared  to

'  Son  of  the  Prophet's  nurse  Baraka  (Um  Aiman)  and  her  husband  Zeid.

2  'Ah' answered  Mohammad:  'O  Prophet!  there  is  no  lack  of  women,
and  thou  canst  without  difficulty  supply  her  place.  Ask  this  servant  girl
about  her,  perchance  she  may  tell  the  truth.'  So  Mohammad  called
the  maid.  'All  arose  and  struck  her,  saying:  'Tell  the  truth  unto  the
Prophet.'  'I  know  nothing,'  said  she,  'of  'A'isha  but  what  is  good  :—
excepting  this,  indeed,  that  one  day  I  was  kneading  corn,  and  I  asked
her  to  watch  it,  and  she  went  asleep,  and  the  goats  came  and  ate  thereof.'
We  must  not  forget,  however,  that  all  this  is  from  'A'isha  herself,  who
had  a  strong  antipathy  to  'All.

^  'A'isha  says  that  the  name  of  Jacob  having  gone  out  of  her  head  at
the  moment,  she  substituted  the  v^oxA'a  Josep/t's  father.


revealed  on
the  occasion


302  FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  YEARS  OF  HIJRA  [chap.

fall  into  a  trance.  They  covered  him  over,  and  placed  a
pillow  under  his  head.  Thus  he  lay  seemingly  unconscious.
•A'isha  assures  us  that  her  mind  was  perfectly  tranquil  at
the  moment,  confident  that  her  innocence  would  be  vindicated
from  heaven.  In  a  little  while  he  recovered,  cast  off  the
clothes,  and  sat  up.  Wiping  away  the  great  drops  of  sweat
from  his  forehead,  he  exclaimed  :  ^A'isha!  rejoice!  Verily  the
Lord  hath  declared  thine  itmocoice.'  '  Embrace  thy  husband  ! '
cried  her  mother.  But  'A'isha  could  do  no  more  than  ejacu-
late, '  Praise  be  to  the  Lord ! '
Passages  Then  Mohammad  went  forth  to  the  people,  and  recited

before  them  the  commands  he  had  received  in  this  matter,
which  form  the  law  of  adultery  to  the  present  day.  The
24th  Sura  opens  with  declaring  one  hundred  stripes^  the
punishment  for  harlotry,  and  proceeds  thus  : —

Sura  xxiv.  They  that  slander  married  women,  and  thereafter  do  not  bring  for-

4  f«  ward  four  witnesses,  scourge  them  with  four-score  stripes  :  and  ye  shall

never  again  receive  their  testimony  ; for they  are infamous,— Unless
they  repent  after  that,  and  amend,  for  God  is  forgiving  and  merciful.^
V.  1 1  fF.  *  *  *  Verily  as  for  them, — a  party  amongst  you, — that  have  fabricated

lies,  think  it  not  to  be  an  evil  unto  you.  To  every  man  amongst  them
shall  be  dealt  out  punishment  according  to  the  crime  which  he  hath
wrought ;  and  he  that  hath  been  forward  amongst  them  in  aggravating
the  same,  his  punishment  shall  be  grievous.^  Wherefore,  when  they
heard  it,  did  not  the  faithful  men  and  women  imagine  good  in  their
hearts,  and  say, — This  is  a  manifest  falsehood?  Have  they  brought
four  witnesses  thereof?  Wherefore,  since  they  have  not  produced  the
witnesses,  they  are  liars,  these  men,  in  the  sight  of  God.  If  it  were  not
for  the  favour  of  God  upon  you,  and  His  mercy  in  this  world  and  in  the
next,  verily  for  that  which  ye  have  spread  abroad,  a  grievous  punishment

1  Sura  xii.  18.  This  penalty  is  made  by  the  Muslim  divines  to  apply
to  fornication  only,  and  not  to  adultery.  For  the  latter  no  punishment  is
mentioned  in  the  Kor'an^  but  the  Sunna  awards  death  by  stoning  for  it.

2  Here  intervenes  the  ordinance  prescribed  for  a  husband  charging
his  wife  with  adultery.  If  he  have  no  witnesses,  the  charge,  sworn  to  by
himself  four  times,  with  a  fifth  oath  imprecating  the  wrath  of  God  if
swearing  falsely,  is  accepted  without  witnesses.  The  wife  may  avert  the
punishment  by  similar  oaths  and  a  similar  imprecation.  No  correspond-
ing privilege  is  conceded  to  the  wife  who  accuses  her  husband  of
adultery.

3  The  expression  here  is  so  strong  that  some  take  it  to  mean  hell,
and  apply  it  to  'Abdallah.  Others  refer  it  to  Hassan,  who  shortly  after
became  blind.  But  the  natural  meaning  is  the  punishment  of  stripes,
severe  enough  certainly  for  the  honourable  class  on  whom  it  was
inflicted.


XVI.]


CALUMNIATORS  OF  'A'ISHA  SCOURGED


303


T8f.


Calumni-
ators of
'A'isha
scourged


had  overtaken  you  ; — when  ye  published  it  with  your  tongues,  and  said
with  your  mouths  that  of  which  ye  had  no  knowledge:  and  ye  counted
it  light,  but  with  God  it  is  weighty.  Why,  when  ye  heard  it,  did  ye  not
say  :  //  belo?rgeth  not  to  lis  that  we  should  speak  of  this  ; — Gracious  Cod!
It  is  a  monstrous  calumjiy  !

God  admonisheth  you  that  ye  return  not  to  the  like  again  for  ever.
.  .  .  Verily,  they  who  love  that  infamy  should  be  published  regarding
the  Believers  :  to  them  shall  be  a  grievous  torment  in  this  world  and  in
the  next.  And  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  grace  of  God  upon  you,  and
His  mercy, — Verily,  God  is  merciful  and  forgiving.

After  some  further  denunciations  and  threats  of  punish-
ment, both  in  this  life  and  the  next,  against  the  publishers
of  scandal  and  traducers  of  innocent  females,  Mohammad
stopped  short;  and,  in  accordance  with  the  divine  command,
ordered  the  prescribed  punishment  to  be  inflicted  on  the
calumniators  of  'A'isha.  Mistah  and  Hassan  received  each
four-score  stripes ;  and  even  Hamna,  the  sister  of  the
favourite  Zeinab,  did  not  escape.  Against  'Abdallah  alone,
Mohammad  did  not  venture  to  enforce  the  sentence.  It  was
fortunate  that  he  refrained  from  doing  so,  for  a  time  of  trial
was  at  hand  when  the  alienation  of  this  powerful  Citizen  and
his  adherents  might  have  proved  dangerous  to  his  cause.

Satisfied  with  such  emphatic  vindication  of  his  favourite Hnssan
wife,  Mohammad  dropped  the  grudge,  and  sought  now  rather byTresent
to conciliate her calumniators. Safwan (the hero  of  the of  an  estate
misadventure),  smarting  from  the  imputations  veiled  under
the  satires  of  the  poet  Hassan,  drew  his  sword  upon  him  and
inflicted  a  deep  wound. Hassan  and  his  friends  seized  and
bound Safwan,  and carried  him before Mohammad. The
Prophet  first  rebuked  Hassan  for  troubling  the  Citizens  with
his  lampoons ; and then,  having  composed the difference,
more than compensated the Poet  for  his  wound  and the
disgrace  of  the  stripes,  by  conferring  on  him  a  valuable  estate
and  mansion  in  the  vicinity  of  Medina. He  also  commanded
Abu  Bekr  not  to  withdraw  from  Mistah,  his  indigent  relative,
the  support  he  had  hitherto  given  him.^

^  This  was  not  thought  too  small  a  matter  for  a  special  injunction  ;
see  Sura  xxiv.  22.  Of  Hassan,  we  learn  that,  though  by  far  the  first
poet  in  Medina,  his  character  was  not  such  as  to  inspire  respect.  He
was  foul-mouthed  and  cowardly,  and  never  went  into  battle.  Combing
his  hair  over  his  forehead  and  eyes,  and  dyeing  his  moustache  a  bright
red  while  the  rest  of  his  hair  was  black,  he  affected  often  the  wild  appear-
ance of  a  wolf.


304


FOURTH  AND  FIFTH  YEARS  OF  HIJRA  [chap.


Hassan
reconciles
'A'isha  by
an  ode


Guilt  or
innocence  of
'A'isha


Law  of
slander
established
by  Moham-
mad


Mohammad
cautions  his
wives  against
immodesty


Sura  xxxiii.
28  £f.


'A'isha  resumed  her  place,  more  secure  than  ever,  as  the
queen  of  the  Prophet's  heart  and  home.  Hassan,  changing
his  muse,  sang  in  glowing  verse  of  her  purity,  elegance,  and
wit,  and  (what  she  piqued  herself  the  most  upon)  her  slender,
graceful  figure.^  The  flattering  compliment  reconciled  her
to  the  Poet ;  but  she  never  forgave  'Ali  for  his  doubting.

Little  remark  is  needed  regarding  the  character  of  'A'isha
and  the  revelation  to  which  it  gave  occasion.  The  reason
assigned  for  her  innocence  and  the  punishment  of  her  slan-
derers, namely,  the  absence  of  four  witnesses,  is  inconclusive  ;
but  her  life  both  before  and  after  must  lead  us  to  believe  her
innocent  of  the  charge.  It  might  have  been  necessary  that
Mohammad  should  caution  his  followers,  and  even  punish
them,  for  lightly  or  maliciously  damaging  a  reputation
hitherto  untarnished  ;  but  to  prohibit,  on  pain  of  stripes,  all
comment  on  suspicious  morality  unless  attested  by  four
witnesses,  is  to  cast  a  veil  over  conduct  which  the  interests
of  society  might  imperatively  require  to  be  canvassed  and
held  up  to  reprobation.  The  direct  evidence  of  four  eye-
witnesses is  still  needed  to  prove  the  charge  of  adultery,  so
that  the  draconic  penalty  of  stoning  is  practically  inoperative.^
But  the  law  itself  is  a  fair  example  of  the  way  in  which  the
Code  of  Islam  grew  out  of  the  circumstances  of  the  day,
concrete  rather  than  based  on  abstract  considerations.

Although  admitting  so  decisively  the  innocence  of  'A'isha,
Mohammad  did  not  deem  the  character  of  his  wives  above
the  necessity  of  caution,  and  the  threat  of  a  double  punish-
ment if  they  erred.  They  were  not  as  other  women ;  far
more  than  others  they  were  bound  to  abstain  from  every
word  and  action  that  might  encourage  those  'whose  hearts
are  diseased.'  The  passage  enjoining  this  is  too  curious  to
be  curtailed,  even  at  the  risk  of  the  reader's  patience.

O  Prophet,  say  unto  thy  Wives, — Jf  ye  seek  after  this  -present  Life  and
the  fashion  thereof,  come,  I  will  7iiake  provision  for  you  and  dismiss  you
with  a  fair  distnission. But  if  ye  seek  after  God  and  His  Apostle,  and  the


^  Diwdn,  No.  cxlvi.  When  he  came  to  the  passage  referring  to  her
slimness,  she  archly  interrupted  him  by  a  piece  of  raillery  at  his  own
corpulence.

2  Vide  p.  302,  note  i.  It  is  true  that  an  exception  is  made  in  favour
of  the  husband,  whose  oath  five  times  repeated  may  be  substituted,  as
above  noted  (page  302,  note  2)


XVI.] CAUTIONS  HIS  WIVES  AGAINST  IMMODESTY 305

Life  to  come,  then  verily  God  hath  prepared  for  the  excellent  amongst  you
a  great  reward.  O  ye  Wives  of  the  Prophet !  if  any  amongst  you  should
be  guilty  of  incontinence,  the  punishment  shall  be  doubled  unto  her  two-
fold ;  and  that  were  easy  with  God.  But  she  that  amongst  you  devoteth
herself  to  God  and  His  Apostle,  and  worketh  righteousness,  We  shall
give  unto  her  her  reward  twice  told,  and  We  have  prepared  for  her  a
gracious  maintenance.

O  ye  Wives  of  the  Prophet  I  Ye  are  not  as  other  women.  If  ye  fear
the  Lord,  be  not  bland  in  your  speech  lest  he  indulge  desire  in  whose
heart  is  disease.  Yet  speak  the  speech  that  is  suitable.  And  abide
within  your  houses  ;  and  array  not  yourselves  as  ye  used  to  do  in  the
bygone  days  of  Ignorance.  And  observe  the  times  of  Prayer  ;  and  give
Alms  :  and  obey  God  and  His  Apostle.  Verily  the  Lord  desireth  only  to
purge  away  from  you  impurity,  ye  that  are  of  (his)  household,  and  to
purify  you  wholly.  And  keep  in  memory  that  which  is  recited  in  your
houses,  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  Wisdom  :  for  God  pierceth  that  which
is  hidden,  and  is  acquainted  with  all  things.


CHAPTER XVII

SIEGE OF MEDINA,^ AND MASSACRE OF THE BENI
KOREIZA

Dhu'l-Ka^da,  a.h.  v. — February,  March,  A.D.  627

Stirring WHILE  Mohammad  thus  busied  himself  with  the  cares  of  his
scenes  open increasinsT  harim,  and,  by  messasfes  addressed  from  heaven,

upon  Mo-  ...  ..  .  ,  .  r y-r

hammad enjomed  upon  Its  mmates  virtue  and  propriety  of  hfe,  more

stirring  scenes  awaited  him. A  storm  was  gathering  in  the

south.

Koreish,  The  Winter  season  was  again  come  round,  at  which  it  had

joined  by become the wont of  Koreish to arm themselves against

cedawin  • _  °

tribes,  march  Medina.  Their  preparations  now  exceeded  those  of  any
Medina  previous  year.  Huyei,  and  other  exiled  Jewish  chiefs,  under-
took to  rouse  the  Bedawin  tribes  bound  by  alliance  or
sympathy  in  the  same  cause.  Among  these  were  several
clans  of  the  Ghatafan  family,  between  whom  and  Mohammad
there  had  already  been  some  warlike  passages.  Ashja*  and
Murra  each  brought  400  warriors  ;  and  the  Beni  Fezara  a
large  force,  with  1,000  camels,  under  'Oyeina ;  the  Suleim,
who  had  been  concerned  in  the  massacre  at  Bi'r  Ma'una,
joined  the  army  on  the  way,  with  700  men.  The  Beni  Sa'd
and  Asad  also  swelled  the  force,  the  latter  still  smarting  from
the  attack  made  on  them  by  Mohammad  about  two  years
before.  Koreish  themselves  brought  into  the  field  4,000
soldiers,  including  300  horse,  and  1,500  riders  upon  camels.
The  banner  was  mounted  in  the  Hall  of  Council  and  delivered
to  'Othman,  son  of  Talha  the  standard-bearer  killed  at  Ohod.
The  entire  force  was  estimated  at  10,000  men.  They
marched  in  three  separate  camps ;  all  were  under  the  general
leadership  of  Abu Sufyan,  but,  when  the  time  for  action

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  668  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1463  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  190  ff.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  47  ff.


CHAP.  XVII] SIEGE  OF  MEDINA. A  TRENCH  IS  DUG 307

came, the several chiefs each for a day commanded in
succession.

Mohammad was  apprised  of  the  danger  by  a  friendly Mohammad
message  from  the  Khoza'a,  but  barely  in  time  to  prepare. Med'ina  b
Alarm  overspread  Medina. The  defeat  at  Ohod  by  numbers a  trench.
much  inferior  put  it  out  of  the  question  to  offer  battle ;  and Febriuirv
the  only  anxiety  now  was  how  successfully  to  defend  the a.d.  627
city. By  advice  of  Salman  '  the  Persian ' — who,  taken  captive
in  Mesopotamia,  was  familiar  with  warlike  tactics  practised
there— it  was  resolved  to  entrench  Medina,  a  stratagem  as
yet  unknown  to  the  Arabs.^ The  outer  line  of  houses  was
built  together  so  compactly  that,  for  a  considerable  length,
they  presented  a  high  stone  wall,  of  itself  a  solid  defence
against  the  enemy. But  it  was necessary  to  connect  this
barrier  on  one  hand  with  the  rocks  which  on  the  north-west
approach  the  city ,2  and  on  the  other  to  carry  it  round  the
open  and  unsheltered  quarter  on  the  south  and  east. The
work,  consisting  of  a  deep  ditch  and  rude  earthen  dyke,  was
portioned  out  amongst  the  various  clans. Shovels,  pickaxes,
and  baskets  were  borrowed  from  the  Beni  Koreiza. Moham-
mad stimulated  the  enthusiasm  of  his  followers  by  himself
carrying  basket-loads  of  the  excavated  earth,  and  joining  in
their  song,  as  at  the  building  of  the  Mosque  : —

O  Lord  !  there  is  no  happiness  but  that  of  Futurity.

O  Lord  !  have  mercy  on  the  Citizens  and  the  Refugees  !

He  also  frequently  repeated  the  following  verses,  covered
as  he  was,  like  the  rest,  with  earth  and  dust : —

O  Lord  !  without  Thee,  we  had  not  been  guided  !
We  should  neither  have  given  ahns,  nor  yet  have  prayed  !
Send  down  upon  us  tranquillity,  and  in  battle  stablish  our  steps  !
For  they  have  risen  up  against  us,  and  sought  to  pervert  us,  but  we
refused  ! — Yea,  we  refused.

And  as  he  repeated  the  last  two  words,  he  raised  his  voice
high  and  loud.

^  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  Christian  captive  of  Mesopotamia,  bought
by  a  Jew  from  the  Beni  Kelb,  and  ransomed  on  his  profession  of  Islam.
This  is  the  first  occasion  on  which  he  comes  to  notice.  See  Ibn  Hisham,
p.  136  fif.

2  The  fortress  or  castle  of  Medina  is  now  built  on  this  'out-cropping
mass  of  rock.' — Burton.  Burckhardt  calls  it  a  small  rocky  elevation.
Speaking  of  the  great  mountain  chain,  he  also  says  :  '  The  last  undula-


3o8


SIEGE  OF  MEDINA


[chap.


Army  of
Medina
ported
within
trench.
A.H.  V.
March  2,
A.D.  626


Koreish
encamp
opposite
them,


And  detach
Beni  Koreiza
from  allegi-
ance to
Mohammad


In  six  days  the  trench  was  dug,  deep  and  wide  through-
out almost  the  whole  length  of  the  defence ;  and  well-sized
stones  were  piled  along  its  inner  bank  to  be  used  against  the
enemy.  The  dwellings  outside  the  town  were  evacuated,  and
the  women  and  children  bidden  to  stay  at  the  top  of  the
double-storied  houses  within  the  entrenchment.  These
things  were  barely  done  when  the  enemy  was  reported  to  be
advancing,  as  before,  by  the  hill  of  Ohod.  The  army  of
Medina,  3,000  strong,  marched  out  at  once  into  the  open
space  between  the  city  and  the  trench.  It  commanded  the
road  leading  to  Ohod,  its  rear  resting  upon  the  north-eastern
quarter  of  the  city  and  the  eminence  of  Sal*.  The  northern
face  was  the  most  vulnerable  point,  the  approaches  from  the
east  being  covered  by  walls  and  palm  enclosures.  A  tent  of
red  leather  was  pitched  for  Mohammad  on  the  ground,  in
which  'A'isha,  Um  Selama,  and  Zeinab  visited  him  by  turns.

Koreish,  with  their  Bedawi  hordes,  and  multitudes  of
camels  and  horses,  encamped  at  first  upon  their  old  ground,
under  the  hill  of  Ohod.  Then,  finding  the  country  deserted,
they  swept  rapidly  round  by  the  scene  of  their  former  victory,
and,  still  advancing  unopposed,  were  brought  to  a  stand  by
the  trench.  Closely  guarded  all  along  by  pickets  on  the  city
side,  it  formed  a  barrier  which  they  could  not  pass.  They
were  astonished  and  disconcerted  at  the  new  tactics  of
Mohammad.  Unable  to  come  to  close  quarters,  they  pitched
their  camps  on  the  plain  beyond,  and  contented  themselves
for  some  time  with  a  distant  discharge  of  archery.

Meanwhile,  Abu  Sufyan  succeeded  in  detaching  the  Beni
Koreiza,  now  the  only  remaining  Jewish  tribe,  from  their
allegiance  to  Mohammad.  Huyei,  the  exiled  Jew  and  ally
of  the  Koreish,  sent  by  him  to  their  fortress,  was  at  first
refused  admittance.  But,  persevering  in  his  solicitations,
dwelling  upon  the  ill-concealed  enmity  of  Mohammad
towards  the  Jews  at  large,  and  representing  the  overwhelming
numbers  of  the  confederate  army  as  '  a  surging  sea,'  he  at


tions  of  these  mountains  touch  the  town  on  the  north  side.'  This  is
apparently  what,  in  tradition,  is  called  Sal\  though  Burckhardt  gives
that  name,  'Jebel  Sila,'  to  the  Mondkh  (or  encamping  ground)  lying
immediately  to  the  south.  I  gather  that  the  part  of  modern  Medina  im-
mediately to  the  east  of  the  fort  was  in  ancient  times  open  and  unbuilt
upon.


XVII.] BENI  KOREIZA  DETACHED  FROM  MOHAMMAD 309

last  persuaded  Ka'b  their  chief  to  relent.  It  was  agreed  that
the  Beni  Koreiza  would  assist  Koreish,  and  that  Huyei
should  retire  into  their  fortress  in  case  the  allies  marched
back  without  inflicting  a  fatal  blow  upon  Medina.  Rumours
of  this  defection  reaching  Mohammad,  he  sent  the  two  Sa'ds,
chiefs  of  the  Aus  and  Khazraj,  to  ascertain  the  truth  ;  and
strictly  charged  them,  if  the  result  should  prove  unfavourable,
to  divulge  it  to  none  other  but  himself  They  found  the
Beni  Koreiza  in  a  sullen  mood.  'Who  is  Mohammad,'  said
they,  '  and  who  is  the  Apostle  of  God,  that  we  should  obey
him  ?  There  is  no  bond  or  compact  betwixt  us  and  him.'
After  high  words  and  threats,  the  messengers  took  their
leave,  and  reported  to  Mohammad  that  the  temper  of  the
Jews  was  worse  even  than  he  had  feared.^

'  It  is  not  easy  to  say  exactly  what  campact  did  at  this  time  exist  between
Mohammad  and  the  Beni  Koreiza,  and  what  part  the  Beni  Koreiza  actually
took  in  assisting  the  Allies.  The  evidence  is  altogether  ex  parte,  and
naturally  adverse  to  the  Beni  Koreiza.  The  Kor'an,  our  surest  guide,  says
simply  that  they  'assisted'  the  Allies;  and  the  best  traditions  confine
themselves  to  this  general  expression.  Had  they  entered  on  active
hostilities,  no  doubt  it  would  have  been  more  distinctly  specified  in  the
Kor'an.  On  the  other  hand,  a  tradition  from  'A'isha  states  that,  when
the  Allies  broke  up,  the  Beni  Koreiza,  'returned'  to  their  fort ;  and  some
traditions,  though  not  of  much  weight,  speak  of  them  as  part  of  the
besieging  force  before  Medina.  There  is  also  a  weak  tradition  that
Hodheifa,  sent  by  Mohammad  as  a  spy  to  the  enemy's  camp,  overheard
Abu  Sufyan  telling  his  comrades  the  good  news  that  the  Beni  Koreiza  had
agreed  to  join  him,  after  ten  days'  preparation,  provided  he  sent  seventy
warriors  to  hold  their  fortress  while  they  were  absent  in  the  field  ;  and
that  Hodheifa's  report  was  the  first  intelligence  Mohammad  had  of  the
defection.

On  the  whole,  my  impression  is  that  the  Beni  Koreiza  entered  into  some
kind  of  league  with  the  Jewish  exile  Huyei,  making  common  cause  with
him,  and  promising  to  take  part  in  following  up  any  success  on  the  part
of  Koreish — a  promise  which  they  were  in  the  best  position  to  fulfil —
their  fortress  being,  though  at  some  distance  from  the  city,  on  its
undefended  side.  But,  before  opportunity  offered,  they  saw  the  likelihood
of  the  siege  failing,  and  then  distrust  of  Koreish  broke  out,  and  so  their
promise  never  was  fulfilled.  The  compact  existing  betwixt  them  and
Mohammad  is  described  by  Al-Wakidi  as  a  ''slight^  one.  Al-Jauhaii
says  that  this  term  means  a  treaty  entered  into  without  forecast  or
design,  or  'infirm.' '  Foedus  vel  pactum  forte  initum,  vel  baud  firmum.'

Sprenger  notes  these  alternatives  ; — First,  that,  as  at  Ohod,  the  Beni
Koreiza  were  forbidden  by  Mohammad  to  take  part  with  him  in  the
fight ; second, that  of  their  own  free-will  they  remained  neutral. He


3IO


SIEGE  OF  MEDINA  [chap.


Danger  to  The  news  alarmed Mohammad  and  disturbed  the  city.

^  mThis '^^^^  Jews,  whom  the  previous  treatment  of  their  brethren

defection, might  now  drive  to  desperate  measures,  had  still  a  powerful

fo"AtTsafe[^^  party in their favour ; and the defences, moreover,  were

weakest  on  that  side. Disaffection  lurked  everywhere,  and

some  began  even  to  talk  of  deserting  to  the  enemy. To

protect  the  town  in  the  quarter  most  exposed,  and  guard

against  surprise  or treachery,  Mohammad  was  obliged  to

detach  from  his  force,  already  barely  adequate  to  man  the

trench,  two  parties  under  Zeid  and  a  Citizen  respectively,

which  night  and  day  patrolled  the  streets. A  strong  guard

was  also  posted  over  the  Prophet's  tent.

Attack  on  The  vigilance  of  the Muslim pickets  kept  at  bay  the

trench  Confederate  host,  who  proclaimed  the  trench  to  be  an  un-

repulsed  . .

worthy  subterfuge.  '  Truly  this  ditch,'  they  cried  in  their
chagrin,  '  is  the  artifice  of  strangers,  a  shift  to  which  no  Arab
yet  has  ever  stooped.'  But  it  was,  nevertheless,  the  safety  of
Medina.  The  Confederate  host  resolved  if  possible  to  storm
the  trench,  and,  having  discovered  a  narrow  and  ill-guarded
part,  a  general  attack  was  made  upon  it.  Spurring  their
horses,  a  few  of  them,  led  by  'Ikrima,  son  of  Abu  Jahl,  cleared
the  ditch,  and  galloped  vauntingly  before  the  Muslim  line.
_  No  sooner  was  this perceived,  than 'All with  a  guard  of

picked  men  moved  out  against  them.  These,  by  a  rapid
manoeuvre,  gained  the  rear  of  'Ikrima,  and,  occupying  the
narrow  point  which  he  had  crossed,  cut  off  his  retreat.  At
this  moment  'Amr,  an  aged  chief  in  the  train  of  'Ikrima,
challenged  his  adversaries  to  single  combat.  'All  forthwith
accepted  the  challenge,  and  the  two  stood  man  to  man  in  the
open  plain.  'Amr,  dismounting,  maimed  his  horse,  in  token
of  his  resolve  to  conquer  or  to  die.  They  closed,  and  for  a
short  time  were  hidden  in  a  cloud  of  dust.  But  it  was  not
long  before  the  loud  Tekbir, '  Great  is  the  Lord  ! '  from  'All's
lips,  made  known  that  he  was  the  victor.^ The  rest,  taking

decides  in  favour  of  the  first  ;  — that  they  resisted  the  temptation  and
remained  faithful,  and  that  even  the  Jews  of  Kheibar  kept  aloof  from
Koreish  for  fear  of  compromising  their  brethren  at  Medina.

The  question  is  important  as  bearing  on  the  sentence  executed
against  the  Beni  Koreiza  after  Koreish  retired.

^  Koreish,  it  is  said,  offered  a  great  sum  for  the  body  ;  but  Mohammad
returned  the  '  worthless  carcase '  (as  he  termed  it)  free.


XVII.]


BATTLE  OF  THE  DITCH


311


advantage  of  the  diversion,  again  spurred  their  horses  across
the  trench,  and  escaped,  all  excepting  Naufal,  who,  failing  in
the  leap,  was  despatched  by  Az-Zubeir  [or  according  to
another  account  by  'All].^

Nothing  further  was  attempted  that  day.  But  great
preparations  were  made  during  the  night ;  and  next
morning,  Mohammad  found  the  whole  allied  forces  drawn
out  against  him.  It  required  unceasing  vigilance  to  frustrate
their  manoeuvres.  Now  they  would  threaten  a  general
assault;  now  breaking  up  into  divisions  they  would  attack
various  posts  in  rapid  and  distracting  succession ;  and  at  last,
watching  their  opportunity,  they  would  mass  their  troops
together  on  the  least  protected  point,  and,  under  cover  of
galling  archery,  attempt  to  force  the  trench.  Once  and
again  a  gallant  dash  was  made  at  the  city  by  such  leaders  of
renown  as  Khalid  and  'Amr,  and  the  tent  of  Mohammad
himself  was  at  one  moment  in  peril;  but  the  brave  Muslim
front,  and  showers  of  arrows,  drove  the  assailants  back.
This  continued  throughout  the  day ;  and,  as  the  army  of
Mohammad  was  but  just  sufficient  to  guard  the  line,  there
could  be  no  relief  Even  at  night  Khalid's  troop  kept  up  the
alarm,  and  rendered  outposts  at  frequent  intervals  necessary
But  the  endeavours  of  the  enemy  were  all  without  effect.
The  trench  was  never  crossed  in  force ;  and  during  the  whole
affair  Mohammad  lost  only  five  men.  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh,  chief
of  the  Aus,  was  wounded  severely  by  an  arrow  in  the
shoulder ;  the  archer  crying  aloud  : — '  There,  take  that  from
the  son  of  Al-'Araka.'^  Whereupon  Mohammad  exclaimed,
with  a  bitter  play  upon  the  name  :  '  The  Lord  cause  thy  face
to  sweat  ('arraka)  in  hell  fire ! '  The  Confederates  had  but
three  men  killed.

No  prayers  had  been  said  that  day :  the  duty  at  the
trench  was  too  heavy  and  incessant.  When  it  was  dark,
therefore,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  enemy  had  retired,  the
Muslim  troops  assembled,  and  a  separate  service  was  held
for  each  omitted  prayer.  On  this  occasion  Mohammad  cursed
the  allied  army  thus  : — '  They  have  kept  us  from  our  daily
prayers  :  God  fill  their  bellies  and  their  graves  with  fire  ! '

Though  the  loss  of  life  had  been  trifling,  yet  the  army

1  At-Tabari,  i.  1475  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  210.

^  [He  is  not  mentioned  by  Ibn  Hisham  or  At-Tabari.]


General
attack,  suc-
cessfully
repelled


Prayers
repeated  in
the  evening
for  those
omitted
during  day


Distress  at
Medina


312


SIEGE  OF  MEDINA


[chap.


Sura  xxxiii.
10  f.


Secret
negotiation
to  buy  off
Beni  Gha-
tafan


Mutual
distrust
sown
between
Koreish
and  Jews
by  emissary
from  Mo-
hammad


of  Medina  was  harassed  and  wearied  with  unceasing  watch
and  duty  night  and  day.  They  were,  moreover,  dispirited  by
finding  themselves  hemmed  in,  and  seeing  no  prospect  of  the
siege  being  raised.  Mohammad  himself  was  in  constant  alarm
lest  the  trench  should  be  forced,  or  his  rear  be  threatened
by  the  Jews  or  disaffected  Citizens.  Many  followers,  whose
possessions  lay  outside  the  city,  afraid  lest  they  should  be
plundered,  begged  leave  to  go  and  protect  them.  Mohammad
was  to  outward  look  weak  and  helpless.  '  Where,'  it  was
asked,  'were  now  the  Prophet's  hopes,  and  where  his  pro-
mises of  Heaven's  assistance?'  It  was  a  day  of  rebuke,
when  (as  we  read  in  the  vivid  language  of  the  Kor'an)  '  the
enemy  came  upon  them  fro^n  above  and  frojn  beneath,  and  the
sight  became  confused ;  and  hearts  reached  to  the  throat ;  and
the  people  imagined  of  God  strange  imaginations ;  for  there
were  the  FaitJifid  tried,  and  made  to  tremble  violently^  In
this  state  of  alarm,  when  the  siege  had  now  lasted  ten  or
twelve  days,  Mohammad  bethought  him  of  buying  off  the
Bedawin  as  the  least  hostile  portion  of  his  foe.  He  sent
therefore  to  'Oyeina,  chief  of  the  Beni  Fezara,  and  sounded
him  as  to  whether  he  would  engage  to  withdraw  the  Ghatafan
tribes,  on  condition  of  receiving  one-third  of  the  produce  of
the  date-trees  of  Medina.  'Oyeina  signified  his  readiness,  if
one-half  were  guaranteed.  But  Mohammad  had  over-estimated
his  authority.  On  sending  for  the  two  Sa'ds,  as  repre-
sentatives of  the  Aus  and  of  the  Khazraj,  they  spurned  the
compromise ;  but,  still  maintaining  their  subordination  to  the
Prophet,  added :  '  If  thou  hast  received  a  command  from
heaven  for  this,  then  do  thou  act  according  to  the  same.'
'  Nay,'  said  Mohammad,  '  If  I  had  received  a  bidding  from
the  Lord,  I  had  not  consulted  you  ;  I  but  ask  your  advice  as
to  that  thing  which  is  the  most  expedient.'  '  Then,'  said  the
chiefs,  'our  counsel  is  to  give  nothing  unto  them  but  the
Sword.' And  so  the  project  dropped.

Another  and  more  artful  device  was  now  tried.  There
was  a  man  of  the  allied  army,  who  possessed  the  ear  of  both
sides — the  same  No'eim  who  had  been  employed  by  Koreish
in  the  previous  year  to  prevent  Mohammad  from  advancing
upon  Bedr,  by  exaggerated  accounts  of  the  preparations  at
Mecca.  He  is  here  represented  as  an  exemplary  believer,  but
secretly  for  fear  of  his  tribe. His  services  now  offered  were


XVII.]  MUTUAL  INTRIGUE  313

gladly  accepted.  'See  now,'  said  Mohammad  to  him,
'whether  thou  canst  not  break  up  this  confederacy:  for  War
after  all  is  but  a  game  of  deception.'  No'eim  went  first  to
the  Beni  Koreiza  and,  representing  himself  as  their  friend,
artfully  insinuated  that  the  interests  of  the  allied  army  were
diverse  from  theirs ;  before  they  compromised  themselves
irretrievably  by  joining  in  the  renewed  attack  on  Medina,
they  ought  to  demand  from  Korcish  hostages,  as  a  guarantee
against  being  in  the  last  resort  deserted  and  left  in  the  power
of  Mohammad.^  Suspecting  no  harm,  they  agreed  to  act  on
his  advice.  Next  he  went  to  the  allied  chiefs  and  cautioned
them  against  the  Jews :  '  I  have  heard,'  said  he,  '  that  the
Beni  Koreiza  intend  asking  for  hostages ;  beware  how  ye
give  them,  for  they  have  already  repented  of  their  compact
with  you,  and  promised  Mohammad  to  give  him  up  the
hostages  to  be  slain,  and  then  join  in  the  battle  against  you.'
The  insidious  plot  immediately  took  effect.  When  Koreish
sent  to  demand  of  the  Beni  Koreiza  the  fulfilment  of  their
engagement  to  join  in  a  general  attack  on  the  following  day,
they  pleaded  their  Sabbath  as  a  pretext  against  fighting  on
the  morrow,  and  their  fear  of  being  deserted  as  a  ground  for
demanding  hostages.  The  Allies,  regarding  this  as  a  con-
firmation of  No'eim's  intelligence,  were  so  fully  persuaded  of
the  treachery  of  the  Beni  Koreiza  that  they  began  even  to
fear  an  attack  upon  themselves  from  that  quarter.

The  Confederate  chiefs  were  already  disheartened.  After
the  first  two  days  of  vigorous  fighting,  they  had  not  again
attempted  any  general  assault.^  The  hopes  entertained  from
another  engagement,  during  which  the  Beni  Koreiza  were  to
have  fallen  upon  the  city  in  the  rear  of  Mohammad,  were  now
changed  into  the  fear  of  hostilities  from  the  Beni  Koreiza
themselves.  Forage  was  obtained  with  the  utmost  difficulty  ;
provisions  were  running  short,  and the  camels  and horses

^  The  tenor  of  No'eim's  advice,  as  given  uniformly  by  tradition,  is
opposed  to  the  supposition  that  the  Beni  Koreiza  had  as  yet  joined  in  active
hostilities  against  Mohammad,  or  committed  any  such  overt  act  as
would  have  prevented  them  rejoining  his  cause.  Sprenger  says  that,  at
this  stage,  Huyei  made  a  last  attempt  to  persuade  the  Beni  Koreiza  to  fall
upon  the  rear  of  the  Muslims  at  the  time  of  a  general  attack,  but  did  not
succeed.

2  Perhaps  the  system  by  which  the  chiefs  commanded  each  on  succes-
sive days  may  have  paralysed  their  energies.


314


SIEGE  OF  MEDINA


[chap.


A  tempest ;
Abu  Sufyan
orders  allied
force  to
break  up


Enemy
retires


Mohammad
attributes
relief  to
divine  in-
terposition


dying  daily  in  great  numbers.  Wearied  and  damped  in
spirit,  the  night  set  in  upon  them  cold  and  tempestuous.
Wind  and  rain  beat  mercilessly  on  the  unprotected  camp.
The  storm  rose  to  a  hurricane.  Fires  were  extinguished,
tents  blown  down,  cooking  vessels  and  other  equipage  over-
thrown. Cold  and  comfortless,  Abu  Sufyan  suddenly  resolved
on  an  immediate  march.  Hastily  summoning  the  chiefs,  he
made  known  his  decision :  *  Break  up  the  camp,'  he  said,
'  and  march  ;  as  for  myself,  I  am  gone.'  With  these  words
he  leaped  on  his  camel  (so  great,  we  are  told,  was  his  im-
patience) while  its  fore  leg  was  yet  untied,  and  led  the  way.
Khalid  with  200  horse  brought  up  the  rear,  as  a  guard  against
pursuit.  Koreish  took  the  road  by  Ohod  for  Mecca,  and  the
Beni  Ghatafan  retired  to  their  desert  haunts.

The  grateful  intelligence  soon  reached  Mohammad,  who
had  sent  a  follower  in  the  dark  to  spy  out  the  enemy's
movements.  In  the  morning  not  one  of  them  was  left  in
sight.  This  happy  issue  was  an  answer,  the  Prophet  said,  to
the  earnest  prayer  he  had  for  some  days  been  offering  up :
'  O  Lord  I  Revealer  of  the  Book,  thou  that  art  swift  in  taking
account!  turn  to  flight  the  confederate  Host!  Turn  them  to
flight,  O  Lord,  and  make  them  to  quake  I  ^  The  Lord,  in
answer,  had  sent  the  tempestuous  wind,  he  said ;  the  armies
of  heaven  had  been  fighting  for  them ;  terror  had  been
struck  into  the  heart  of  the  enemy.  And  now  they  were
gone.

The  army  of  Medina,  thus  unexpectedly  relieved,  joyfully
broke  up  their  camp,  in  which  they  had  been  besieged  now
for  fifteen  days,  and  returned  to  their  homes.  Mohammad
had  no  thoughts  of  a  pursuit :  it  would  have  been  affording
Koreish  that  which  perhaps  they  still  desired — an  action  in
the  open  country.  His  thought  was  of  a  surer  and  more
important  blow  nearer  home.^
Butimmedi-  He  was  still  cleansing  himself  from  the  dust  of  the  field,
ately  re- when Suddenly  Gabriel  brought  him  command  to proceed

formed  to  .  ,  •^^^^  ii-ii  1  ,  ••

chastise  Beni  agamst  the  Jews. 'What! said the heavenly  visitant re-

Koreiza proaching  him,  '  hast  thou  laid  aside  thine  armour,  while  as

yet  the  Angels  have  not  laid  theirs  aside ! Arise ! go  up

against  the  Beni  Koreiza. Behold  I  go  before  thee  to  shake

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  684  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1485  fif.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  210  ff.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  53  f.


Muslim
army
breaks  up,


XVII.]  SIEGE  RAISED  315

the  foundations  of  their  stronghold.' ^  Instantly  Bilal  made  Siege  of
proclamation  throughout  the  town ; — immediate  march  was  fonres's!"^^'^^
ordered  ;  all  were  to  be  present  at  evening  prayer  in  the  camp  a.h  v.
pitched  before  the  fortress,  two  or  three  miles  south-east  of  5^5  '  '  '
Medina.  The  great  banner,  standing  yet  unfurled  in  the
Mosque,  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  'All.  Mohammad
mounted  his  ass,  and  the  army  (as  before  3,000  strong,  with
36  horse)  followed.  The  fortress  was  at  once  invested,  and  a
discharge  of  archery  kept  up  steadily,  but  without  effect.
One  man,  approaching  incautiously  near,  was  killed  by  a
Jewess  casting  down  a  millstone  from  the  walls.  The  im-
provident Jews,  whom  the  fate  of  their  brethren  should  have
taught  to  better  purpose,  had  not  calculated  on  the  chances
and  necessities  of  a  siege.  Soon  reduced  to  great  distress,
they  sought  to  capitulate  on  condition  of  quitting  the  neigh-
bourhood even  empty-handed.  But  Mohammad,  having  no
longer  other  Jewish  neighbours  to  alarm  or  aleniate,  was  bent
on  severer  measures,  and  refused.  In  this  extremity,  the
Beni  Koreiza  appealed  to  their  ancient  friendship  with  the
Aus,  and  the  services  rendered  to  them  in  bygone  days.
They  begged  that  Abu  Lubaba,  an  ally  belonging  to  that
tribe,  might  be  allowed  to  visit  them.  He  came,  and,  over-  Abu  Lu-
come  by  the  wailing  of  the  children  and  the  cries  of  the  ^^^^  Koteiza
women,  had  no  heart  to  speak  ;  but,  symbolically  drawing  his
hand  across  his  throat,  intimated  that  they  must  fight  to  the
last,  as  death  was  all  they  had  to  hope  for.  On  retiring,  he
felt  that  he  had  been  too  plain  and  honest  in  his  advice ;  for
'  War,'  as  the  Prophet  had  said,  '  was  a  game  of  deception.'
Therefore  he  went  to  Mohammad,  and,  confessing  his  guilt,
said  :  '  I  repent ;  for  verily  I  have  dealt  treacherously  with
the  Lord,  and  with  his  Prophet' Mohammad  vouchsafed  no

1  Tradition  abounds  with  stories  of  Gabriel  on  this  occasion.  He  was
seen  to  go  before  the  Muslim  army  in  the  appearance  of  Dihya  the
Kelbite,  who  'resembled  Gabriel  in  his  beard  and  face.'  Again,
Mohammad  desired  to  postpone  the  campaign  a  few  days  as  his  people
were  fatigued  ;  but  Gabriel  would  not  admit  of  a  moment's  delay,  and
galloped  off  with  his  troop  of  angels,  raising  a  great  dust.  Gabriel's
dress  is  particularised  :  he  rode  on  a  mule  with  a  silken  saddle,  a  silken
turban,  &c.  Mohammad  had  washed  the  right  cheek  and  was  beginning
to  wash  the  left,  when  Gabriel  appeared  and  gave  him  the  order  to  march
to  the  siege  of  the  Beni  Koreiza  ;  so,  leaving  thus  his  face  half  washed
he  obeyed  at  once  I


3i6


MASSACRE  OF  BENI  KOREIZA


[chap.


They  sur-
render at
the  discre-
tion of  the
Aus


Sa'd  ibn
Mo'adh
appointed
arbiter  of
their  fate


Bloody
judgment
of  Sa'd


reply ;  and  Abu  Lubaba,  the  more  strongly  to  mark  his
contrition,  went  straightway  to  the  Mosque  and  bound
himself  to  one  of  its  posts.  In  this  position  he  remained  for
several  days,  till  at  last  Mohammad  relented,  and  sent  to
pardon  and  release  him.  The  '  Pillar  of  repentance '  is  still
pointed  out  to  the  pious  pilgrim.

At  last  the  wretched  Jews,  brought  now  to  the  last  verge
of  starvation,  offered  to  surrender,  on  condition  that  their
fate  should  be  decided  by  their  allies  the  Aus.  To  this
Mohammad  agreed  ;  and,  after  a  siege  of  two  or  three  weeks,
the  whole  tribe,  men,  women,  and  children,  over  2,000  souls,
came  forth  from  their  stronghold.  The  men,  their  hands
tied  behind  their  backs,  were  kept  apart,  under  Moham-
mad, the  assassin  of  Ka'b.  The  women  and  children,  torn
from  their  protectors,  were  placed  under  charge  of  a  rene-
gade Jew.  As  they  passed  before  the  conqueror,  his  eye
marked  the  lovely  features  of  Reihana,  and  he  destined
her  for  himself.  The  spoil,  consisting  of  household  stuff,
clothes  and  armour,^  camels  and  flocks,  were  all  brought
forth  to  await  the  arbiter's  award.  The  store  of  wine  and
fermented  liquors  was  poured  forth,  as  now  forbidden  to
Believers.

The  Aus,  with  whom  the  judgment  la}'',  were  urgent  with
the  Prophet  that  their  ancient  allies  should  be  spared.
'  These  are  our  confederates,'  they  cried  importunately ;
'  show  them  at  least  the  same  pity  as,  at  the  suit  of  the
Khazraj,  thou  didst  show  to  their  allies  the  Beni  an-Nadlr.'
'  Are  ye  then  content,'  replied  Mohammad,  '  that  they  be
judged  by  one  of  yourselves?'  They  answered,  'Yes,'  and
Mohammad  forthwith  nominated  Sa'd  ibn  Mo'adh  to  be  the
judge.

Sa'd  still  suffered  from  the  injury  inflicted  by  the  arrow
at  the  trench.  From  the  field  of  battle  he  had  been  carried
to  a  tent  pitched  by  Mohammad,  in  the  courtyard  of  the
Mosque,  where  the  sick  were  waited  on  by  Rufeida,  an  ex-
perienced nurse.  His  wound  had  begun  apparently  to  heal.
But  the  sense  of  the  injury  still  rankled  in  his  heart ;  and
Mohammad,  no  doubt,  knew  the  bitter  hate  into  which  his
former  friendship  had  been  turned  by  the  treachery  of  the

'  There  were  1,500  swords,  1,000  lances,  500  shields,  and  300  coats  of
mail.


xvii]  JUDGMENT  OF  SA'D  317

Beni  Koreiza.i  He  was  now  summoned.  Large  and
corpulent,  he  was  mounted  with  some  difficulty  on  a  well-
padded  ass,  and,  amidst  appeals  for  mercy  from  his  tribes-
men crowding  round  him,  was  conducted  to  the  camp.  He
answered  not  a  word  till  he  approached  the  scene,  and  then
replied  :  '  Verily,  to  Sa'd  hath  this  grace  been  given,  that  he
careth  not,  in  the  cause  of  God,  for  any  blame  the  Blamers
may  cast  upon  him.'  As  he  drew  near,  Mohammad  called
aloud  to  those  around  him  :  '  Stand  up  to  meet  your  Master,
and  assist  him  to  alight' ^  Then  he  commanded  that  Sa'd
should  pronounce  his  judgment.  It  was  a  scene  well  worthy
the  pencil  of  a  painter.  In  the  background,  the  army  of
Medina  watch  with  deep  interest  this  show  of  justice,
regarding  eagerly  the  booty,  the  household  stuff  and  armour,
the  camels  and  flocks,  the  date-groves,  and  the  deserted
town,  all,  by  the  expected  decree  of  confiscation,  about  to
become  their  own.  On  the  right,  with  hands  pinioned  behind
their  backs,  are  the  captive  men,  seven  or  eight  hundred  in
number,  dejection  and  despair  at  the  ominous  rigour  of  their
treatment  stamped  upon  their  faces.  On  the  left,  are  the
women  and  the  little  children,  pale  with  terror,  or  frantic
with  grief  and  alarm  for  themselves  and  for  their  husbands
and  fathers,  from  whom  they  have  been  just  now  so  rudely
dragged.  In  front  is  Mohammad,  with  his  chief  Companions
by  his  side,  and  a  crowd  of  followers  thronging  behind.
Before  him  stands  Sa'd,  supported  by  his  friends,  weak  and
jaded  with  the  journey,  yet  distinguished  above  all  around  by
his  portly  and  commanding  figure.  '  Proceed  with  thy
judgment!'  repeated  the  Prophet.  Sa'd  turned  himself  to
his  people,  who  were  still  urging  mercy  upon  him,  and  said  :
'Will  ye,  then,  bind  yourselves  by  the  covenant  of  God  that
whatsoever  I  shall  decide,  ye  will  accept  ? '  There  was  a
murmur  of  assent.  '  TJien',  proceeded  Sa'd,  '  my  judgment  is
that  the  men  shall  be  put  to  death,  the  women  and  children  sold

^  On  his  being  wounded,  Sa'd  is  said  to  have  cursed  the  Beni
Koreiza  and  prayed  :  '  O  Lord  !  suffer  me  not  to  die  until  my  heart  hath
had  its  revenge  against  them.'

2  The  Refugees  held  with  much  pertinacity  that  this  order  was  only
addressed  to  the  Citizens  of  Medina,  as  Sa'd  was  their  chief.  The
Citizens,  on  the  contrary,  regarded  the  words  as  addressed  to  all  then
present,  including  the  Refugees,  and  as  significant  of  the  honourable  and
commanding  post  of  judge,  assigned  to  Sa'd.


3i8  MASSACRE  OF  BENI  KOREIZA  [chap.

into  slavery,  and  the  spoil  divided  amongst  the  army'  Many  a
heart  quailed,  besides  the  hearts  of  the  wretched  prisoners,
at  this  bloody  decree.  But  all  questionings  were  forthwith
stopped  by  Mohammad,  who  sternly  adopted  the  verdict  as
his  own,  nay,  declared  it  to  be  the  solemn  judgment  of  the
Almighty.  '  Truly,'  he  said,  '  the  judgment  of  Sa'd  is  the
iudgment  of  God  pronounced  on  high  from  beyond  the  seventh
heaven!
Butchery  No  sooner  was  the  sentence  passed  and  ratified  than  the

of  the  Bern ^amp  broke  up,  and  the  people  wended  their  way  back  to
■  '  Medina, The  captives,  still under charge of  Mohammad,

were  dragged  roughly  along ;  one  alone  was  treated  with
tenderness  and  care, — it  was  Reihana  the  beautiful  Jewess,
set  apart  for  Mohammad.  The  men  were  shut  up  in  a  yard,
separate  from  the  women  and  children ;  they  were  supplied
with  dates  and  spent  in  prayer  the  hours  of  darkness,  re-
peating passages  from  their  Scriptures  and  exhorting  one
another  to  faith  and  constancy.  During  the  night  trenches
sufficient  to  contain  the  dead  bodies  of  the  men  were  dug
across  the  market-place  of  the  city.  In  the  morning,
Mohammad,  himself  a  spectator  of  the  tragedy,  commanded
the  male  captives  to  be  brought  forth  in  companies  of  five  or
six  at  a  time.  Each  company  as  it  came  up  was  made  to  sit
down  in  a  row  on  the  brink  of  the  trench  destined  for  its
grave,  there  beheaded,  and  the  bodies  cast  therein.  And  so
with  company  after  company,  till  all  were  slain.^  One  woman
alone  was  put  to  death ;  it  was  she  who  threw  the  millstone
from  the  battlements.  When  she  heard  that  her  husband
had  been  slain,  she  loudly  avowed  what  she  had  done,  and
demanded  of  Mohammad  that  she  might  share  her  husband's
fate ; — a  petition  which,  perhaps  in  more  mercy  than  was
meant,  he  granted ;  and  she  met  her  death  with  a  cheerful
countenance.  This  heroine's  smile,  as  she  stepped  fearless  to
her  death,  'A'isha  tells  us,  haunted  her  ever  after.  For  Az-
Zablr,  an  aged  Jew,  who  had  saved  some  of  the  Aus  in  the

*  As  the  messenger  went  to  bring  up  each  successive  party,  the
miserable  prisoners,  not  conceiving  a  wholesale  butchery  possible,  asked
what  was  about  to  be  done  with  them.  'What  !  will  ye  never  under-
stand?' said  the  hard-hearted  keeper;  'will  ye  always  remain  blind?
See  ye  not  that  each  company  goeth  and  returneth  not  hither  again?
What  is  this  but  death  ? '


XVII.]


FATE  OF  THE  TRIBE


319


battle  of  Bo'ath,  Thabit  ibn  Keis  interceded  and  procured  a
pardon,  including  the  freedom  of  his  family  and  restoration
of  his  property.  '  But  what  hath  become  of  all  our  chiefs, —
of  Ka'b,  of  Huyei,  of  'Azzal  the  son  of  Samuel  ? '  asked  the
old  man.  As  one  after  another  he  named  the  leading  chiefs
of  his  tribe,  he  received  the  same  reply ; — they  had  all  been
put  to  death  already.  '  Then  of  what  use  is  life  to  me  any
longer?  Leave  me  not  in  the  tyrant's  power  who  hath  slain
all  that  are  dear  to  me.  Slay  me  also,  I  entreat  thee,  that  I
may  join  them  in  their  home.  Here,  take  my  sword,  it  is
sharp  ;  strike  high  and  hard.'  Thabit  refused,  and  gave  him
over  to  another  who,  under  'All's  orders,  beheaded  the  aged
man,  but  attended  to  his  last  request  in  obtaining  freedom
for  his  family.  When  told  of  his  dying  words,  Mohammad
answered  :  *  Vea,  he  shall  Join  them  in  their  home^ — the  fire  of
Hell!'

The  butchery,  begun  in  the  morning,  lasted  all  day,  and
continued  by  torchlight  till  the  evening.  Having  thus
drenched  the  market-place  with  the  blood  of  seven  or  eight
hundred  victims,^  and  having  given  command  for  the  earth
to  be  smoothed  over  their  remains,  Mohammad  returned
from  the  horrid  spectacle  to  solace  himself  with  the  charms
of  Reihana,  whose  husband  and  all  her  male  relatives  had
just  perished  in  the  massacre.  He  invited  her  to  be  his  wife ;
but  she  declined,  and  chose  to  remain  (as  indeed,  having
refused  marriage,  she  had  no  alternative)  his  slave  or  concu-
bine.^ She  also  declined  the  summons  to  conversion,  and
continued  in  the  Jewish  faith,  at  which  the  Prophet  was  much

^  The  numbers  are  variously  given  as  six  hundred,  seven  hundred,
eight  hundred,  and  even  nine  hundred.  If  the  number  of  arms
enumerated  among  the  spoil  in  a  former  note  be  correct,  nine  hundred
would  seem  to  be  a  moderate  calculation  for  the  adult  males  ;  but  I  have
taken  eight  hundred  as  the  number  more  commonly  given.

2  She  is  represented  as  saying,  when  he  offered  her  marriage  and  the
same  privileges  as  his  other  wives  :  '  Nay,  O  Prophet !  But  let  me
remain  as  thy  slave  ;  this  will  be  easier  both  for  me  and  for  thee.'  By
this  is  probably  meant  that  she  would  have  felt  the  strict  seclusion  as  a
married  wife  irksome  to  her.  That  she  refused  to  abandon  the  faith  of
her  fathers  shows  a  more  than  usual  independence  of  mind  ;  and  there
may  have  been  scenes  of  sorrow  and  aversion  in  her  poor  widowed  heart,
which  tradition  is  too  one-sided  to  hand  down,  or  which  indeed  tradition
may  have  never  known.  She  died  A.H.  632,  a  year  before  Mohammad
himself.


Mohammad
takes  the
captive
Reihana  for
his  concubine


320


MASSACRE  OF  BENI  KOREIZA


[chap.


The  women
and  child) en
sold  as
slaves
in  Nejd


Notice  of
these  events
in  Kor'an


Sura  xxxiii.
9ff.


concerned. It  is  said,  however,  that  she  afterwards  embraced
Islam. She  did  not  many  years  survive  her  unhappy  fate.

The  booty  was  divided  into  four  classes — lands,  chattels,
cattle,  and  slaves ;  and  Mohammad  took  a  fifth  of  each.
There  were  (besides  the  little  children  who  counted  with
their  mothers)  a  thousand  captives ;  from  his  share  of  these,
Mohammad  made  certain  presents  to  his  friends  of  slave  girls
and  female  servants.  The  rest  of  the  women  and  children  he
sent  to  be  sold  among  the  Bedawi  tribes  of  Nejd,  in  exchange
for  horses  and  arms  in  the  service  of  the  State ;  for  he  kept
steadily  in  view  the  advantage  of  raising  a  body  of  efficient
cavalry.  The  remaining  property  was  divided  amongst  the
3,000  soldiers  of  Medina,  to  the  highest  bidders  among  whom
the  women  were  also  sold.^

We  are  told  that  three  or  four  men  of  the  doomed  tribe
saved  their  lives,  their  families,  and  property  by  embracing
Islam,  probably  before  the  siege  began.  No  doubt  the  whole
tribe  might  have,  on  the  same  terms,  bought  their  safety.
But  they  remained  firm,  and  may  be  counted  as  martyrs  to
their  faith.

The  siege  of  Medina,  and  the  massacre  of  the  Beni
Koreiza,  are  noticed,  and  the  Disaffected  bitterly  reproached
for  their  cowardice  before  the  besieging  army,  in  a  passage
revealed  shortly  after,  and  recited  by  Mohammad,  as  was
customary,  from  the  pulpit ; —

O  ye  that  believe  !  Call  to  mind  the  favour  of  God  unto  you,  when
Hosts  came  against  you,  and  We  sent  upon  them  a  tempest  and  Hosts
which  ye  saw  not  ;  and  God  beholdeth  that  which  ye  do  ;— when  they
came  at  you  from  above  you,  and  from  beneath,  and  when  the  sight  was
confused,  and  the  hearts  reached  to  the  throat,  and  ye  imagined  of  God
strange  imaginations.  There  were  the  Faithful  tried  and  made  to
tremble  violently.  And  when  the  Disaffected  said,  and  they  in  whose
hearts  is  a  disease  said,  God  and  His  Prophet  have  promised  only  a
delusion : — And  when  a  Party  amongst  them  said : — O  7nen  of  Yathrib

^  Mohammad  (Ka'b's  assassin)  said  that,  being  mounted,  his  share
was  three  females  with  their  children,  worth  forty-five  golden  pieces  ;  the
whole  booty  at  the  prize  valuation  would  thus  be  40,000  dinars.
Mohammad  sold  a  number  of  the  State  slaves  to  'Othman  and  'Abd
ar- Rahman,  who  made  a  good  speculation  therefrom.  They  divided
them  into  old  and  young.  'Othman  took  the  old,  and  found  as  he
expected  much  money  on  their  persons.  Large  sums  were  obtained  from
the  Jews  of  Kheibar  and  other  places  for  the  ransom  of  such  of  the
women  and  children  as  they  were  interested  in.


XVII.]  SIEGE  OF  MEDINA  321

there  is  no  security  for  you,  wherefore  retire;  and  a  part  of  them  asked
leave  of  the  Prophet  to  depart,  saying,  Our  houses  are  without  protection  ;
and  they  were  liot  without  protection,  but  they  desired  only  to  escape  : —
And  if  an  entrance  had  been  effected  amongst  them  (by  the  enemy)  from
some  adjacent  quarter,  and  they  had  been  invited  to  desert,  they  had
surely  consented  thereto  ;  then  they  had  not  remained  in  the  same,  but
for  a  little.  And  verily  they  had  heretofore  covenanted  with  God,  that
they  would  not  turn  their  backs.  Say, — Flight  will  not  profit  you,  were
ye  to  flee  from  death  and  slaughter  ;  and  if  ye  did,  ye  would  enjoy  this
life  but  for  a  little.  .  .  .  Verily  God  knoweth  those  amongst  you  that  v.  i3
turn  others  aside,  and  such  as  say  to  their  brethren, — Come  hither  to  us;
and  they  go  not  to  the  battle  excepting  for  a  little.  Covetous  are  they
towards  you.  But  when  fear  cometh,  thou  mayest  see  them  looking
towards  thee,  their  eyes  rolling,  like  unto  one  that  is  overshadowed  with
death.  Then,  when  the  fear  hath  gone,  they  attack  thee  with  sharp
tongues,  covetous  of  the  choicest  of  the  spoil.  They  thought  that  the
Confederates  ^  would  not  depart.  And  if  the  Confederates  should  come
(again),  they  would  wish  themselves  away  amongst  the  Bedawln,  asking
tidings  of  you.  And  if  they  were  amongst  you,  they  would  not  fight,
excepting  a  little.  .  .  .  And  when  the  Believers  saw  the  Confederates,  v.  22
they  said, — This  is  what  God  and  His  Apostle  promised  us,  and  God  and
His  Apostle  have  spoken  the  Truth.  And  it  only  increased  their  faith  v.  24
and  submission.  .  .  .  Verily  God  is  forgiving  and  merciful.  And  God
drave  back  the  heathen  in  their  rage.  They  obtained  no  advantage.
And  God  sufficeth  for  the  Believers  in  battle.  He  is  strong  and  mighty.
And  He  hath  caused  to  descend  from  their  strongholds  the  Jews  that
assisted  them.  And  he  struck  terror  into  their  hearts.  A  part  ye
slaughtered,  and  a  part  ye  took  into  captivity.  And  He  hath  made  you
to  inherit  their  land,  and  their  habitations,  and  their  wealth,  and  a  land
which  ye  had  not  trodden  upon ;  and  God  is  over  all  things  powerful.

In reviewing  these transactions,  it is evident  that the Moham-
position  of  Mohammad  was  now  greatly  improved  in  strength "^'^'?^.'
and  influence. The  whole  weight of Koreish  and of  the greatly
Bedawi  tribes,  with  all  their  mighty  preparations,  had  been i"^P'"oved
successfully  repelled,  and  that  with hardly  any  loss. The
entire  defence  of  Medina,  by  tacit  consent,  had  been  conducted
by  Mohammad  as  its  Chief;  and  notwithstanding  the  ill-con-
cealed disaffection  of  some  of  the  inhabitants,  he  was  now
the  acknowledged Ruler,  as  well as Prophet, of  the city.
The  negotiation  with  'Oyeina  was,  no  doubt,  a  proof  of  weak-
ness  at  the  moment,  and distrust in his own  cause;  but,
fortunately  for  him,  it  was  hardly  entered  upon  when,  by  the
firmness  of  the  two  Sa'ds,  it  was  broken  off;  and  the  episode
was  lost  sight  of  afterwards  in  the  signal  success  of  the  defence.
^  Koreish  and  their  allies.


322


MASSACRE  OF  BENI  KOREIZA


[chap.


Effect  of
massacre  of
the  Beni
Koreiza
on  Moham-
mad's
position


The  fate  of  the  Beni  Koreiza  removed  the  last  remnant  of
open  opposition,  political  or  religious,  from  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  Medina ;  and  though  the  bloody  deed  did
not  at  the  time  escape  hostile  criticism,  yet  it  struck  so  great
a  terror  into  the  hearts  of  all,  and  the  authority  of  the
Prophet  was  already  invested  with  so  mysterious  and  super-
natural a  sanction,  that  no  one  dared  openly  impugn  it.
The  ostensible  grounds  upon  which  he  proceeded  were  politi-
cal, for  as  yet  he  did  not  profess  to  force  men  to  join  Islam,
or  to  punish  them  for  not  embracing  it.  It  may  be  admitted
that  a  sufficient  casus  belli  had  arisen.  The  compact  with
the  Beni  Koreiza  indeed  was  weak  and  precarious.  Moham-
mad's policy  towards  the  Jews,  from  a  period  shortly  after. his
arrival  at  Medina,  had  been  severe  and  oppressive ;  he  had
attacked  and  expatriated  the  other  two  tribes  on  very  doubt-
ful grounds ;  he  had  caused  the  assassination  of  several  Jews
in  such  a  manner  as  to  create  universal  distrust  and  alarm;
after  the  murder  of  Ka'b  and  the  incautious  permission  at  the
moment  given  to  slaughter  the  Jews  indiscriminately,  he
himself  felt  that  the  existing  treaty  had  been  practically  set
aside,  and,  to  restore  confidence,  he  had  entered  into  a  new
compact.^  All  these  circumstances  must  plead  against  the
strength  of  obligation  which  bound  the  Beni  Koreiza  to  his
cause.  They  had,  moreover,  stood  by  the  second  contract  at
a  time  when  they  might  fairly  have  set  it  aside  and  joined  the
Beni  an-Nadlr.  That  they  now  hearkened  to  the  overtures
of  Koreish,  through  a  singular  want  of  prudence  and  foresight,
was  no  more  than  Mohammad  might  have  expected.  Still
the  Beni  Koreiza  had  joined  his  enemies  at  a  critical  period,
and  he  had  now  a  sufficient  cause  for  warring  against  them.
He  had,  furthermore,  fair  grounds  of  political  necessity  for
requiring  them  perhaps  to  quit  altogether  a  vicinity  where
they  must  have  continued  a  dangerous  nucleus  of  disaffection,
and  possibly  an  encouragement  for  renewed  attack.  We
might  even  concede  that  the  conduct  of  their  leaders
amounted  to  treason  against  the  city,  and  warranted  a  severe
retribution.  But  the  indiscriminate  slaughter  of  eight
hundred  men,  and  the  subjugation  of  the  women  and  children
of  the  whole  tribe  to  slavery,  cannot  be  recognised  otherwise
than  as  an  act  of  monstrous  cruelty. The  plea  of  divine

*  See  p.  249  f.


XVII.]  END  OF  SA'D  323

ratification  or  command  may  allay  the  scruples  of  the  Muslim  ;
but  it  will  be  summarily  rejected  by  those  who  call  to  mind
that  the  same  authority  was  now  habitually  produced  for
personal  ends,  and  for  the  justification  even  of  questionable
actions.  In  short,  the  butchery  of  the  Beni  Koreiza  casts  an
indelible  blot  upon  the  life  of  Mohammad.

Before  closing  this  chapter,  I  will  follow  to  its  end  the  Death-bed
career  of  Sa'd  ibn  xMo'adh.i  After  delivering  himself  of  the  Mo||fi,'^"
bloody  decree,  he  was  conducted  back  upon  his  ass  to  Ru-
feida's  tent  But  the  excitement  was  fatal  to  him ;  the
wound  burst  forth  anew.  Mohammad  hastened  to  the  side  of
his  bed ;  embracing  him,  he  placed  the  dying  man's  head
upon  his  knee  and  prayed  thus  :  O  Lord  !  Verily  Sa'd  hath
laboured  in  thy  service.  He  hath  believed  in  thy  Prophet,  and
hath  fulfilled  his  covenant.  Wherefore  do  thou,  O  Lord,  receive
his  spirit  with  the  best  reception  zuherewith  thou  receivest  a  de-
parting soul !'  Sa'd  heard  the  words,  and  in  faltering  accents
whispered  :  '  Peace  be  on  thee,  O  Apostle  of  God  ! — Verily
I  testify  that  thou  art  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord.'  When  he
had  breathed  his  last,  they  carried  to  his  home  the  corpse.^
After  the  forenoon  prayer,  Mohammad  proceeded  to  join  the
burial.  He  reached  the  house  as  they  were  washing  the
body.  The  mother  of  Sa'd,  weeping  loudly,  gave  vent  to  her
grief  in  plaintive  Arab  verse.  They  chid  her  for  reciting
poetry  on  such  an  occasion  ;  but  Mohammad  interposed,  say-
ing :  '  Leave  her  thus  alone  ;  all  other  poets  lie  but  she.'
The  bier  was  then  carried  forth,  and  Mohammad  helped  to  His  burial
bear  it  for  the  first  thirty  or  forty  yards. Notwithstanding

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  697  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  221  fif.

2  The  tale  of  Sa'd  is  surrounded  with  supernatural  associations.  For
instance,  when  Mohammad  went  to  be  present  at  the  washing  of  the
body,  he  walked  so  rapidly  that  the  people  could  scarcely  keep  up  with
him;  'you  would  have  thought  the  thongs  of  their  sandals  would  have
broken,  and  their  mantles  fallen  from  their  shoulders,  they  hurried  so
fast.'  When  they  asked  why  he  hastened  so,  he  replied:  'Verily,  I
feared  lest  the  Angels  should  have  reached  the  house  before  us,  as  they
came  before  us  to  Hanzala  ;' — alluding  to  the  burial  of  the  latter,  and  the
supposed  washing  of  his  corpse  by  the  angels  (p.  265).  Then  there  are
numerous  legends  about  the  angels  crowding  into  the  room  where  the
corpse  was  laid  out,  and  one  of  them  spreading  out  his  wing  for
Mohammad  to  sit  upon.  These  traditions  have  grown  out  of  the  reply
of  Mohammad  to  the  Disaffected,  viz.,  that  the  bier  was  light,  because
supported  by  a  crowd  of  Angels.


324  MASSACRE  OF  BENI  KOREIZA  [chap.

that  Sa'd  was  so  large  and  corpulent,  the  bier  was  reported  to
be  marvellously  light. The  Disaffected  said  :  '  We  have  never
heard  of  a  corpse  lighter  in  the  bier  than  that  of  Sa'd  :  know
ye  why  this  is? It  is  because  of  his  judgment  against  the
Beni Koreiza.'^ Mohammad, hearing the rash remark,
turned  aside  its  point  by  a  mysterious  explanation  which  was
eagerly  caught  up  by  his  followers  : '  The  angels  are  carrying
the bier,' he said, 'therefore it is light in your hands.
Verily  the  throne  on  high  doth  vibrate  for  Sa'd,  and  the
portals  of  heaven  are  opened,  and  he  is  attended  by  seventy
thousand  angels  that  never  trod  the  earth  before.' The  long
procession,  with  Mohammad  at  its  head,  wended  its  way  slowly
to  the  burial-ground. When  they  reached  the  spot,  four  men
descended  into  the  grave,  and  lowered  the  body  into  its  place.
Just  then  Mohammad  changed  colour,  and  his  countenance
betrayed strong  emotion. But he immediately recovered
himself,  and gave praise to God. Then he three times
uttered  the  Tekbir,  '  Great  is  the  Lord  ! '  and  the  whole  con-
course, which  filled  the  burial-ground  to  overflowing,  took  up
the  words,  until  the  place  re-echoed  with  the  shout. Some  of
the  people  asked  him  concerning  his  change  of  colour,  and  he
explained  it  thus  : — '  At  that  moment  the  grave  became  strait
for  your  comrade,  and  the  sides  thereof  closed  in  upon  him.
Verily,  if  any  one  could  have  escaped  the  straitening  of  the
tomb  it  had  been  Sa'd. Then  the  Lord  gave  him  expansion
therein.' The  mother  of  Sa'd  drew  near,  desiring  to  look  into
the grave,  and  they  forbade her. But Mohammad said :
*  Suffer  her  to  look.' So  she  looked  in,  before  the  body  was
covered  over. As  she  gazed  on  the  remains  of  her  son,  she
said : *  I commit thee unto the  Lord ' ; and Mohammad

^  The  death  of  Sa'd  followed  so  immediately  on  his  sanguinary
judgment,  that  the  Disaffected  coupled  the  two  together.  To  avert  this
inference,  tradition  tells  us  that  Sa'd  had  prayed  thus:  'O  Lord!  If
thou  hast  in  store  any  further  fighting  with  Koreish,  then  preserve  me  to
take  part  in  it :  but  if  thou  hast  put  an  end  to  their  warring  against  thy
Prophet,  then  take  me  unto  thyself!'  which  when  he  prayed,  he  was  to
all  appearance  well,  the  wound  presenting  only  a  cicatrised  ring.  But
shortly  after  he  was  carried  to  the  tent,  and  died.  Although,  in  fact,
there  was  hardly  any  more  fighting  with  Koreish  after  this  date,  yet  the
prayer  is  evidently  an  afterthought.  For  at  the  time  it  was  quite
uncertain  whether  Medina  might  not  again  be  besieged  by  Koreish,  in
proof  of  which  see  Sura  xxxiii.  20.


XVII.]


SURAS  OF  THIS  PERIOD


325


comforted  her.  Then  he  went  aside  and  sat  down  near  the
grave,  while  they  built  it  over  with  bricks,  and  filled  in  the
earth.  When  the  whole  was  levelled,  and  the  tomb  sprinkled
with  water,  the  Prophet  again  drew  near,  and,  standing  over
the  grave,  prayed  once  more  for  the  departed  chief.  Then
he  turned,  and  retired  to  his  home.


SOras  Revealed during  the First  Five Years  of
Mohammad's  Residence  at  Medina

We  have  now  reached  a  stage  at  which  it  may  be  useful  once
more  to  pause,  review  the  Revelations  given  forth  by
Mohammad  during  the  early  years  of  the  Hijra,  and  consider
the  points  in  which  they  illustrate  his  life  and  the  principles
of  Islam.

The  people  most  prominently  addressed  in  the  first
Medina  Suras  are  the  Jews.  Like  the  closing  Suras  at
Mecca,  these  abound  in  Jewish  fable  and  legend,  based  upon
the  Old  Testam.ent  and  rabbinical  tradition.  The  marvellous
interpositions  of  the  Almighty  in  behalf  of  His  people  of  old
are  recounted  with  the  object  of  stirring  up  the  neighbouring
Jewish  tribes  to  gratitude,  and  of  inciting  them  to  publish
unreservedly  the  evidence  which  their  Scriptures  contained
in  substantiation  of  his  claims.  They  are  appealed  to  in
language  such  as  this : —

Ye  children  of  Israel !  Remember  my  favour  wherewith  I  have
favoured  you,  and  have  preferred  you  above  all  the  world.  And  fear  the
day  whereon  no  soul  shall  at  all  make  satisfaction  for  another  soul  ;  nor
shall  intercession  be  accepted  therefrom  :  neither  shall  compensation  be
received  from  it, — and  they  shall  not  be  helped.  *  *  *  O  children  of
Israel !  Fulfil  my  Covenant :  so  will  I  fulfil  your  Covenant.  And  believe
in  that  {i.e.  the  Kor'an)  which  I  reveal  attesting  the  Revelation  which  is
with  you  ;  and  be  not  the  first  unbelievers  therein  ;  and  sell  not  my
signs  for  a  small  price :  and  let  Me  be  your  fear.  And  clothe  not  the
Truth  with  falsehood  ;  neither  conceal  the  Truth  while  ye  know  it.  Set
ye  up  prayer,  and  give  alms  ;  and  bow  down  (in  prayer)  with  them  that
bow  themselves  down.  What !  will  ye  command  men  to  do  justice,  and
forget  your  own  selves,  while  yet  ye  read  the  Scripture  ?  What !  do  ye
not  understand .''

But,  excepting  a  few,  the  Jews,  as  we  have  seen,  refused
to  acknowledge  the  Arabian  prophet ;  he  had  none  of  the
signs  of  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come  of  the  seed  of  Jacob


Review  of
portions  of
Kor'an
revealed  at
Medina


Mohammad
calls  on
Jews  to  bear
evidence
in  his  favour


Sura  ii.  44  f.,
also  116  f.


38  f.


326


SURAS  OF  FIRST  FIVE  YEARS


[chap.


On  their
refusal  he
changes
style  of
address  to
rebuke  and
reproach


and  David,  and  not  from  amongst  a  strange  people  the
progeny  of  Ishmael.  They  did  not  object  to  enter  into  a
treaty  with  him  of  amity  and  good  neighbourhood,  but  they
scorned  to  bow  to  his  spiritual  pretensions.  Their  refusal  was
set  down  to  envy  and  malice.  The  Jews  could  not  brook  that
the  prophetic  dignity  should  pass  from  themselves  to  another
people ;  they  well  knew  the  prophecies  regarding  Islam  ;  but
they  stifled  their  convictions,  suppressed  the  plain  declara-
tions of  their  Scriptures,  and  perverted  their  meaning  by
'dislocating'  the  context,  or  producing  false  glosses  of  the
Rabbins.  Their  hearts  were  hardened,  and  every  avenue  to
conviction  closed.  It  was  in  vain  to  seek  for  their  conversion
to  Islam,  for  they  had  already  shown  themselves  proof  against
the  Word  of  God  as  revealed  in  the  Old  Testament.  They
were  following  in  the  steps  of  their  stiff-necked  forefathers
who  slew  the  prophets,  departed  from  the  true  God,  and
sought  out  inventions  of  their  own  creation.  As  an  example
of  such  passages  which  abound  at  this  period,  take  the
following : —


Sura  ii.  8i  And  verily  We  gave  Moses  the  Scriptures,  and  We  made  Apostles  to

follow  after  him  ;  and  We  gave  Jesus  son  of  Mary  evident  miracles,  and
We  strengthened  him  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Wherefore  is  it  that  so
often  as  an  Apostle  cometh  unto  you  with  that  which  ye  desire  not,  ye
are  puffed  up  ;  and  some  ye  reject  as  liars,  and  some  ye  put  to  death  ?

V  83  *  *  *  And  when  a  Book  {i.e.  the  Kor'an)  cometh  unto  them  from  God,

attesting  that  Scripture  which  is  with  them, — and  truly  they  had  aforetime
been  praying  for  assistance  against  the  Unbelievers,^ — yet  when  there
came  unto  them  that  which  they  recognised,  they  disbelieved  the  same.
Wherefore  the  curse  of  God  is  on  the  Unbelievers.  Evil  is  that  for
which  they  have  sold  themselves,  to  reject  what  God  hath  revealed,  out
of  rebellion  against  God  for  sending  down  a  portion  of  His  favour  upon
such  of  His  servants  as  He  pleaseth.^  Wherefore  they  have  incurred
wrath  upon  wrath ;  and  for  the  Unbelievers  there  is  prepared  an
ignominious  punishment.  And  when  it  is  said  unto  them.  Believe  in  that
•which  is  sent  dowft,  they  say.  We  believe  in  that  which  God  hath  sent
down  to  us ;  and  they  disbelieve  in  that  which  came  after  it,  although  it
be  the  Truth  attesting  that  Scripture  which  is  with  them.  Say, — Why,
therefore,  have  ye  killed  the  Prophets  of  God  aforetime,  if  ye  are
Believers?  And  verily  Moses  came  with  evident  Signs;  then  ye  took
the  Calf  thereupon,  and  became  transgressors,  Sac.


^  That  is,  when  oppressed  by  the  Aus  and  Khazraj  they  used  to  pray
for  the  coming  of  Messiah  to  vanquish  them.

2  Le.  envious  at  the  gift  of  prophecy  being  shared  by  an  Arab  people.


XVII.]


ATTITUDE  TOWARDS  JEWS


327


This  denunciation  of  the  Jews'  mah'ce,  unbelief,  and  per- jews  thus
version  of  the  truth,  naturally  aroused  their  hatred. They  no stirred  up

1  r-i-i  •  /-Ti/ri  11  ,  ^o  hatred  of

longer  put  laith  m  the  assertion  of  Mohammad  that  he  was  Mohammad
come  to  'attest  their  Scripture,'  and  re-establish  the  divine
doctrines  it  contained.  The  hope,  once  fondly  cherished,
that,  through  their  holy  Oracles  which  he  professed  to  revere
and  follow,  he  would  be  guided  towards  the  Truth,  they  now
saw  to  be  fallacious.  Political  inferiority,  indeed,  compelled
them  to  disguise  their  hatred ;  but  their  real  feelings
transpired  in  various  ways,  and  among  others  in  expressions
of  double  meaning,  which  greatly  displeased  and  affronted
Mohammad : —

Of  the  Jews  there  are  that  per\ert  words  from  their  places,  saying,  Sura  iv.  48  f.
IVe  hatfe  /leard  and  disobeyed,  and  Hear  without  hearijig,  and  (Ra'ina)
Look  upon  us,  twisting  their  tongues  and  reviling  the  Faith.'  But  if
they  had  said,  IVe  have  heard  and  obeyed,  and  Hearken,  and  (Unzurna)
Look  upon  us,  it  had  been  better  for  them ;  but  God  hath  cursed  them
for  their  Unbelief;  wherefore  they  shall  not  believe,  excepting  a  few.
O  ye  to  whom  the  Scripture  hath  been  given,  believe  in  What  we  have
sent  down,  attesting  that  {i.e.  the  Old  Testament)  which  is  with  you, —
before  We  deface  your  countenances,  turning  the  face  backwards ;  or
curse  them  as  We  cursed  those  that  broke  the  Sabbathc

And  two  or  three  years  later : —

O  ye  that  believe  !  Take  not  as  your  friends  those  who  make  a  Sura  v.  62  ff.
laughing-stock  and  a  sport  of  your  Religion,  from  amongst  the  people  ot
the  former  Scripture  and  the  Infidels  :  and  fear  God,  if  ye  be  Believers.
.  .  .  Say, — Ye  people  of  the  Book  !  Do  ye  keep  aloof  from  us  otherwise
than  because  we  believe  in  God,  and  in  that  which  hath  been  sent  down
to  us,  and  in  that  which  hath  been  sent  down  before,  and  because  the
greater  part  of  you  are  evil  ?  Say, — Shall  I  announce  unto  you  what  is
worse  than  that,  as  to  the  reward  which  is  with  God  ?  He  whom  God
hath  cursed,  and  against  whom  He  is  wroth,  and  hath  made  of  them
Apes  and  Swine,^  these,  and  the  worshippers  of  Idols,  are  in  an  evil  case.
*  *  *  Thou  shalt  see  multitudes  of  them  running  greedily  after  wicked-  v.  67
ness  and  injustice,  and  eating  what  is  forbidden.  Alas  for  that  which
they  work  !  Wherefore  do  their  Rabbins  and  their  Priests  restrain  them
not  from  uttering  wickedness,  and  eating  that  which  is  forbidden.  Alas
for  that  which  they  commit ! The  Jews  say.  The  hand  of  God  is  tied  up.

*  Terms  of  contumely  in  Hebrew,  but  so  pronounced  as  to  appear
innocent  in  Arabic.  [There  seems  to  be  a  reference  to  the  word  Raca
in  Matt.  v.  22.]

^  Alluding  to  the  legendary  punishment  inflicted  on  the  Israelites  who
broke  the  Sabbath  day,  in  turning  their  faces  backwards,  and  making
monkeys  and  swine  of  them.


328


SURAS  OF  FIRST  FIVE  YEARS


[chap.


Jews  accused
of  encourag-
ing idolatry
at  Mecca

Sura  iv.  47  if.


Removal  of
Jews  from
the  scene


Nay,  their  own  hands  are  tied  up,  and  they  are  cursed  for  what  they  say.
But  His  hands  are  both  stretched  out.  That  which  hath  been  revealed
to  thee  from  thy  Lord  shall  but  increase  rebellion  and  impiety  in  many
of  them.  We  have  cast  among  them  enmity  and  hatred,  until  the  day
of  Judgment.  So  often  as  they  shall  kindle  the  fire  of  war,  God  shall
extinguish  the  same  ;  and  they  shall  set  themselves  to  do  wickedness  in
the  Earth. And  God  loveth  not  the  wicked  doers.

In  another  passage  the  Jews  are  even  accused  of  en-
couraging Koreish  to  continue  in  idolatry  by  representing
that  it  was  preferable  to  the  doctrine  of  Mohammad  : —

Hast  thou  not  seen  those  to  whom  a  portion  of  the  Scripture  hath
been  given?  They  believe  in  false  gods  and  idols.  They  say  to  the
Unbelievers, — These  are  better  directed  in  the  right  way  than  those  that
believe.  These  are  they  whom  God  hath  cursed  ;  and  for  him  that  God
curseth,  thou  shalt  find  no  helper.  Shall  they^  indeed,  have  any  portion
ill  the  Kingdom,  since,  if  they  had,  they  would  not  part  unto  men  with
Ihc  least  iota  thereof?  Do  they  envy  men  that  which  God  hath  given
them  of  His  bounty?  And  Verily  We  gave  unto  the  house  of  Abraham
the  Scripture,  and  Wisdom  ;  and  We  gave  them  a  great  Kingdom,  And
there  is  amongst  them  such  as  believe  in  him  (Mohammad)  ;  and  there
is  that  turneth  aside  from  him.  But  the  raging  fire  of  hell  will  suffice  for
such.  Verily,  they  that  reject  our  Signs,  We  will  surely  cast  them  into
the  fire,  So  often  as  their  skins  are  burned,  WE  will  change  for  them
other  skins,  that  they  may  fully  taste  the  torment.  For  God  is  mighty
and  wise.  They  that  believe  and  do  good  works.  We  shall  introduce
them  into  gardens  with  rivers  running  beneath  them  ;  they  shall  abide
therein  for  ever.  And  there  shall  they  have  pure  Wives  ;  and  We  shall
lead  them  into  grateful  shades.

Eventually,  as  we  have  seen,  Mohammad  did  not  confine
his  communications  with  the  Jewish  tribes  of  Medina  to
simple  threats  of  divine  wrath,  but  himself  inflicted  condign
punishment  upon  them,  till  by  exile  and  slaughter  they  were
all  removed  from  the  scene.  Such  was  fast  becoming  the  spirit
of  Islam.  Judaism  would  not  yield  to  its  pretensions.  And
Mohammad,  notwithstanding  his  respect  for  other  creeds,  the
still  reiterated  assurance  that  '  he  was  only  a  public  preacher,
and  his  guarantee  that  'there  should  be  no  constraint  in
Religion,'  could  not  brook  the  profession  of  any  tenets
opposed  to  his  claims.  The  first  step  had  now  been  taken  for
sweeping  from  the  Peninsula  every  creed  but  that  of  the
Kor'an.

The  disappearance  of  the  Jews  is  followed  by  a  corre-
sponding change  in  the  material  of  the  Kor'an.  The  Revela-
tions of  Mohammad  formed  in  no  respect  an  abstract  and


XVII.]


CHANGED  ATTITUDE  TOWARDS  JEWS


329


systematic  compilation.  The  Kor'an  is  purely  concrete  in  its
origin  and  progress.  It  grew  up  and  formed  itself,  both  as
regards  its  dogmas  and  its  social  code,  out  of  the  circum-
stances and  sentiments  of  the  day.  Hence,  the  necessity  for
referring  to  Jewish  Scripture  and  history  having  passed  away
with  the  disappearance  of  the  Jews  themselves,  we  have  no
longer  in  the  later  Suras  those  allusions  to  the  Old  Testa-
ment and  repetition  of  Biblical  stories  and  legends  which  so
teemed  throughout  the  Oracle's  middle  stage.  The  few
notices  which  hereafter  occur  bear  as  much  upon  the  Christian
as  upon  the  Jewish  record.  Both  are  still  spoken  of,  though
with  extreme  infrequency,  yet  with  veneration  and  respect.
And,  as  already  stated,  there  is  nowhere  to  be  found  through-
out the  Kor'an  any  imputation  whatever  against  either  the
authority  or  the  genuineness  of  the  one  or  of  the  other.  The
occasion  for  their  mention  having  died  out,  they  pass  into
oblivion.

I  have  drawn  attention  to  the  Kor'an  as  a  medium  for  the
publication  of  what  we  might  call  general  orders,  such  as
passages  which  touch  on  victory  or  defeat,  rebuke  backward-
ness and  cowardice,  or  applaud  constancy  and  courage.  But
it  was  not  merely  in  respect  of  military  affairs,  as  the  reader
will  have  observed,  that  the  Revelation  contains  comments
and  commands.  Scattered  throughout  its  Suras,  we  have,  to
some  extent,  the  archives  of  a  theocratic  government  in  all
its  departments.  The  conduct  of  the  Disaffected,  the  treat-
ment of  Allies,  the  formation  of  treaties,  the  acceptance  of
terms,  and  other  political  matters,  not  infrequently  find  a
place  among  the  heavenly  messages.  Liberality  in  con-
tributing towards  the  expenses  of  war,  the  only  object  as  yet
requiring  a  public  purse,  is  continually  inculcated.  The
elements  also  of  a  code  both  civil  and  criminal  are  introduced.
Punishments  are  specified,  and  legislation  laid  down  for  the
tutelage  of  orphans,  marriage,  divorce,  sales,  bargains,  wills,
evidence,  usury,  and  other  similar  concerns.  Further,  there
are  copious  instructions  for  the  guidance  of  the  Believer  in
his  private  life ;  and  special  provisions,  some  of  which  I  have
quoted  at  length,  regulating  the  intercourse  of  Mohammad
with  his  people,  and  with  his  own  family.  These  all  partake
of  the  essential  character  of  the  Kor'an,  being  in  the  form  of
a  Revelation  ;  and  they  ordinarily  end  with  some  such  phrase


Followed  by
discontinu-
ance in
Kor'an
of  Jewish
legends  and
reference  to
Scriptures


But  Scrip-
tures still
referred  to
with  rever-
ence


Kor'an  con-
tains orders
in  all

departments
of  theocratic
government


330


SURAS  OF  FIRST  FIVE  YEARS


[chap.


Though
simple  in
habits,
Mohammad
assumed
regal  power
and  dignity


as,  '  God  is  knowing  and  wise' — '  God  is  forgiving  and  merci-
ful ' — '  Evil  is  the  fate  of  the  Transgressors,'  &c.,  thus  com-
pleting the  rhythm,  and  investing  the  record  with  an  inspired
and  oracular  character.  Throughout  this,  which  may  be
styled  the  administrative  portion  of  the  Kor'an,  are  inter-
spersed as  heretofore  passages  inculcating  piety  and  virtue,
denouncing  infidelity  and  vice,  and  containing  directions  for
social  duties  and  religious  ceremonies.  In  the  exhortations
and  denunciations,  the  main  change  is  that  at  first  the  Jews,
and  subsequently  the  Disaffected,  now  usurp  almost  entirely
the  place  before  occupied  by  the  Idolaters  of  Mecca.

The  advancing  power  and  dignity  of  Mohammad  may  be
traced  in  the  reverence  and  submission  prescribed  in  the
Kor'an  as  due  to  him.  A  kingly  court  was  not  in  accord
with  the  customs  of  the  people,  nor  with  the  tastes  and  habits
of  Mohammad  himself  The  artless  life  and  simple  dress  and
surroundings  of  an  Arab  chieftain  were  not  departed  from  at
Medina ;  and  it  is  this  which,  in  vivid  contrast  with  the  state
and  luxury  of  his  Successors,  has  induced  tradition  to  cast
around  the  Prophet's  life  an  air  of  hardship  and  privation.^


^  For  example,  we  have  stories  such  as  the  following.  Mohammad
having  hurt  his  hand,  they  carried  him  into  his  house,  and  placed  him
on  a  bed  plaited  with  ropes  of  palm-fibre,  and  put  under  his  head  a
pillow  of  leather  stuffed  with  the  same  material.  'Omar,  seeing  the
marks  of  the  corded  bedding  on  his  side,  wept  aloud.  On  Mohammad
asking  why  he  wept,  he  replied  :  '  Verily,  I  called  to  mind  how  the
Chosroes  and  the  Kaiser  sit  upon  thrones  of  gold,  and  wear  garments
of  silk  and  brocade  ;  and  thou  art  in  this  sad  condition  ! '  '  What
'Omar ! '  said  the  Prophet,  art  thou  not  content  that  we  should  have  the
portion  of  Futurity,  and  ihcy  the  portion  of  this  Life?'  On  another
occasion,  Mohammad  having  risen  from  sleep  with  the  marks  of  the
matting  on  his  side,  'Abdallah,  his  attendant,  rubbed  the  place,  and
said  :  '  Let  me,  I  pray  thee,  spread  a  soft  covering  for  thee  over  this
mat.'  'Not  so,'  replied  Mohammad;  'What  have  I  to  do  with  the
comforts  of  this  life  ?  The  world  and  I,  what  connection  is  there
between  us  ?  Verily,  the  world  is  no  otherwise  than  as  a  tree  unto  me  ;
when  the  traveller  hath  rested  under  its  shade,  he  passeth  on.'

Notwithstanding  anecdotes  like  these,  exaggerated  by  strong  contrast
with  the  subsequent  luxury  of  the  Muslims,  it  is  evident  that  Mohammad
had  everything  in  abundance  which  he  really  desired,  and  which  wealth
or  authority  could  procure.  He  would  give  a  large  price  for  his  clothes  :
once  he  exchanged  nineteen  (others  say  seventeen)  camels  for  a  single
dress,  and  he  bought  a  mantle  for  eight  golden  pieces.  He  had  a
coUyrium  box,  from  which  at  bedtime  he  used  to  apply  antimony  to  his


XVII.]


MOHAMMAD'S  POWER


33»


The  misconception  is  manifest ;  for  Mohammad  and  his
Companions  enjoyed  all  that  the  resources  of  the  land  and
plunder  of  their  enemies  could  yield  ;  and  if  they  maintained
plain  and  frugal  habits,  it  was  not  from  necessity,  but  because
magnificence  and  pomp  were  foreign  and  distasteful.  A  row
of  modest  houses,  built  of  sun-dried  brick,  and  covered  in
with  rough  palm-branches,  the  inner  walls  hung  about  with
water-bags  of  leather  for  domestic  use,  formed  a  habitation
for  the  Prophet  and  his  wives  far  more  desirable  than  the
most  splendid  seraglio  '  ceiled  with  cedar  and  painted  with
vermilion.'  A  mattress  of  date-fibre  covered  with  leather
was  a  luxury  to  the  Arab  incomparably  greater  than  any
stately  '  bed  of  the  wood  of  Lebanon,  decked  with  tapestry.'
The  trappings  of  a  royal  camp  would  have  ill  comported  with
the  grave  simplicity  of  Mohammad,  while  an  ordinary  nomad
tent  afforded  him  ample  accommodation ;  and  his  bag,  with
ivory  comb,  toothpick,  oil  for  his  hair  and  antimony  for  his
eyes,  supplied  all  the  comforts  within  the  compass  of  an
Arab's  imagination.  The  luxurious  and  pampered  courtiers
of  Damascus  and  Baghdad  marvelled  at  the  tales  of  their  Pro-
phet having  mended  his  sandals,  and  of  'Omar  having  tended
his  own  flock  of  goats,  not  reflecting  that  a  more  artificial  state
would  have  been  at  variance  with  everything  around,  and  that
the  habits  of  threescore  years  had  become  a  second  life.

Nevertheless,  in  whatever  constitutes  real  dignity  and
power,  Mohammad  was  not  behind  the  most  absolute
Dictator,  or  pompous  Sovereign.  To  him  every  dispute  Mohammad
must  be  referred,  and  his  word  was  law.  On  his  appearance  ^'f^JP"^^"^"^
the  assembly  rose,  and  gave  place  to  him  and  his  chief  Com-
panions ;  the  people  were  required  to  approach  him  reverently,
to  speak  softly  in  his  presence,  and  not  to  crowd  around  or


Honour  and

reverence
paid  to


atives


eyelids,  saying  tViat  it  made  the  sight  more  piercing,  and  caused  the  hair
to  grow.  The  Governor  of  Egypt  sent  him  a  crystal  goblet ;  and  either
this,  or  another  jug  from  which  he  drank,  was  set  in  silver.  He  had
also  a  copper  vase,  which  he  used  in  bathing.  He  was  very  fond  of
perfumes,  and  indulged,  as  'A'isha  tells  us,  in  'men's  scents,'  i.e.  in  musk
and  ambergris  ;  he  used  also  to  burn  camphor  on  odoriferous  wood,  and
enjoy  the  fragrant  smell.  Anas,  his  servant,  says  :  'We  always  used  to
know  when  Mohammad  had  issued  forth  from  his  chamber  by  the  sweet
perfume  that  filled  the  air.'

Such  were  perhaps  the  only  luxuries  which,  from  his  simple  habits,
he  was  able  to  appreciate.


332  SURAS  OF  FIRST  FIVE  YEARS  [chaP.

throng  him.  They  were  not  to  visit  his  house  unasked  ;  and
even  when  invited  they  must  not  linger  long,  or  indulge
familiarly  in  discourse  with  him.  '  The  calling  of  the  Apostle
was  not  to  be  as  the  calling  of  one  Believer  to  the  other  ;'  it
was  to  be  implicitly  heard  and  promptly  obeyed.  Those  in
attendance  were  not  to  leave  without  permission  first  received.
His  wives  were  withdrawn  from  the  vulgar  gaze  ;  none  might
communicate  directly  or  familiarly  with  them  excepting  their
near  relatives  and  domestic  servants.  The  Prophet  was  the
favourite  of  Heaven ;  the  true  Believer  but  followed  the
example  of  the  heavenly  hosts,  and  of  God  himself,  when  he
invoked  blessings  upon  him  : —

Sura  xxxiii.  Verily,  God  and  His  angels  invoke  blessings  upon  the  Prophet. O

56  f.  ye  that  believe  !  do  ye  also  invoke  blessings  upon  him,  and  salute  him

with a  reverential salutation. Verily,  they  that  trouble  God  and  His

Apostle,  God  hath  cursed  them  in  this  world,  and  in  that  which  is  to

come  :  He  hath  prepared  for  them  an  ignominious  punishment.

Special  pre-  The  idea  that  he  was  tJie  Favourite  of  Heaven  may  be  the  key
buf^no'"'  ^°  ^^  peculiar  privileges  which  he  claimed,  especially  in  his
supernatural  conjugal  relations.  Still,  no  supernatural  character  was
assert^r  assumed  by  Mohammad.  He  did  not  differ  from  the  former
Prophets.  Like  other  men  he  was  mortal ;  and  equally  with
them  needed  to  pray  to  God  for  the  pardon  of  his  sins.
Irreverent  I  have  before  observed  that  Mohammad  did  not  consecrate

'"h"h^'^  '"kl  ^"^y  ^^y^  ^^^^  ^^^  Seventh,  to  religious  Worship.  On  Friday,
service  at  the  day  appointed  for  public  prayer,  business  and  merchandise
^b^*  d  might,  after  its  conclusion,  be  transacted  as  much  as  on  any
other  day.  The  weekly  service,  indeed,  appears  at  first  to
have  been  treated  with  little  respect.  On  a  certain  Friday,
while  Mohammad  discoursed  from  the  Pulpit  to  a  crowded
assembly  in  the  Mosque,  the  sound  of  drums  announced  the
arrival  of  a  Syrian  caravan,  when  the  greater  part  of  his
audience  hurried  forth  to  meet  it,  and  left  Mohammad  stand-
ing in  the  Pulpit  nearly  alone. Hence  this  passage : —

Sura  Ixii.  9  f.  O  ye  that  believe  !  When  the  call  to  Prayer  is  raised  on  the  day  of
Assembly,  then  hasten  to  the  commemoration  of  God,  and  leave  off
trafficking — that  will  be  better  for  you,  if  ye  knew  it.  And  when  the
Prayers  are  ended,  then  disperse  abroad,  and  seek  (gain)  from  the
favour  of  God,  and  make  frequent  mention  of  God,  that  ye  may  prosper
When  they  see  Merchandising  or  Sport,  they  break  away,  flocking
thereto,  and  leaving  thee  standing  ;  say.  That  which  is  with  God  is
better  than  sport  or  merchandise  ;  and  God  is  the  best  Supporter.


XVII.]


MISCONDUCT  AT  SERVICE


333


Elsewhere  we  find  Mohammad  forbidding  his  followers  to Drunkenness
be  present  at  prayer  in  a  state  of  drunkenness :  '  O  ye  that J°ine™was  ^'^'
believe;  draw  not  nigh  unto  Prayers,  while  ye  are  drunken, forbidden
until  ye  can  understand  that  which  ye  say.' This  injunction,
being  connected  with  another  of  a  general  nature,^  may  be
viewed  as  additional  evidence  of  the  lax  manner  in  which  the
devotions  of  the  Muslims  were  at  the  first  performed,  as  well
as  of  the  prevalence  of  intemperance. In  a  previous  passage
the  use  of  Wine  had  been  discouraged,  though  not  prohibited,
on  the  ground  that  it  was  productive  of  greater  injury  than
good : —

They  will  ask  thee  concerning  Wine,  and  Casting  of  lots. Say, — In Sura  ii,  216.
both  there  is  great  evil,  and  also  advantages,  to  Mankind  ;  but  the  evil
of  them  is  greater  than  the  advantages  of  them.

But  Mohammad  at  last  perceived  that  the  sanctions  of
Islani  were  too  weak  to  enforce  a  middle  course,  and  that  the
imposition  of  entire  abstinence  was  the  only  means  by  which
he  could  check  intemperance.  The  command  against  the  use
of  wine  was  issued  in  the  fourth  year  of  the  Hijra,  during  the
siege  (it  is  said)  of  the  Beni  an-NadIr,  and  is  as  follows  : —

O  ye  that  believe  !  Verily  Wine,  and  the  Casting  of  lots,  and  Images,  Sura  v.  93  f
and  Divining-arrovvs,  are  an  abomination  from  amongst  the  works  of
Satan :  Shun  them,  therefore,  that  ye  may  prosper.  Verily,  Satan
seeketh  that  he  may  cast  amongst  you  enmity  and  hatred  through  Wine
and  Games  of  chance,  and  hinder  you  from  the  remembrance  of  God
and  from  Prayer.  Will  ye  not,  then,  refrain  ?  Obey  God,  and  obey  the
Apostle  ;  and  beware  !  For  if  ye  turn  back, — Verily,  our  Apostle's
duty  is  but  to  deliver  his  Message  publicly.

Jewish influence may  still be  traced in moulding the Influence

institutions of Mohammad. Usury is forbidden. The °f  J^^^i^"!

•'  still  main-

criminal  code  follows  largely  the  Law  of  retaliation. Cere- tained  in

monial purification before prayer is  enjoined,  and  in  the  ™stitu'uons

absence  of  water  sand  may  be  used  as  a  substitute. An  oath

something  resembling  the  curse  of  jealousy  is  permitted  to  a

wife  suspected  by  her  husband  of  infidelity. And  generally

in  the  relations  established  between  the  sexes,  a  considerable

degree  of  similarity  may  be  traced  to  the  injunctions  of  the

Pentateuch.

As  in  other  matters,  so  in  those  referring  to  Marriage  and

Divorce,  instead  of  general  principles,  we  have  particular  and

^  I.e.  ceremonial  ablution.


334  SURAS  OF  FIRST  FIVE  YEARS  [chap.

Rules  re- detailed instruction. Apart altogether from the tenor of
garding these  preccpts,  the  language  in  which  they  are  expressed  is
divorce%nd offensive  to  the  European  ear. Making  every  allowance  for
rektfons ^^^  rudeness  of  speech and sentiment  current  in  Arabia,
much remains that cannot be so excused. Further, the
legislation  of  the  Kor'an  on  relations  between  the  sexes  has
given  birth  to  endless  volumes,  by  Jurists  and  Theologians,
of  interpretation,  illustration,  construction,  corollary,  supple-
ment, which cannot but have a deteriorating  effect  upon
Evil  en- Mohammadan students of the law. To define the line
gendered between  the  forbidden  and  the  lawful,  ingenuity  and  labour

tnereuy  in  .

Muslim  have  been  expended  lavishly  in  describing  and  solving  cases
literal  ^^^  ^^^^  mention  of  which  is  repugnant  to  modesty,  in  draw-

ing elaborate  distinctions  and  demonstrating  points  of
casuistry  within  a  domain  of  thought  which  cannot  even  be
approached  without  moral  injury  and  contamination.  The
Arabic  language,  as  moulded  by  the  system  which  grew  out
of  the  precepts  of  Islam,  is  itself  evidence  of  this  evil,^  for
which,  at  the  first  remove,  the  Kor'an  itself  is  responsible.
Four  wives  The number  of  lawful  wives  is  restricted  to  four ; but

an^Tu'niber^  thcse  may  at  any  moment  be  divorced  at  the  caprice  and  by
of  slave-  the  simple  word  of  the  husband,  and  others  substituted  in  their
^^^  ^  stead. As  regards  female  slaves  with  whom  (irrespective  of

his  four  wives)  a  Muslim  may,  without  antecedent  ceremony
or  any  guarantee  of  continuance,  cohabit,  there  is  no  limit.
Female  slavery,  being  a  condition  necessary  to  the  legality  of
this  indulgence,  will  hardly  ever  be  put  down,  without  alien
pressure,  by  any  Muslim  community.  As  a  general  rule
slaves  are  in  Muslim  families  maintained  in  comfort ;  but
this  is  by  indulgence,  and  not  of  right.^  They  are  liable  to
be  treated  as  an  inferior  and  degraded  class.  Under  the
same  restrictions  as  married  wives,  the  female  slave  is
expressly  excluded  from  any  title  to  conjugal  privilege.  She
is  the  toy  of  her  master,  sported  with  at  his  pleasure,  or  cast

This  will  be  painfully  evident  from  a  glance  into  some  of  our
Arabic  dictionaries.  As  to  the  '  Hadlth,'  I  altogether  fail  to  understand
how  any  translator  can  justify  himself  in  rendering  into  English  much
that  is  contained  in  the  Sections  on  marriage,  purification,  divorce,  and
female  slavery.

^  At  the  Farewell  pilgrimage,  as  we  shall  see,  Mohammad  enjoined
that  slaves  should  be  fed  and  clothed  as  their  masters  ;  and  if  they
misbehave,  they  are  to  be  sold  and  not  tormented.


XVII.]  MARRIAGE  LAWS  335

unheeded  aside.  The  one  redeeming  feature  is  that,  when
once  a  slave-girl  has  borne  a  child  to  her  master,  she  cannot
be  sold,  and  at  his  death  obtains  her  freedom.^  The  child  of
the  slave  is  also  as  legitimate  as  that  of  her  married  sister.^

It  has  been  asserted  that  the  institutions  of  Mohammad  Unmarried
have  tended  to  elevate  and  improve  the  state  of  Woman.  aff^Sh"^
Yet,  excepting  in  so  far  as  she  necessarily  shares  in  the  this  system
general  elevation  and  improvement  introduced  by  a  purer
religion  and  more  spiritual  worship,^  it  is  very  doubtful
whether,  in  married  life,  her  position  has  not  been  rendered
more  dependent  than  in  Arab  life  it  was  before.  I  do  not
speak  of  unmarried  and  widowed  females  ;  for,  if  we  put  aside
the  Veil  and  the  depressing  influence  which  the  constraint
and  thraldom  of  the  married  state  has  exercised  upon  the  sex
at  large,  the  unmarried  free  woman  has  nothing  to  complain
of.  And,  in  one  particular,  viz,  the  inheritance  by  the  son  of
his  father's  wives,  she  was  delivered  by  Mohammad  from  a
gross  and  intolerable  abuse.  No  free  woman  can  be  forced,
under  the  code  of  Islam,  to  marry  against  her  will ;  and,  so
long  as  single,  she  is  mistress  of  her  actions.

But  in  respect  of  the  married  state  (which  in  the  East Married
embraces  practically  the  whole  sex  during  the  greater  part  of  fg^ies^laves
their  lives),  the  condition  of  woman  is  that of  a  dependent, occupy

inferior
^  This  is  not  provided  for  in  the  Kor'an,  but  rests  on  the  precedent  of  position
Mohammad,  who  freed  his  own  slave-girl  Mary,  on  her  bearing  a  son  to
him. Such  a  slave  is  called  Um  el-Weled,  or  'Mother  of  the  child.'

2  On  the  laxity  of  morals  in  connection  with  female  slavery,  I  quote
again  from  the  Mohammadan  Princess  who  lately  visited  Mecca.
Speaking  of  the  great  numbers  of  African  and  Georgian  slaves,  the
Begum  of  Bhopal  wrote  :  '  Some  of  the  women  are  taken  in  marriage,
and  after  that  on  being  sold  again,  they  receive  from  their  masters  a
divorce,  and  are  sold  in  their  houses  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  sent  to  the
purchaser  from  their  masters  house  on  receipt  of  payment,  and  are  not
exposed  for  sale  in  the  Dakkah  (slave  market) ;  they  are  only  married
when  purchased  for  the  first  time.  *  *  *  When  the  poorer  people  buy
slaves,  they  keep  them  for  themselves,  and  change  them  every  year  as
one  would  replace  old  things  by  new.' — {Pilgritnage  to  Mecca.  Trans-
lated by  Mrs  W.  Osborne,  1870.)  Such,  according  to  a  shrewd  observer,
are  the  results  of  female  slavery  in  the  holiest  city  of  Islam.

3  The  notion  that  the  female  sex  is  overlooked  in  the  rewards  of  the
future  life  arose,  apparently,  from  their  not  having  been  provided  with
indulgences  similar  to  those  promised  to  the  other  sex.  Not  only  is  the
idea  of  their  exclusion  from  Paradise  at  variance  with  the  whole  tenor  of
the  Kor'an,  but  it  is  contradicted  by  express  passages.


336


SURAS  OF  FIRST  FIVE  YEARS


[chap.


Sura  iv.  38


Position  of

married
women  im-
paired by
Islam


destined  for  the  service  of  her  lord,  liable  to  be  cast  off
without  the  assignment  of  any  reason  and  without  the  notice
of  a  single  hour.  While  the  husband  possesses  the  power  of
divorce,  absolute,  immediate,  unquestioned,  no  privilege  of  a
corresponding  nature  has  been  reserved  for  the  Wife.^  She
hangs  on,  however  unwilling,  neglected  or  superseded,  the
slave  of  her  lord, — if  such  be  his  will.  When  divorced,  she
can,  indeed,  claim  her  dower, — her  hire,  as  in  too  plain
language  it  is  called  ;  this,  however,  is  but  a  poor  security
against  capricious  taste,  and  in  the  case  of  female  slaves,  even
that  is  wanting.  The  power  of  divorce  is  not  the  only  power
that  may  be  arbitrarily  exercised  by  the  tyrannical  husband  :
authority  to  confine  and  to  beat  his  wives  is  vested  in  his
discretion : —

Men  stand  above  Women,  because  of  the  superiority  which  God  hath
conferred  on  one  of  them  over  the  other,  and  because  of  that  which  they
expend  of  their  wealth.  Wherefore  let  the  good  Women  be  obedient,
preserving  their  purity  in  secret,  in  that  wherein  God  preserveth  them.
But  such  as  ye  may  fear  disobedience  or  provocation  from,  rebuke  them,
and  put  them  away  in  separate  apartments,  and  chastise  them.  But,  if
they  be  obedient  unto  you,  seek  not  agamst  them  an  excuse  for  severity  ;
verily  God  is  lofty  and  great.

The  '  exchanging  of  one  wife  for  another'  (that  is,  the  divorc-
ing of  one  in  order  to  marry  another)  is  recognised  in  the
Kor'an,  with  only  this  caution,  that  the  dower  stipulated  at
marriage  be  given  in  full  to  her  that  is  put  away.^  Thus  re-
strained and  secluded,  liable  at  the  caprice  or  passion  of  the
moment  to  be  turned  adrift,  it  would  be  hard  to  say  that  the
position  of  a  wife  was  improved  by  the  code  of  Mohammad.
Indeed,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  she  was  not  possessed
of  more  freedom,  and  exercised  a  healthier,  and  more  legiti-

^  The  Kor'an  does  not  contemplate  anywhere  the  contingency  of
divorce  being  claimed  by  the  wife.  The  idea  of  any  independent  right
of  the  kind  was  foreign  to  Mohammad's  notions  of  the  position  of  the
sex.  The  Mohammadan  doctors  have,  indeed,  determined  that  under  a
few  rare  contingencies  divorce  may  be  demanded ;  but  they  are  so
exceptional  as  hardly  to  deserve  notice.

2  'And  if  ye  be  desirous  to  exchange  one  wife  in  place  of  another
wife,  and  ye  have  given  one  of  them  a  talent,  then  take  not  away  any-
thing therefrom.  What !  will  ye  take  it  away  falsely,  and  commit  an
open  sin  :  And  how  can  ye  take  it  away,  seeing  that  one  of  you  hath
gone  in  unto  the  other,  and  they  have  received  from  you  a  firm
covenant .'' ' — Sura  iv.  24  f.


XVII.]


DIVORCE


337


mate influence, under the pre-existing institutions of
Arabia.

In  the  conditions  of  Divorce,  there  is  one  which  (much  as
I  might  desire)  cannot  be  passed  over  in  silence.  A  husband
may  twice  divorce  his  wife,  and  each  time  receive  her  back
again.  But  when  it  has  been  thrice  repeated,  the  divorce  is,
with  a  hateful  exception,  irreversible.  However  unjust  or
injurious  the  action,  how  much  soever  the  result  of  passion  or
caprice,  however  it  may  affect  the  interests  not  only  of  an
innocent  wife,  but  also  of  her  innocent  children,  however
desirous  the  husband  may  be  of  undoing  the  wrong, — the
decision  cannot  be  recalled  ;  the  divorced  wife  can  return  to
her  husband  but  on  one  condition,  and  that  is  that  she  shall
first  be  married  to  another,  and  after  cohabitation  be  again
divorced.^  The  tone  of  Mohammadan  manners  may  be
imagined  from  the  functions  of  the  temporary  husband  hired
to  legalise  re-marriage  with  a  thrice-divorced  wife,  having
passed  into  a proverb.^ Such  flagrant  breach  of  decency,

1  'And  if  he  (a  third  time)  divorce  her,  she  shall  not  be  lawful  unto
him  after  that,  until  she  shall  have  married  a  husband  other  than  he ;
and  if  the  latter  divorce  her,  then  there  shall  be  no  sin  in  the  two  that
they  again  return  to  each  other,  if  they  think  that  they  can  observe  the
limits  appointed  by  God.  These  are  the  ordinances  of  God,  which  He
manifesteth  to  people  that  understand.' — Sura  ii.  230.

^  I  quote  from  Burckhardt ; — ^A  thousa?id  lovers,  rather  than  one
mostahel.  Many  lovers  or  gallants  cause  less  shame  to  a  woman  than
one  Mostahel  {i.e.  husband  procured  for  the  occasion).  According  to
the  Muslim  law,  a  person  who  has  (thrice)  divorced  his  wife  cannot
re-marry  her  until  she  has  been  married  to  some  other  man,  who  becomes
her  legitimate  husband,  cohabits  with  her  for  one  night,  and  divorces
her  next  morning  ;  after  which  the  first  husband  may  again  possess  her
as  his  wife.  Such  cases  are  of  frequent  occurrence— as  men  in  the  haste
of  anger  often  divorce  their  wives  by  the  simple  expression  (/  divorce
thee),  which  (thrice  repeated)  cannot  be  retracted.  In  order  to  regain
his  wife  a  man  hires  (at  no  inconsiderable  rate)  some  peasant,  whom  he
chooses  from  the  ugliest  that  can  be  found  in  the  streets.  A  temporary
husband  of  this  kind  is  called  Mostahel,  and  is  generally  most  disgusting
to  the  wife.' — {Arabic  Proverbs,  p.  21.)  Some  commentators  hold  the
practice  to  be  illegal ;  whether  legal  or  not,  I  gladly  believe  that  it  is  far
from  being  so  frequent  as  here  represented.  But  its  existence  is  un-
doubted ;  and  it  has  existed,  in  a  more  or  less  revolting  form,  ever  since
the  verse  was  revealed.  A  case  is  mentioned  by  tradition  in  which
Mohammad  himself  insisted  on  cohabitation  with  another  husband,
before  married  life  could  be  returned  to,  and  that  in  language  which,
one  may  hope,  prurient  tradition  has  fabricated  for  him. Tradition  and


Divorce
thrice  re-
peated irre-
vocable.
Revolting
condition
on  which
alone  original
marriage
can  be  re-
verted to


338  SURAS  OF  FIRST  FIVE  YEARS  [chap.

such  cruel  violation  of  the  modesty  of  an  unoffending  wife,
may  be  an  abuse  the  full  extent  of  which  was  not  at  the  time
contemplated  by  Mohammad  ;  but  it  is  not  the  less  an  abuse
for  which,  as  a  direct  result  of  the  unnatural  and  revolting
provision  framed  by  him,  Mohammad  is  responsible.^
Warlike  The  warlike  spirit  of  the  Suras  of  this  period  has  been

spirit  of  perhaps  sufficiently  illustrated  in  the  preceding  chapters.  I
may  here  just  refer  to  one  passage  which  is  peculiarly
demonstrative  of  the  lust  of  plunder  which  had  been  stirred
up,  and  which  (so  natural  was  it  to  the  Arab)  the  Prophet
soon  found  it  difficult  to  restrain  within  expedient  bounds.
Only  those  could  be  lawfully  slain  and  plundered  who  were
disbelievers  in  his  mission;  but  so  insatiable  had  the  thirst
for  spoil  become,  that  cases  now  occurred  of  Muslims  slaying
others  who  had  made  profession  of  the  Mohammadan  faith,
on  pretext  that  they  were  insincere  Believers.  Stringent
prohibition  was  required  to  guard  against  this  abuse.  Who-
ever trifled  with  the  life  of  any  one  professing  Islam,  did  so  at
the  peril  of  his  soul.  After  prescribing  the  penalty  or  penance
for  killing  a  Muslim  unintentionally,  the  ordinance  proceeds  : —

Sura  iv.  95  f.  But  whosoever  killeth  a  Believer  wilfully,  his  reward  shall  be  Hell, —
for  ever  therein.  God  shall  be  wroth  with  him,  and  shall  curse  him ;
He  hath  prepared  for  him  a  great  punishment.  O  ye  that  believe  !
When  ye  go  forth  fighting  in  the  way  of  God,  rightly  discriminate,  and
say  not  to  him  that  saluteth  you,^  Thou  art  not  a  Believer, — seeking  the

law  books  abound  with  fetid  commentaries  illustrative  of  this  subject,
and  with  checks  against  the  intermediate  marriage  and  cohabitation
being  merely  nominal.

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  all  the  immorality  of  speech  and  action
connected  with  this  shameful  institution,  and  the  outrage  done  to  female
virtue  (not  necessarily  for  any  fault  of  the  wretched  wife,  but  the  passion
and  thoughtlessness  of  the  husband  himself),  has  arisen  solely  out  of  the
verse  quoted  above.  It  is  a  sorry  excuse  that  Mohammad  wished
thereby  to  check  inconsiderate  divorce :  a  good  object  is  not  to  be
sought  for  by  such  evil  means.

^  See  Deut.  xxiv.  4  :  '  Her  former  husband,  which  sent  her  away,
may  not  take  her  again  to  be  his  wife  after  that  she  is  defiled  ;  for  that
is  an  abomination  before  the  Lord.^

2  I.e.  with  the  salutation  peculiar  to  Islam  {as-salaniu  ^aleikum),  which
was  held  equivalent  to  professing  oneself  a  Muslim.  Abu  Bekr,  in  send-
ing forth  expeditions  against  the  rebel  tribes,  on  the  same  principle,
made  it  a  strict  injunction  that  wherever  the  Azan  for  prayer  was  heard,
attack  was  to  be  suspended. — Caliphate,  p.  17.


XVII.]


WARLIKE  SPIRIT


339


References
to  Koreish
and  to
idolatry


Waverers
threatened


transitory  things  of  this  present  life, — whilst  with  God  there  is  great
spoil.  And  such  were  ye  yourselves  aforetime,  but  God  had  favour
towards  you.  Wherefore  carefully  discriminate,  for  God  is  attentive  to
that  which  ye  do.

Though  Mecca  with  its  heathen  inhabitants  has  now  faded
in  the  distance,  and  Koreish  are  hardly  ever  referred  to  but
for  their  hostile  inroads,  still  we  find  occasional  passages,
after  the  old  Meccan  style,  in  reprobation  of  Idolatry,  and
menace  of  the  city  '  which  had  cast  out  its  Prophet'  Poly-
theism and  Idolatry  are  denounced  as  the  only  unpardonable
sins.  The  tone  of  defiance  becomes  bolder  and  at  times
exulting.  Mohammad  and  his  people  are  '  to  fight  till
opposition  shall  cease,  and  the  Religion  becometh  God's
alone.'  Until  this  glorious  consummation,  '  they  are  not  to
faint,  neither  invite  to  peace.'  A  complete  and  speedy
victory  is  promised.  God  is  the  stronger,  and  will  prevail :
Islam  shall  shortly  be  established  triumphantly.  Such  as
withdraw  from  Mecca,  and  rally  around  the  standard  of
Mohammad  while  the  struggle  yet  impends,  shall  have  a
merit  superior  far  to  the  merit  of  those  who  join  it  after
opposition  shall  have  been  beaten  down.  The  waverers,  who,
though  persuaded  of  the  truth,  cannot  make  up  their  minds
to  abandon  Mecca,  are  told  that  their  excuse  of  inability  will
not  be  accepted  of  God  ; — '  their  habitation  shall  be  Hell,  an
evil  journey  thither  ! '  But  a  word  of  comfort  is  added  for
'  the  weak,'  withheld  by  real  helplessness  from  leaving  Mecca.
The  rescue  of  such  from  their  unhappy  position  is  adduced  as
a  powerful  motive  why  their  more  fortunate  brethren  at
Medina  should  fight  bravely  in  the  cause : —

Fight  in  the  way  of  God,  ye  that  sell  the  present  Life  for  that  which  Sura  iv.  76  f.
is  to  come.  Whosoever  fighteth  in  the  way  of  God,  whether  he  be  slain
or  be  victorious,  We  shall  surely  give  him  a  great  Reward.  And  what
aileth  you  that  ye  fight  not  in  the  way  of  God,  and  for  the  Weak  amongst
the  men  and  women  and  children,  who  say,  '  O  Lord  !  Deliver  us  out  of
this  City,  whose  people  ar.e  oppressors  ;  and  grant  us  from  thyself  a
Protector,  and  grant  us  from  thyself  a  Defender.'

From  these  numerous  quotations  (so  numerous,  I  fear,  as Style  tame,
to  have  been  irksome  to  the  reader)  it  will  be  evident  that  the ^^'  ^''^^  ,

'  occasional

style  of  the  Kor'an,  though  varying  greatly  in  force  and  touches  of
vigour,  has  for  the  most  part  lost  the  stamp  of  vivid  imagina-  P^^*-"^  "^^
tion and poetic fire which marks the earlier Siiras. It


Weak
believers
at  Mecca
comforted


340  StJRAS  OF  FIRST  FIVE  YEARS [chap.  xvii.

becomes,  as  a  rule,  tame  and  ordinary  both  in  thought  and
language.  Occasionally,  indeed,  we  still  find  traces  of  the
former  spirit.  Here  for  instance  the  Deity  is  described  in  a
passage  [called  the  Throne  verse]  of  which  the  followers  of
Mohammad  are  justly  proud  : —

Sura  ii.  256  God  ! There  is  no  God  but  He  :  the  Living,  the  Eternal. Slumber

doth  not  overtake  Him,  neither  Sleep.  To  Him  belongeth  all  that  is  in
the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth.  Who  is  he  that  shall  intercede  before
Him,  excepting  by  His  permission?  He  knoweth  that  vv'hich  is  before
them,  and  that  which  is  behind  them,  and  they  shall  not  comprehend
anything  of  His  knowledge,  saving  in  so  far  as  He  pleaseth.  His  throne
stretcheth  over  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  the  protection  of  them  both  is
no  burden  unto  Him. He  is  the  Lofty  and  the  Great.

In  the  following  extract,  the  verses  in  which  Infidelity  is
compared  to  a  tempestuous  Sea,  of  which  the  crested  waves
below  mingle  with  the  lowering  clouds  above, — a  scene  of  im-
penetrable darkness  and  despair,  are  to  my  apprehension
amongst  the  grandest  and  most  powerful  in  the  whole
Kor'an.  The  Sura  belongs  to  the  Fifth  year  of  the  Hijra  ;
but  part  of  it  is  in  the  best  style  of  the  Meccan  period.

Sura  xxiv.  35  God  is  the  Light  of  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth.  The  likeness  of
His  light  is  as  the  niche  wherein  is  a  Lamp  inclosed  in  glass  ; — the  glass
is  as  a  refulgent  Star.  It  is  lighted  from  a  blessed  tree,  an  Olive  neither
of  the  East  nor  of  the  West.  Its  Oil  is  near  unto  giving  light,  even  if
the  fire  did  not  touch  it ;  light  upon  light.  God  directeth  towards  His
light whom  He pleaseth. (Here  follows  a  description  of  the  worship

V.  39  and  good  works  of  Believers.) And  those  that  disbelieve  ; — their  works

are  as  the  Serdb  in  the  plain  ;  the  thirsty  man  thinketh  it  to  be  water,
until,  when  he  cometh  thereto,  he  doth  not  find  it  anything ;  but  he
findeth  God  to  be  about  him,  and  He  will  fulfil  unto  him  his  account ;
for  God  is  swift  in  taking  account : —

Or  as  the  Darkness  in  a  bottomless  Sea,  covered  by  wave  riding  upon
wave.  Above  them  are  clouds.  Darkness  of  one  kind  over  another
kind.  When  one  stretcheth  forth  his  hand,  he  hardly  seeth  it.  And  to
whomsoever  God  doth  not  grant  light,  he  shall  have  no  light.

What !  seest  thou  not  that  unto  God  giveth  praise  everything  that  is
in  the  Heavens  and  in  the  Earth,  and  the  Birds  with  expanded  wing.
Truly  every  one  knoweth  his  prayer  and  his  hymn  of  praise  ;  and  God

v*x  knoweth  whatsoever  they  do.  .  .  .  Seest  thou  not  that  God  driveth  the

clouds  along,  then  gathereth  them  together,  then  setteth  them  in  layers  ;
and  thou  seest  the  rain  issuing  forth  from  between  them.  And  he  sendeth
down  from  the  heavens  as  it  were  mountains  wherein  is  hail.  He  striketh
therewith  whom  He  pleaseth,  and  averteth  the  same  from  whom  He
pleaseth. The  brightness  of  His  lightning  well-nigh  taketh  the  sight  away.


CHAPTER  XVIII

SIXTH YEAR OF THE HIJRA

A.D. 627,  628

JETAT. 59

The  Sixth  year  of  the  Hijra  was  one  of  considerable  activity  Numerous
at  Medina. No  important  battle  indeed  was  fought,  nor  any ™'?-?.'^  ^^'.

_  ^  t> >  ^ peditions  in

great  expedition  undertaken.  But  small  parties  were  Sixth  year
constantly  in  motion,  either  for  the  chastisement  of  hostile  ^j|^^
tribes,  for  the  capture  of  caravans,  or  for  the  repulse  of
robbers  and  marauders.  We  read  of  as  many  as  seventeen
such  affairs  during  the  year.  They  generally  resulted  in  the
dispersion  of  the  enemy  and  the  capture  of  flocks  and  herds,
which  enriched  the  Prophet's  followers,  and  stimulated  their
zeal  for  active  service ;  they  also  served  to  spread  terror  of
his  name.  But  few  of  them  were  otherwise  attended  with
marked  results  ;  and  it  will  not  therefore  be  necessary  to
narrate  them  all.^

Two  of  the  expeditions  were  led  by  Mohammad  himself.  Expedition
One  was  against  the  Beni  Lihyan,^  whom  he  had  long  been byMoham-

°  _  .  ^ )  fc>  jjiad  against

desirous  of  chastising  for  their  treacherous  attack,  two  years  Beni  Libyan.

before,  on  the  little  band  of  his  followers  at  Ar-Rajl'. During  t^^'g^^'p

the  summer  he  set  out  with  a  selected  body  of  two  hundred  627
men  on  camels,  and  twenty  horse. That  he  might  the  more

*  Weil  regards  the  comparative  insignificance  of  these  expeditions,
and  especially  the  smallness  of  Mohammad's  following  on  the  pilgrimage
to  Al-Hodeibiya,  as  a  proof  how  low  his  authority  had  sunk.  But  there
was  no  object  on  these  occasions  for  any  great  exertion  or  extensive
following.  The  authority  of  Mohammad,  which  had  been  materially
increased  by  his  successful  resistance  to  the  grand  confederation  at  the
siege  of  Medina,  was  steadily  advancing.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  718  f .  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1500  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  226  f. ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  56  f.


342  SIXTH  YEAR  OF  HIJRA  [chap.

surely  fall  upon  his  enemy  unawares,  he  first  took  the  road
N.W.  towards  Syria.  After  two  or  three  marches,  he
suddenly  turned  south,  and  travelled  rapidly  along  the
seashore  by  the  way  to  Mecca.  But  the  stratagem  was  of
no  avail,  for  the  Beni  Lihyan  had  notice  of  his  approach,
and,  taking  their  cattle  with  them,  retired  to  heights  where
they  were  safe  from  attack.  At  the  spot  where  his  followers
had  been  slaughtered,  he  halted,  and  invoked  pardon  and
mercy  on  them.  Small  parties  were  sent  to  scour  the  vicinity,
but  no  traces  of  the  tribe  were  anywhere  to  be  found.  Being
now  within  two  marches  of  Mecca,  he  advanced  to  'Osfan
with  the  view  of  alarming  Koreish.  From  thence  Abu  Bekr
was  sent  with  ten  horsemen,  as  it  were  the  vanguard,  to
approach  still  nearer.  Satisfied  with  this  demonstration,  the
force  retraced  its  steps  to  Medina.  On  his  way  back  from
this  fruitless  journey,  the  Prophet,  who  had  been  greatly
incommoded  by  the  heat,  is  said  to  have  prayed  thus :
*  Returning  and  repentant^  yet  if  it  please  the  Lord,  praising
His  name  and  serving  Him,  I  seek  refuge  in  God  from  the
troubles  of  the  way,  the  vexation  of  return,  and  the  evil  eye
which  affect eth  family  and  zvcalth!
Pursuit  of  Not  many  days  after,  Medina  was  early  one morning

Sacked  ''^°  startled  by  a  cry  of  alarm  from  the  adjoining  height  of  Sal'.^
camels  at  The  chieftain  'Oyeina,  with  a  troop  of  Fezara  horse,  came
A.H^vi'^^'  clown  upon  the  plain  of  Al-Ghaba,  within  a  few  miles  of
July,  A.D.  Medina,  fell  upon  the  milch  camels  of  Mohammad  which  were
^'^  grazing  there,  drove  off  the  whole  herd,  and  having  killed

the  keeper  carried  off  his  wife.  A  Citizen,  early  on  his  way
to  the  pasture  lands,  saw  the  marauding  band  and  gave  the
alarm.  The  call  to  arms  was  ordered  by  Mohammad.  A
troop  of  horse  was  shortly  at  the  gate  of  the  Mosque.^  A
flag  was  mounted  for  them,  and  they  were  despatched  at
once  in  pursuit,  Mohammad  himself  with  some  600  men
following  shortly  after. Sa'd ibn  'Obada,  with 300  armed

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  719  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1502  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  227  ff. ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  58  ff.

2  Al-Mikdad  being  the  first  to  come  up,  Mohammad  mounted  the
flag  on  his  spear,  which  occasioned  some  to  say  that  he  was  the  leader  of
the  expedition,  while  that  honour  belonged  in  reality  to  Sa'd  ibn  Zeid.
There  is  a  curious  anecdote  on  this  point,  which  shows  that  Hassan's
poetry  sometimes  originated  errors  in  tradition.  In  his  piece  on  this
expedition,  the  poet  speaks  of  the  horsemen  of  Al-Mikddd,  as  if  he  had  been


XVIII.]  AFFAIR  AT  DHU'L-KASSA  343

followers,  remained  behind,  to  guard  the  city.  The  advanced
party  hung  daringly  upon  the  rear  of  the  marauders,  slew
several  of  them,  and  recovered  half  of  the  plundered  camels.
On  the  side  of  the  Muslims  only  one  man  was  killed.
Mohammad,  with  the  main  body,  marched  onwards  as  far
as  Dhu  Karad,  in  the  direction  of  Kheibar  ;  but  by  this  time
the  robbers  were  safe  away  in  the  desert.  The  captive  female
effected  her  escape  on  one  of  the  plundered  camels  which  she
vowed  on  reaching  her  home  in  safety  to  offer  up  as  a  sacri-
fice of  thanksgiving.  On  acquainting  Mohammad  with  her
vow,  he  rallied  her  on  the  ingratitude  of  seeking  to  slay  the
animal  which  had  saved  her  life,  and  which  moreover  was
not  hers  to  offer  up.  He  bade  her  go  to  her  home  in  peace.
Finding  that  hostile  tribes  were  gathering  around  them  in
dangerous  numbers,  the  force  returned,  having  been  five  days
absent  from  Medina.

Scarcity  still  prevailing  in  Nejd,  and  rain  having  fallen Affair  at
plentifully towards Medina, the Ghatafan tribes were Dhu'l-isassa:

1 r  1  '  11- ps'ty  of

tempted  in  their  search  for  pasture  to  advance  beyond  their Muslims
usual limits.^ The herds of camels belonging to the '^"^"P*
Muslims,  greatly  increased  by  the  plunder  of  late  years,  had August',  a.d.
been  sent  out  to  graze  in  the  same  direction. They  offered ^^7
a tempting prize for  a  foray,  and  the  neighbouring  tribes
were  suspected  to  be  gathering for  the purpose. Moham-
mad ibn Maslama  was  deputed  with  ten  followers  to  visit
the locality  and ascertain how  matters stood. At  Dhu'l-
Kassa,  two  or  three  days'  distance,  he  was  surrounded  in  the
night-time  by  overpowering  numbers. After  a  short  resist-
ance, his  men  were  all  slain,  and  he  himself  left  on  the  field
as  dead. A  friend,  happening  to  pass  that  way,  assisted  him
on his  journey back to Medina. A body of forty well-
mounted soldiers under Abu 'Obeida was despatched to
chastise  the  offenders ; but  they  had dispersed  among  the
neighbouring  heights,  and,  excepting  the plunder  of  some
flocks  and  household  stuff,  no  reprisals  were  effected.

the  leader.  On  hearing  the  poetry  recited,  Sa'd  repaired  in  great  wrath
to  Hassan,  and  required  amends  for  the  misrepresentation.  The  poet
quietly  replied  that  his  name  did  not  suit  the  rhythm  so  well  as  Al-
Mikdad's.  And  yet,  says  Al-Wakidi  the  verses  remained  in  circulation
and  gave  rise  to  the  erroneous  tradition  that  Al-Mikdad  was  leader.
1  At-Tabari,  i.  1554 ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  233  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  61  f.


344


SIXTH  YEAR  OF  HIJRA


[chap.


A  Meccan
caravan
plundered
at  Al-'Is.
A.H.  VI,'
September,
A,D.  627


Abu'l-'As
and  Zeinab
Moham-
mad's
daughter


Abu'l-'As,
when  taken
at  Bedr,
had  been
freed  on
condition  of
sending
Zeinab  to
Medina


During  the  autumn  an  interesting  episode  occurred.
A  well-freighted  caravan  from  Mecca,  venturing  to  resume
the  seashore  route  to  Syria,  was  overpowered  at  Al-'Ts,
and  carried  into  Medina  with  a  large  store  of  silver  and  some
of  those  who  guarded  it  as  prisoners.^  Among  these  was
Abu'l-'As,  son-in-law  of  Mohammad.  His  romantic  story-
deserves  recital,  as  well  for  its  own  interest,  as  for  the  share
which  the  Prophet  himself  bore  therein.  The  reader  will
remember  that  Mohammad,  at  Khadlja's  desire,  gave  his
daughter  Zeinab  in  marriage  to  her  nephew  Abu'l-'As,  a
prosperous  trader  in  Mecca.  While  declining  to  embrace
Islam,  Abu'l-As  equally  resisted  the  bidding  of  Koreish  to
abandon  Zeinab  and  choose  one  of  their  own  daughters  in
her  stead.  '  I  will  not  separate  from  my  wife,'  he  said ;
'  neither  do  I  desire  any  other  woman  from  amongst  your
daughters.'  Mohammad  was  much  pleased  at  the  faithfulness
of  Abu'l-'As  to  his  daughter.  The  attachment  was  mutual,
for  when  the  family  emigrated  to  Medina,  Zeinab  remained
behind  at  Mecca  with  her  husband.

In  the  battle  of  Bedr,  Abu'l-'As  had  been  amongst  the
captives ;  and  when  Koreish  deputed  men  to  ransom  their
prisoners,  Zeinab  sent  by  their  hands  such  property  as  she
had  for  her  husband's  freedom.^  Among  other  things  was  a
necklace,  which  Khadija  had  given  her  on  her  marriage.
The  Prophet,  seeing  this  touching  memorial  of  his  former
wife,  was  overcome,  and  said  to  the  people :  *  If  it  seem  right
in  your  eyes,  let  my  daughter's  husband  go  free,  and  send
these  trinkets  back.'  All  agreed ;  but  as  the  condition  of
his  freedom,  Mohammad  required  of  Abu'l-'As  that  he  should
at  once  send  Zeinab  to  Medina.  Accordingly,  on  his  return
to  Mecca,  he  sent  her  away  mounted  on  a  camel-litter,  under
charge  of  his  brother  Kinana.  Certain  of  the  baser  sort,
however,  from  amongst  Koreish  went  in  pursuit,  determined
to  bring  her  back.  The  first  that  appeared  was  Habbar,  who
struck  the  camel  with  his  spear,  and  so  affrighted  Zeinab  as
to  bring  on  a  miscarriage,  Kinana  at  once  made  the  camel
sit  down,  and  by  the  mere  sight  of  his  bow  and  well-filled
quiver,  kept the pursuers at  bay. Just  then  Abu  Sufyan

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  464  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1555  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  233  f ;  Ibn
Sa'd,  p.  63.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  464  ff. ;  At-Tabari,  i,  1347  ff.


A.H.  VI.


XVIII.]  CONVERSION  OF  ABU'L-'AS  345

came  up  and  held  parley  with  Kinana  :  '  Ye  should  not,'  he
said,  'have  gone  forth  thus  publicly,  knowing  the  disaster  we
have  so  lately  sustained  at  the  hands  of  Mohammad.  The
open  departure  of  his  daughter  would  be  regarded  as  proof
of  our  weakness  and  humiliation.  But  it  is  no  object  of  ours
to  keep  back  this  woman  from  her  father,  or  to  retaliate  our
wrongs  upon  her.  Return,  therefore,  for  a  little  while  to
Mecca,  and  when  this  excitement  shall  have  died  away,  then
set  out  secretly.'  They  followed  his  advice,  and  some  days
after,  Zeinab,  escorted  by  Zeid,  who  had  been  sent  to  fetch
her,  reached  Mohammad  in  safety.

It  was  three  or  four  years  after  this  that  Abu'l-'As  was  Abu'l-'As
now  again  made  prisoner  with  the  caravan  at  Al-'Is.  As  the  ^^^^  ^^^'
party  carrying  him  captive  approached  Medina,  he  contrived  converted
by  night  to  have  an  interview  with  Zeinab,  who  gave  him
the  guarantee  of  her  protection,  on  which  he  rejoined  the
other  prisoners.  At  morning  prayer  she  called  aloud  from
her  apartment  that  she  had  passed  her  word  to  Abu'l-'As,
When  prayers  were  ended,  Mohammad  thus  addressed  the
assembly :  '  Ye  have  heard,  as  I  have,  the  voice  of  my
daughter.  I  swear  by  Him  in  whose  hands  is  my  life,  that
I  knew  nothing  of  her  guarantee  until  this  moment.  But
the  pledge  even  of  the  least  of  my  followers  must  needs  be
kept.'  Thus  saying,  he  retired  to  his  daughter,  and  desired
her  to  treat  Abu'l-'As  with  honour,  as  a  guest,  but  not
recognise  him  as  her  husband.  Then  sending  for  the  captors
of  the  caravan,  he  reminded  them  of  his  connection  with
Abu'l-'As,  and  said :  '  If  ye  treat  him  well,  and  return  his
property  unto  him,  it  would  be  pleasing  to  me ;  but  if  not,
the  booty  is  yours  which  the  Lord  hath  given  into  your
hands,  and  it  is  your  right  to  keep  it'  They  all  with  one
consent  agreed  to  let  the  prisoner  go  free,  and  return  to  him
his  property.  This  generosity,  and  the  continued  attach-
ment of  Zeinab,  so  wrought  on  Abu'l-'As,  that  when  he  had
adjusted  his  affairs  at  Mecca,  he  made  profession  of  Islam
and  rejoined  her  at  Medma.  Their  domestic  happiness,
however,  was  not  of  long  continuance ;  for  Zeinab  died  the
following  year  from  the  illness  caused  by  the  attack  of
Habbar  at  Mecca.^ The  treatment  of  his  daughter  on  that

1  They  had  a  daughter,  whom  'All  married  after  the  death  of  Fatima.
It  is satisfactory  to find that  at Mecca,  the  cruelty  of  Habbar  was


346


SIXTH  YEAR  OF  HIJRA


[chap.


Mohammad
commands
that  his
daughter's
pursuers  be
put  to  death


Beni

Judham
chastised
for  robbing
Dihya,  sent
by  Moham-
mad on  an
embassy  to
Syria.
A.H.  vr.
October,
A.D.  627


occasion  had  greatly  incensed  Mohammad.  Once,  when  a
party  was  setting  out  on  an  expedition  towards  Mecca,  he
commanded  that  if  Habbar,  and  another  who  had  joined  him
in  the  pursuit  of  Zeinab,  fell  into  their  hands,  they  should
both  be  burned  alive  ;  but  the  same  night  he  countermanded
it  in  these  words ;  *  It  is  not  fitting  for  any  of  His  creatures
to  punish  by  fire  but  God  only.  Wherefore  if  ye  seize  them
put  them  to  death  simply  by  the  sword.*

About  this  time  we  read  of  Mohammad's  first  communica-
tion with  the  Roman  Empire,  One  of  his  followers,  named
Dihya,  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  Emperor,  or  rather  per-
haps to  one  of  the  Governors  of  Syria.^  He  was  graciously
received,  and  presented  with  a  dress  of  honour.  On  his  way
home,  he  was  plundered  of  everything  near  Wadi  al-Kora,
by  the  tribe  of  Judham.  A  neighbouring  tribe,  however,
under  treaty  with  Mohammad,  attacked  the  robbers,  recovered
the  spoil,  and  restored  his  property  to  Dihya.  On  the  robbery
reaching  the  ears  of  Mohammad,  he  despatched  Zeid  (now  a
favourite  commander)  with  500  men,  to  chastise  the  delin-
quents. Marching  by  night,  and  concealing  themselves  by
day,  they  fell  unexpectedly  on  Judham,  killed  their  leader
and  several  others,  and  carried  off  one  hundred  women  and
children,  with  all  their  herds  and  flocks.  Unfortunately,  the
branch  thus  punished  had  just  tendered  submission  to
Mohammad.  The  chief  therefore  hastened  to  Medina  and
appealed  against  these  proceedings.  He  produced  the  letter
of  terms  which  the  Prophet  had  made  with  his  people,  and
demanded  justice.  '  But,'  said  Mohammad,  'how  can  I  com-
pensate thee  for  those  that  have  been  slain  ? '  '  Release  to  us
the  living,'  was  the  reply  ;  '  as  for  the  dead,  they  are  beneath
our  feet'  Mohammad  acknowledged  the  justice  of  his  demand
and  despatched  'All  to  order  restoration.  He  met  Zeid
returning  to  Medina,  and  the  prisoners  and  booty  were
immediately  surrendered  to  the  chief.


scouted  as  unmanly.  Even  Hind,  wife  of  Abu  Sufyan,  gave  vent  to  her
indignation  ;  meeting  the  party  as  it  returned,  she  extemporised  some
severe  verses  against  them  :  'Ah  !  in  time  of  peace  ye  are  very  brave  and
fierce  against  the  weak  and  unprotected,  but  in  battle  ye  are  like  women
with  gentle  speeches,'  &c.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  975  f. ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1555  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  234  f. ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  63  f.


XVIII.] BARBAROUS  EXECUTION  OF  UM  KIRFA


347


Soon  after,  'Abd  ar-Rahman  set  out  with  700  men,  on  a
second  expedition  to  Dumat  al-Jandal.^  Mohammad  bound
a  black  turban,  in  token  of  command,  about  his  head.  He
was  first  to  gain  over,  if  possible,  the  people  of  Dumat  al-
Jandal,  and  fight  only  in  the  last  resort : — '  but  in  no  case,'
said  the  Prophet,  'shalt  thou  use  deceit  or  perfidy,  or  kill
any  child.'  On  reaching  Dumat  al-Jandal,  'Abd  ar-Rahman
summoned  the  tribes  around  to  embrace  Islam,  and  allowed
them  three  days'  grace.  Within  that  period,  Al-Asbagh,  a
Christian  chief  of  the  Beni  Kelb,  gave  in  his  adhesion,  and
many  followed  his  example.  Others  preferred  to  be  tribu-
taries, with  the  condition  of  being  allowed  to  retain  profession
of  the  Christian  faith.  'Abd  ar-Rahman  sent  tidings  of  this
success  to  Mohammad,  who,  in  reply,  desired  him  to  marry
Tomadir,  daughter  of  the  chief.  'Abd  ar-Rahman  accordingly
brought  this  lady  with  him  to  Medina,  where  she  bore  him
Abu  Selama  (the  famous  jurisconsult  of  after  days)  and,  amid
many  rivals,  maintained  her  position  as  one  of  his  wives,  till
her  husband's  death.^

Zeid  having  set  out  upon  a  mercantile  expedition  to  Syria,
with  ventures  from  many  of  the  Citizens,  was  waylaid  near
Wadi  al-Kora,  and  maltreated  and  plundered  by  the  Beni
Fezara.^  This  occasioned  much  exasperation  at  Medina.
When  he  was  sufficiently  recovered  from  the  injuries  inflicted
by  the  robbers,  Zeid  was  deputed  with  a  strong  force  to  execute
vengeance  upon  them.  Approaching  stealthily,  he  surprised
and  captured  the  marauders'  stronghold.  Um  Kirfa,  aunt
of  'Oyeina,  a  lady  who  had  gained  celebrity  as  mistress
of  this  nest  of  robbers,  was  taken  prisoner  with  her  daughter.
Neither  the  sex,  nor  great  age  of  Um  Kirfa,  saved  her  from
a  death  of  extreme  barbarity.  Her  legs  were  tied  each  to  a
separate  camel.  The  camels  were  driven  asunder,  and  thus
she  was  torn  in  pieces.  Two  young  brothers  were  also  put
to  death. Zeid,  on  his  return,  hastened  to  Mohammad,  who

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  991  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1556;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  236.;  Ibn
Sa'd,  p.  64  f.

2  For  some  account  of  'Abd  ar-Rahmfln's  conjugal  relations,  see  ante^
p.  174.  Besides  slave-girls,  he  had  issue  by  sixteen  wives.  There  were
several  unimportant  raids  this  year  hardly  requiring  mention  ;  but  I
must  not  omit  one  for  the  cruel  deed  that  closed  it.

3  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  979  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1557  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  236  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  64.


Second  ex-
pedition to
Dumat.
A.H.  V.

November,
627


Beni  Fezara
chastised.
A.H.  VI.
December,
A.D.  627


Barbarous
execution
of  Um  Kirfa


348


SIXTH  YEAR  OF  HIJRA


[chap.


Assassina-
tion of  Abu
Rafi',  a
Jewish
chief.
A.H.  VI.
December,
A.D.  627


hurried  forth  to  meet  him  with  dress  ungirded :  and,  learning
the  success  of  the  expedition,  embraced  and  kissed  him.  We
do  not  read  of  disapprobation  at  the  inhuman  treatment  of
the  aged  female.  The  daughter  was  given  to  'A'isha  as  her
waiting-maid  ;  but  the  brigand  spirit  survived  in  her,  and  a
few  years  after  we  find  her  slain  in  a  similar  encounter  with
Khalid.i

His  old  enemies,  the  Jews,  were  still  the  cause  of  annoy-
ance. A  party  of  the  Beni  an-NadIr,  after  their  exile,  settled
down  among  their  brethren  at  Kheibar.  Abu  Rafi',  their
chief,  having  taken  a  prominent  part  in  the  Confederate  force
which  besieged  Medina,  was  now  susj^ected  of  encouraging
certain  Bedawi  tribes  in  their  depredations.  An  expedition
was  therefore  undertaken  by  'All  against  the  Jews  of  Kheibar,
but  besides  the  capture  of  their  camels  and  flocks,  it  produced
no  other  result.  As  a  surer  means  of  stopping  these  attacks,
Mohammad  resolved  on  ridding  himself  of  their  supposed
author,  the  Jewish  chief.^  The  Khazraj,  emulous  of  the
distinction  which  their  brethren  gained  some  years  before  by
the  assassination  of  Ka'b,  had  long  offered  themselves  for
like  service.  Mohammad  therefore,  having  chosen  five,  gave
them  command  to  make  away  with  Abu  Rafi'.  On  approaching
Kheibar,  they  concealed  themselves  till  nightfall,  when  they
repaired  to  their  victim's  house.  The  leader,  who  was
familiar  with  the  tribe  and  with  their  language,  called  out  at
the  door  to  the  chief's  wife,  and  thus  gained  admittance  on  a
false  pretext.  When  she  perceived  that  his  companions  were
armed,  she  screamed  aloud ;  but  they  pointed  their  weapons
at  her,  and  forced  her  to  be  silent.  Then,  rushing  in,  they
despatched  Abu  Rafi'  with  their  swords  ;  and  hastily  retiring,
hid  themselves  in  an  adjacent  cave  till  the  pursuit  was  over.
Mohammad,  meeting  them  as  they  returned,  exclaimed :
'  Success  attend  you  ! '  '  And  thee,  O  Prophet ! '  they  replied.
They  recounted  to  him  all  that  had  happened ;  and,  as  each

1  Al-Wakidi  says  she  was  given  by  Mohammad  to  one  of  his
followers.  But  we  find  in  the  Caliphate  of  Abu  Bekr,  a.h.  xi.,  that  a
daughter  of  Um  Kirfa,  called  Um  Ziml,  who  had  waited  on  'A'isha  as  her
maid,  afterwards  having  escaped,  raised  a  rebellion,  and  like  her  mother
was  slain  in  battle  by  Khalid.  I  presume  it  must  have  been  the  same.
See  the  Caliphate,  p.  23. At-Tabari,  i.  1901  f.

2  (Ibn  Hisham,  p.  351)  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1375  fif.  (a.h.  III.);  Al-Wakidi,
p.  170  f  (a.h.  IV.) ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  66.


XVIII.] PARTY  OF  JEWS  TREACHEROUSLY  SLAIN  349

one  claimed  the  honour  of  the  deed,  Mohammad  examined
their  weapons,  and,  from  the  marks  on  the  sword  of  'Abdallah
ibn  Oneis,  who  has  already  been  mentioned  as  the  assassin
of  Sufyan,  chieftain  of  the  Beni  Libyan,  assigned  to  him  the
merit  of  the  fatal  blow.

The  assassination  of  Abu  Rafi'  did  not  relieve  Mohammad Oseir  and
of  his  apprehensions  from  the  Jews  of  Kheibar  ;  for  Oseir,  or  P^';'y  of  Jews

^'^  •'  '  '  slain.

Yuseir,  elected  in  his  room,  maintained  the  same  relations  a.h.  vi.
with  the  Ghatafan,  and  was  even  reported  to  be  designing  ^  0^628'
fresh  movements  against  Medina.^  Mohammad  deputed  a
Citizen,  Ibn  Rawaha,  to  Kheibar,  with  three  followers,  to
make  inquiries  as  to  how  Oseir  also  might  be  taken
unawares.  But  he  found  the  Jews  too  much  on  the  alert  to
admit  of  a  second  successful  attempt.  On  his  return,  there-
fore, a  new  plan  was  devised.  Ibn  Rawaha  was  now  sent
openly  with  thirty  men  to  persuade  Oseir  to  visit  Medina.
They  assured  him  that  Mohammad  would  make  him  ruler
over  Kheibar  and  treat  him  with  distinction ;  and  gave  him
a  solemn  guarantee  of  safety.  Oseir  consented,  and  set  out
with  thirty  followers,  each  Muslim  taking  one  of  the  Jewish
party  behind  him  on  his  camel.  The  unfortunate  chief  was
mounted  on  the  camel  of  'Abdallah  ibn  Oneis,  who  relates
that,  after  they  had  travelled  some  distance,  he  perceived
Oseir  stretching  out  his  hand  towards  his  sword.  Urging
forward  his  camel  till  he  was  well  beyond  the  rest  of  the
party,  'Abdallah  called  out :  '  Enemy  of  the  Lord  !  Treachery  1
Twice  hath  he  done  this  thing.'  As  he  spoke,  he  leaped  from
the  camel,  and  aimed  a  deadly  blow  at  Oseir,  which  took  effect
on  the  hip  joint.  The  chief  fell  mortally  wounded  to  the
ground,  but  in  his  descent  succeeded  in  wounding  'Abdallah's
head  with  the  camel  staff,  the  only  weapon  within  his  reach.
Upon  this,  each  of  the  Muslims  turned  upon  his  man,  and  they
were  all  murdered,  excepting  one  who  eluded  pursuit.  The
party  continued  their  journey  to  Medina,  and  reported  the
tragedy  to  Mohammad,  who  gave  thanks  and  said  :  '  Verily,
the  Lord  hath  delivered  you  from  an  unrighteous  people.' ^

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  980  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1759  f. ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  239;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  66  f.

2  The  reader  will  judge  for  himself  on  which  side  treachery  is  likeliest
to  have  occurred,  on  that  of  the  unarmed  Oseir,  or  of  Ibn  Oneis,  already
known  as  an  assassin. But  I  have  given  the  narrative  as  I  find  it.


350


SIXTH  YEAR  OF  HIJRA


[chap.


Certain
robbers
executed
barbarously,
for  plunder
and  murder


Mutilation
recognised
as  a  legal
punishment


A  party  of  eight  Bedawi  Arabs  had  some  time  previously
visited  Medina  and  embraced  Islam.  The  damp  of  the
climate  affected  their  spleen,  and  for  a  cure  Mohammad
bade  them  join  his  herd  of  milch  camels  grazing  in  the
plain  south  of  Koba,  and  drink  of  their  milk.^  Following  his
advice  they  soon  recovered ;  but  with  returning  strength
they  revived  also  the  lust  of  plunder.  They  drove  off  the
herd,  and  attempted  to  escape.  The  herdsman  pursued  the
plunderers,  but  was  seized  and  barbarously  handled ;  his
hands  and  legs  were  cut  off,  and  thorny  spikes  thrust  into  his
tongue  and  eyes,  till  he  died.  When  tidings  of  this  outrage
reached  Mohammad,  he  despatched  twenty  horsemen  in
pursuit.^  They  surrounded  and  seized  the  robbers,  and
recovered  the  camels  excepting  one,  which  had  been
slaughtered  by  them.  The  captives  were  conducted  to
Mohammad,  who  was  justly  exasperated  at  their  ingratitude
and  savage  treatment  of  his  servant.  They  had  merited
death ;  but  the  mode  in  which  he  inflicted  it  was  unworthy
of  Islam.  Their  arms  and  legs  were  cut  off,  and  their
eyes  put  out.  The  mutilated  sightless  trunks  were  then
impaled  upon  the  plain  of  Al-Ghaba  (where  Mohammad
chanced  himself  to  be),  until  life  was  extinct.  But,  on
reflection,  Mohammad  felt  that  the  punishment  exceeded  the
bounds  of  humanity.  He  accordingly  promulgated  a  law
by  which  capital  sentence  is  limited  to  simple  death  or
crucifixion.  Amputation  of  the  hands  and  feet  is,  however,
sanctioned  as  a  penal  measure ;  and  amputation  of  the  hands
even  enjoined  as  the  proper  penalty  for  theft.  Such  is  the
cruel  law  throughout  Islam  to  the  present  day,  as  sanctioned
by  the  following  passage  : —


Sura  V.  37  Verily the recompense of  those that fight against God and his

Prophet,  and  haste  to  commit  wickedness  in  the  land,  is  that  they  shall
be  slain  or  crucified  ;  or  that  their  hands  and  feet  of  the  opposite  sides  be


^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  998  f  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1559  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  240  f. ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  67  f.

; .  ^  They  were  commanded  by  Kurz  ibn  Jabir,  whom  we  have  seen,
ante,  p.  207,  as  engaged  in  one  of  the  first  raids  against  Medina.  At
what  period  he  was  converted  and  came  to  Medina  is  not  mentioned.
[He  was  one  of  the  Muslims  killed  at  the  taking  of  Mecca.  Ibn  Hisham,
p.  817.]


XVIII.]  ORDINANCES  ON  PENAL  MUTILATION


351


cut  off;  or  that  they  be  banished  from  the  land.  That  shall  be  their
punishment  in  this  Ufe,  and  in  the  life  to  come  they  shall  have  great
torment.  *  *  *

As  regards  the  robber,  male  and  female,  cut  off  the  hands  of  both.^ v.  42


Al-Wakidi  assigns  to  this  period  an  attempt,  under  the
orders  of  Mohammad,  to  assassinate  Abu  Sufyan.^  As  its
cause,  we  are  told  that  a  Bedavvi  had  been  commissioned  by
Abu  Sufyan  on  a  similar  errand  against  Mohammad ;  but
that  the  emissary  was  discovered,  and  confessed  the  object
of  his  mission.  According  to  Ibn  Hisham  (who  makes  no
mention  of  this  latter  circumstance),  the  attempted  assassina-
tion was  ordered  by  Mohammad  in  the  fourth  year  of  the
Hijra,  in  revenge  for  the  execution  of  the  two  captives  taken
at  Ar-Rajr.  Whatever  the  inciting  cause,  there  seems  no
reasonable  doubt  that  a  commission  was  given  by  the  Prophet
to  'Amr  ibn  Omeiya  to  proceed  to  Mecca,  and  compass  the
death  of  Abu  Sufyan.  'Amr  was  recognised  as  he  lurked
near  the  Ka'ba  before  he  could  carry  his  design  into  effect,
and  was  obliged  to  flee  for  his  life.  True,  however,  to  his
profession,  he  claims  the  credit  of  having  assassinated  three
of  the  Koreish  by  the  way,  and  a  fourth  he  brought  prisoner
to  Medina.^

During  this  year  and  the  following,  Mohammad  made
an  important  advance  in  gaining  over  certain  Bedawi
tribes  lying  between  Medina  and  Mecca.  These  did  not,
indeed,  as  yet  make  profession  of  Islam,  but  they  entered
into  friendly  relations ;  and  the  assistance,  or  at  least
neutrality,  of  all  the  tribes  upon  the  road  might  now  be
counted  on.

About  this  time,  ten  men  of  the  Beni  'Abs,  a  small  but
warlike  clan  in  Nejd,  joined  the  faith  and  settled  at  Medina.
They  distinguished  themselves  in  battle  under  the  title  of

^  For  repeated  robberies,  the  hands  and  feet  may  all,  one  after
another,  be  cut  off,  rendering  the  criminal  a  helpless  cripple.  It  may  be
noticed  that  putting  out  of  the  eyes  is  not  recognised  among  the  legal
punishments.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  992  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1437  ff.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  68.

3  He  is  the  same  who,  escaping  from  the  massacre  at  Bi'r  Ma'una,
assassinated  the  two  travellers  for  whom  Mohammad  paid  compensation
(p.  271).  He  is  stated  by  Al-Wakidi  to  have  been  before  Islam  a
'■professional  7\.%sz.'s,'i\n^ ;  so  that  the  people  of  Mecca,  recognising  him,
immediately  understood  what  his  errand  was.


Attempt  to
assassinate
Abu  Sufyan


Bedawi
tribes  gained
over


'The  ten'
of  the  Beni
•Abs


352  SIXTH  YEAR  OF  HIJRA  [chap.  xvii.

'  the  Ten,'  and  Mohammad  gave  them  a  banner,  which
in  the  Syrian  conquests  became  famous  as  the  'Absite
ensign.

Thus  steadily  did  the  influence  of  Mohammad,  partly
through  religious  motives,  and  partly  from  motives  of  rapine
and  conquest,  extend  and  become  consolidated.


CHAPTER XIX

PILGRIMAGE  TO AL-IIODEIBIYAI


Dhu'l-Ka'-da,  A.H.  w.— March,  A.D.  628

Six  years  had  now  passed  since  Mohammad,  and  those  who
emigrated  with  him,  had  seen  their  native  city,  worshipped
at  the  Holy  House,  or  joined  in  the  yearly  pilgrimage,  which
from  childhood  they  had  regarded  as  an  essential  part  of  their
social  and  religious  life.  They  longed  to  revisit  these  scenes,
and  once  more  join  in  the  solemn  rites  of  the  Ka'ba.

No  one  shared  these  feelings  more  earnestly  than  the
Prophet  himself.  It  was,  moreover,  of  great  importance
that  he  should  show  practically  his  attachment  to  the  ancient
faith  of  Mecca.  He  had,  indeed,  in  the  Kor'an,  insisted
upon  that  faith  as  an  indispensable  element  of  Islam ;  up-
braided Koreish  for  obstructing  the  approach  of  pious
worshippers  to  the  House  of  God ;  and  denounced  them,
because  of  their  idolatrous  practices,  as  not  its  rightful
guardians,  in  such  words  as  these : —

And  what  have  they  to  urge  that  God  should  not  chastise  them,  seeing
that  they  have  hindered  His  servants  from  the  sacred  Temple  ;  and  they
are  not  the  guardians  thereof, — verily,  none  are  its  guardians  save  the
pious.  But  the  greater  part  of  them  do  not  consider.  And  their  prayers
at  the  Temple  are  nought  but  whistling  through  their  fingers,  and  clap-
ping of  their  hands. Taste,  therefore,  the  punishment  of  your  unbelief.

Yet  something  more  than  this  was  needed  to  show  his
attachment  to  the  ancestral  faith  and  observances  of  Koreish.
If  he  made  no  effort  to  visit  the  Holy  Places,  and  fulfil  the
sacred  rites,  he  would  lay  himself  justly  open  to  the  charge
of  lukewarmness  and  neglect.  Precept  must  needs  be
supported  by  example.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  740  ff. ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1528  fif.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  241  ff.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  69  ff.


Anxiety  to
perform
pilgrimage
to  Mecca


Political
considera-
tions


Sura  viii.
34  f.


354  AL-HODEIBIYA  [chap.

Inducements Musing thus, Mohammad had a vision in the night.

for  making FoUowed  by  his  people,  he  dreamed  that  he  entered  Mecca

grimage  in in  security,  and  having  made  the  circuit  of  the  Ka'ba,  and

'^^"^^^''^^' slain the victims, completed thus the ceremonies of the

pilgrimage. The  dream  was  communicated  to  his  followers,

and  every  one  longed  for  its  realisation. It  foretold  nothing

of  fighting or contest ;  the entrance  was  to be  quiet  and

unopposed. Now  the  sacred  month  of  Dhu'l-Ka'da  was  at

hand,  in which observance of  the Lesser  Pilgrimage  was

specially  meritorious. There  would,  moreover,  be  less  chance

of  collision  with  hostile  tribes,  than  at  the  Greater  Pilgrimage

in the succeeding  month. Furthermore,  in the month  of

Dhu'l-Ka'da, war was unlawful throughout Arabia, much

more  within  the  inviolate  precincts  of  Mecca. If  Mohammad

and his followers,  therefore,  should at this  time  approach

the Ka'ba  in  the  peaceful  garb  of  pilgrims,  Koreish  would

be  bound  by  every  pledge  of  national  faith  to  leave  them

unmolested. On the other hand, should Koreish oppose

their  entrance,  the  blame  would  rest  with  them ;  and  even

so,  the  strength  of  the  pilgrim  band  would  secure  its  safety, —

Surrounding  if  not  the  victory. So  soon  as  this  was  resolved  upon,  the

tribes  invited  (^jtizens  as  well  as  Refugees  responded  to  the  call,  and  made

to  join,  but  °  ^ _ ^  '

most  decline  haste to  prepare  themselves  for  pilgrimage. To  swell  the

camp  and  render  it  more  imposing,  the  Arab  tribes  around,

who had entered into  friendly  relations with  Mohammad,

were  also  summoned. But  few  responded  to  the  call ;  there

was,  in fact, little  inducement for them on the score of

booty,  and most part alleged that their occupations  and

families  prevented  them  from  leaving  home.^

Mohammad  Early  in Dhu'l-Ka'da, therefore, arrangements for  the

f  "u  wers  set  Journey  being  now  completed,  Mohammad  entered  his  house,

out  from bathed himself,  and  put on the  two  pieces  of  cloth  which

A^n'^vr constitute  the  pilgrim  garb. He  then  mounted Al-Kaswa,

February, and led the  cavalcade  of  1,500 pilgrims to Dhu'l-Huleifa,

A.D.  628 ^^^  gj.g^  stage  on the road  to  Mecca. There  they  halted,

and  Mohammad  with  the  rest  consecrated  themselves  to  the

service by  repeatedly  uttering the cry,  Labbeik !  Labbeik !

which  signifies,  '  Here  am  I,  O  Lord  ! Here  am  I  ! ' The

victims  were  then  set  apart  for  sacrifice ;  their  heads  having

^  A  few  of  the  Beni  Aslam  joined,  and  they  are  consequently  reckoned
among  the  '  Refugees.'


XIX.] KOREISH  OPPOSE  MOHAMMAD'S  ENTRANCE 355


been  turned  towards  Mecca,  ornaments  were  hung  about
their  necks,  and  a  mark  affixed  upon  their  right  sides.
Seventy  camels  were  thus  devoted  ;  amongst  them  was  the
camel  of  Abu  Jahl,  taken  on  the  field  of  Bedr.  This  done,
the  pilgrims  moved  forward  by  the  ordinary  stages.  A  troop
of  twenty  horse  marched  in  advance  to  give  notice  of  danger.
The  pilgrims  carried  no  arms  but  such  as  are  allowed  by
custom  to  the  traveller,  namely,  each  a  sheathed  sword,  a
bow  and  well-filled  quiver.  The  Prophet  took  his  wife  Um
Selama  with  him.

Tidings  of  Mohammad's  approach  soon  reached  Mecca ;
and,  notwithstanding  the  pious  object  and  unwarlike  attitude
of  the  pilgrims,  filled  Koreish  with  apprehension.  They
did  not  credit  their  peaceful  professions,  and  suspected
treachery.  The  citizens  of  Mecca,  joined  by  the  surrounding
tribes,  were  quickly  under  arms,  and  took  up  ground  on  the
Medina  road,  resolved  to  perish  rather  than  allow  Mohammad
to  enter.  A  body  of  200  horse,  under  Khalid  and  'Ikrima,
son  of  Abu  Jahl,  was  pushed  forward  in  advance.

Mohammad  had  nearly  reached  'Osfan,  the  second  stage
from  Mecca,  when  a  scout  returned  with  this  intelligence :
*  Koreish,'  he  said,  '  are  encamped  at  Dhu  Towa,  clothed
in  panthers'  skins  ;^  their  wives  and  little  ones  are  with
them  ;  and  they  have  sworn  to  die  rather  than  let  thee  pass.'
Shortly  after,  the  Meccan  cavalry  came  in  sight,  and
Mohammad's  horse  went  forward  to  hold  them  in  check.
Further  advance  on  the  high  road  was  now  impossible
without  a  battle,  and  for  this  Mohammad  was  not  yet
prepared.  He  halted,  and,  having  procured  a  guide,  turned
to  the  right  by  a  route  safe  from  the  enemy's  horse,  and,
after  a  fatiguing  march  through  devious  and  rugged  path-
ways, reached  Al-Hodeibiya,  an  open  space  on  the  verge  of  the
sacred  territory  encircling  Mecca.  Here  his  camel  stopped,
and,  planting  her  fore  legs  firmly  on  the  ground,  refused  to
stir  another  step.  '  She  is  weary,'  said  the  people,  as  they
urged  her  forward.  '  Nay,'  exclaimed  Mohammad,  '  Al-
Kaswa  is  not  weary ;  but  the  same  hand  restraineth  her  as
aforetime  held  back  the  Elephant,' — alluding  to  the  invasion
of  Abraha. '  By the  Lord ! '  he continued,  '  no  request  of

1  Expressive  symbolically  of  the  fixed  resolution  of  Koreish  to  fight
to  the  last,  like  beasts  of  prey.


Koreish
oppose
advance  of
Mohammad


Mohammad
leaves  road,
and  encamps
at  Al-
Hodeibiya


356  AL-HODEIBIYA  [chap.

Koreish  this  day,  for  the  honour  of  the  Holy  Place,  shall
be  denied  by  me.'  So  he  alighted,  and  all  the  people  with
him,  at  Al-Hodeibiya.  Some  wells  were  on  the  spot,  but,
being  choked  with  sand,  there  was  little  or  no  water  in  them.
Mohammad,  taking  an  arrow  from  his  quiver  (the  only
implement  at  hand),  made  one  of  his  followers  descend  a
well,  and  with  it  scrape  away  the  obstructing  sand.
Abundance  of  water  soon  accumulated.^
Negotiations  The  road  from  Al-Hodeibiya  led  by  a  circuitous  route  to
between lower  Mecca.^ Koreish  no  sooner  learned  that  the  pilgrims

Ivoreish  *

and  Moham-  had  taken  this  direction,  than  they  fell  back  on  the  city  for
'"^^  its  defence,  and  began  sending  deputations  to  ascertain  the

real  intentions  of  Mohammad.  Al-Hodeibiya  being  only
a  short  stage  distant,  the  communications  were  rapid  and
frequent.  Budeil,  a  Khoza'ite  chief,  with  a  party  of  his  tribe,
was  the  first  to  approach.  He  acquainted  Mohammad  with
the  excited  state  of  Koreish,  and  their  resolve  to  defend
the  city  to  the  last.  The  Prophet  replied,  that  it  was  not
for  war  he  had  come  forth :  '  I  have  no  other  design,'  he
said,  'but  to  perform  the  pilgrimage  of  the  Holy  House:  and
whosoever  hindereth  us  therefrom,  we .  shall  fight  against
them.'  'Orwa,  a  chief  from  At-Ta'if,  and  son-in-law  of  Abu
Sufyan,  was  the  next  ambassador.  He  came,  saying  that
the  people  of  Mecca  were  desperate.  *  They  will  not  suffer
this  rabble  of  thine  to  approach  the  city ;  I  swear  that  even
now  I  see  thee  as  it  were,  by  the  morrow,  deserted  by  them
all.'  At  this  Abu  Bekr  started  up  and  warmly  resented  the
imputation.  'Orwa,  not  heeding  him,  became  still  more
earnest  in  his  speech,  and  (according  to  the  familiar  Bedawi
custom)  stretched  forth  his  hand  to  take  hold  of  Mohammad's
beard.  '  Back  ! '  cried  a  bystander,  striking  his  arm.  '  Hold
thy  hands  from  off  the  Prophet  of  God.!'  'And  who  is
this?'  said  'Orwa,  surprised  at  the  interposition of  a red-

^  This  has  been  magnified  into  a  miracle.  As  soon  as  the  arrow  was
planted  in  the  hitherto  empty  well,  the  fountain  gushed  up  so  rapidly  that
the  people  sitting  on  the  brink  could  draw  water  at  ease.  By  another
account,  Mohammad  spat  into  the  well,  on  which  a  spring  immediately
bubbled  up.  According  to  a  third  tradition,  he  thrust  his  hand  into  a
vessel,  on  which  the  water  poured  forth  as  it  were  from  between  his
fingers,  and  all  drank  therefrom  :  '  The  stream  would  have  sufficed  for  a
hundred  thousand  people.'

"  It  probably  joined  the  Jidda  road,  some  little  distance  from  the  city.


XIX.]  NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  KOREISH  357

haired  ungainly  youth.  *  It  is  thy  nephew's  son,  Al-Moghlra.'
*  O  ungrateful ! '  he  exclaimed  (alluding  to  his  having  paid
compensation  for  certain  murders  committed  by  his  nephew),
'  it  is  but  as  yesterday  that  I  redeemed  thy  life.'  These  and
other  scenes  at  the  interview  struck  'Orwa  with  a  deep  sense
of  the  reverence  and  devotion  of  the  Muslims  towards  their
Prophet ;  and  this  he  endeavoured  to  impress  upon  Koreish,
when  he  carried  back  to  them  a  message  resembling  that
taken  by  Budeil.  But  Koreish  were  firm.  Whatever  his
intentions,  Mohammad  should  not  approach  the  city  with
any  show  of  force,  and  thus  humble  them  in  the  eyes  of  all
Arabia.  'Tell  him,'  they  said,  'that  this  year  he  must  go
back ;  but  in  the  year  following  he  may  come,  and  having
entered  Mecca  then  perform  the  pilgrimage.'  One  of  their
messengers  was  chief  of  the  Bedawi  tribes  around  Mecca.
The  goodly  row  of  victims,  with  their  sacrificial  ornaments,
and  the  marks  of  having  been  long  tied  up  for  this  pious
object,  at  once  convinced  him  of  the  sincerity  of  Mohammad's
peaceful  professions.  But  Koreish,  on  his  return,  refused  to
listen.  '  Thou  art  a  simple  Arab  of  the  desert,'  they  said,
*and  knowest  not  the  devices  of  other  men.'  The  Bedawi
chief  was  enraged  at  the  slight,  and  swore  that,  if  they
continued  to  oppose  the  advance  of  Mohammad,  he  would
retire  with  all  his  Arabs.  The  threat  alarmed  Koreish.
'Have  patience  for  a  little  while,'  they  said,  'until  we  can
make  such  terms  as  are  needful  for  our  security.'  Negotia-
tions were  then  in  earnest  opened.

The  first  messenger  from  the  Muslim  camp  Koreish  had  Deputation
seized  and  treated  roughly;  they  maimed  the  camel  on  ^o  Koreish"
which  he  rode,  and  even  threatened  his  life.  But  the  feelincr
being  now  more  pacific,  Mohammad  desired  'Omar  to  go  as
his  ambassador.  'Omar  excused  himself  on  account  of  the
personal  enmity  of  Koreish ;  he  had,  moreover,  no  influential
relatives  in  the  city  who  could  shield  him  from  danger ;  and
he  pointed  to  'Othman,  who  belonged  to  one  of  the  most
powerful  families  in  Mecca,  as  a  fitter  envoy.  'Othman  con-
sented, and  was  at  once  despatched.  On  entering  the  city,
he  received  the  protection  of  a  cousin,  and  went  straightway
to  Abu  Sufyan  and  the  other  chiefs.  '  We  come,'  said  'Oth-
man, 'to  visit  the  Holy  House,  to  honour  it,  and  to  perform
worship  there. We  have  brought  victims  with  us,  and  after


358


THE  PLEDGE  OF  THE  TREE


[CHAP.


The  Pledge
of  the  Tree
on  report  of
'Othman's
murder


Treaty
between
Mohammad
and  Koreish


slaying  them  we  shall  depart  in  peace.'  They  replied  that
•Othman,  if  he  chose,  might  visit  the  Ka'ba  and  worship
there  ;  but  as  for  Mohammad,  they  had  sworn  that  this  year
he  should  not  enter  the  precincts  of  their  city.  'Othman
declined  the  offer,  and  retired  carrying  their  message  to  the
camp.

During  his  absence,  there  was  great  excitement  at
Al-Hodeibiya.  Some  considerable  delay  having  occurred,  a
report  gained  currency  that  he  had  been  murdered  at  Mecca.
Anxiety  and  alarm  overspread  the  camp.  Mohammad,  him-
self began  to  suspect  treachery ;  taking  his  stand  under  the
thick  shade  of  an  acacia  tree,  and  surrounded  by  the  whole
body  of  the  pilgrims,  he  required  a  pledge  from  them  of
faithful  service,  and  that  they  would  stand  by  'Othman  to  the
death.  When  all  had  taken  thus  the  solemn  oath,  striking
each  one  the  palm  of  his  hand  on  that  of  the  Prophet,  he
himself  struck  his  own  right  hand  upon  his  left  in  token  that
he  would  stand  by  his  absent  son-in-law.  While  war  and
revenge  thus  breathed  throughout  the  pilgrim  camp,  their
fears  were  suddenly  relieved  by  the  reappearance  of  'Othman.
But  '  the  Pledge  of  the  Tree '  is  a  scene  to  which  the  Prophet
ever  after  loved  to  revert ;  for  here  the  strong  feelings  of
devotion  and  sympathy  between  him  and  his  followers  had
found  fitting  and  ardent  expression.  Their  martial  spirit
and  religious  fervour  had  been  excited  to  the  highest
pitch ;  and  they  were  prepared  at  once  to  rush  upon  the
enemy  with  resistless  onset.  It  was  one  of  those  romantic
occasions  so  congenial  to  an  Arab's  spirit,  and  which  survives
for  ever  in  his  memory.

After  some  further  interchange  of  messages,  Koreish
deputed  Suheil,^  and  other  representatives,  with  power  to
conclude  a  treaty  of  peace.  The  conference  was  long,  and
the  discussion,  especially  on  the  part  of  'Omar,  warm.  But
at  last  the  terms  were  settled.  A  ten  years'  truce,  on  the
one  hand,  secured  the  safety  of  the  Syrian  caravans ;  while,
on  the  other,  it  gave  free  liberty  to  converts  passing  over  to
the  Muslim  side.  Mohammad  summoned  'All  to  write  from
his  dictation. And  thus  he  began  : —

'  In  THE  NAME  OF  GOD,  MOST  GRACIOUS  AND  MERCIFUL  ! '
— '  Stop  1 ' said Suheil. '  As for God,  we  know  Him  ;  but

^  See  the  incident  regarding  hiin  after  the  battle  of  Bedr,  p.  233.


XIX.]  TREATY  WITH KOREISH  359

this  new  name,  we  know  it  not.  Say,  as  we  have  always
said,  In  tJiy  name,  O  God!'  Mohammad  yielded.  'Write,'  he
said —

'  In  thy  name,  O  God  !  These  are  the  conditions  of  peace
between  Mohammad  the  Prophet  of  God  and' — '  Stop  again  !'
interposed  Suheil.  '  If  thou  wert  what  thou  sayest,  I  had
not  taken  up  arms  against  thee.  Write,  as  the  custom  is,
thine  own  name  and  thy  father's  name.'  '  Write,  then,'  con-
tinued Mohammad,  calmly, — ^between  Mohammad  son  of
'Abdallah,  and  Snheil  son  of  'Amr.  War  shall  be  suspended
for  ten  years.  Whosoever  wisheth  to  join  Mohammad,  or
enter  into  treaty  with  him,  shall  have  liberty  to  do  so;  and
likewise  whosoever  wisheth  to  join  Koreish,  or  enter  into
treaty  with  them.  If  one  goeth  over  to  Mohammad  without
the  permission  of  his  guardian,  he  shall  be  sent  back  to  his
guardian  ;  but  should  any  of  the  followers  of  Mohammad
return  to  Koreish,  they  shall  not  be  sent  back.  Mohammad
shall  retire  this  year  without  entering  the  City.  In  the
coming  year,  Mohammad  may  visit  Mecca,  he  and  his  fol-
lowers, for  three  days,  during  which  Koreish  shall  retire  and
leave  the  City  to  them.  But  they  may  not  enter  it  with  any
weapons,  save  those  of  the  traveller,  namely,  to  each  a  sheathed
sword.  The  witnesses  hereof  are  Abu  Bekr,'  &c.^  A  copy  Deputies  of
duly  attested,  was  made  over  to  Suheil  and  his  comrades,  who  ?°'^^'j^
taking  it,  departed. The  original  was  kept  by  Mohammad.

Though  unable  to  enter  Mecca,  Mohammad  resolved  to Mohammad
complete  such  ceremonies  of  the  pilgrimage  as  the  nature  of  fo"io^ers
the  spot  admitted. So  he  sacrificed the  victims,  and  con- sacrifice  their
eluded  the  solemnities  by  shaving  his  head. The  rest  of  the ^''^'''"^
pilgrims  having  followed  his  example,^  the  assembly  broke

1  Here  follow  eight  other  names,  viz. — 'Omar,  'Abd  ar-Rahman,  Sa'd
ibn  Abi  Wakkas,  'Othman,  Abu  'Obeida,  Mohammad  ibn  Maslama,
Huweitib  ibn  'Abd  al-'Ozza,  and  Mikraz  ibn  Hafs  (the  last  two  Koreish),
and  below  the  signatures  these  words  :  '  The  upper  part  of  this  was
written  by  'Ali'  (meaning  probably  the  text  of  the  treaty  above  the
signatures).

2  Some  cut  their  hair  instead  of  shaving  it.  There  is  a  great  array  of
tradition  to  prove  that  Mohammad  blessed  the  '  Cutters,'  as  well  as  the
'  Shavers,'  of  their  hair.  Among  the  miracles  mentioned  on  the  occasion
is  this,  'that  the  Lord  sent  a  strong  wind  which  swept  the  hair  of  the
Pilgrims  into  the  sacred  Territory,'  within  a  stone's  throw  of  the  camp  ; —
thus  signifying  acceptance  of  the  rite,  notwithstanding  its  performance  on
common  ground.


36o


PILGRIMAGE  TO  AL-HODEIBIYA


[chap.


Although
people  dis-
appointed,
treaty  gave
Mohammad
great  ad-
vantages


up,  and,  after  a  stay  at  Al-Hodeibiya  of  ten  or  fifteen  days,
began  their  homeward  march.

The  people,  led  by  the  Vision  to  anticipate  an  un-
opposed visit  to  the  Ka'ba,  were  crestfallen  at  the  abortive
result  of  their  long  journey.  But,  in  truth,  a  great  step
had  been  gained  by  Mohammad.  His  political  status,
as  an  equal  and  independent  Power,  was  acknowledged  by
the  treaty :  the  ten  years'  truce  would  afford  opportunity
and  time  for  the  new  religion  to  expand,  and  to  force
its  claims  upon  the  conviction  of  Koreish ;  while  con-
quest, material  as  well  as  spiritual,  might  be  pursued  on
every  other  side.  The  stipulation  that  no  one  under  the
protection  of  a  guardian  should  leave  Koreish  without  his
guardian's  consent,  though  unpopular  at  Medina,  was  in
accordance  with  the  principles  of  Arabian  society ;  and
the  Prophet  had  sufficient  confidence  in  the  loyalty  of  his
own  people  and  the  superior  attractions  of  Islam,  to  fear
no  ill  effect  from  the  counter  clause  that  none  should  be
delivered  up  who  might  desert  his  standard.  Above  all,
it  was  a  great  and  manifest  success  that  free  permission
was  conceded  to  visit  Mecca  in  the  following  year,  and
for  three  days  occupy  the  city  undisturbed.  A  Revelation
appeared  accordingly,  to  place  in  a  clear  light  this  view
of  the  treaty,  and  raise  the  drooping  spirits  of  the  pilgrims.
At  the  close  of  the  first  march,  the  pilgrims  might  be  seen
hurrying  across  the  plain,  urging  their  camels  from  all
directions,  and  crowding  round  the  Prophet.  *  Inspiration
hath  descended  on  him,'  passed  from  mouth  to  mouth
throughout  the  camp.  Standing  upright  upon  his  camel,
Mohammad  recited  the  Sura  entitled  '  The  Victory,'  which
opens  thus : —

Sura  xlviii.  Verily  We  have  ^iven  unto  thee  an  evident  Victory  ; —

I  f.  That  God  may  pardon  thee  the  Sin  that  is  past  and  that  which  is  to

come,  and  fulfil  His  favour  upon  thee,  and  lead  thee  in  the  right  way  ;

and  that  God  may  assist  thee  with  a  glorious  assistance.


In  Kor'an  it
is  styled  a
Vtciorv


Bedawin
denounced
for  not
joining
pilgrimage


After  this  opening  paean,  and  reference  to  future  recom-
pense in  heaven  and  hell,  Mohammad  proceeds  with  a
scathing  denunciation  of  the  Arabs  of  the  desert,  who,  by
false  pretences  had  excused  themselves  from  the  pilgrimage.
Their  brave  words  would  shortly  be  tested  in  battle  with  '  a


XIX.] DENUNCIATION  OF  MALINGERING  BEDAWiN 361

people  terrible  in  vvar.'^  Meanwhile,  as  the  penalty  for
malingering  (a  penalty  hateful  to  the  Bedawin),  they  are
forbidden  to  join,  or  share  in  the  plunder  of  any  marauding
excursion  whatsoever : —

The  Arabs  who  stayed  behind  will  say  to  thee, — Our  Possessions  and  Sura  xlviii.
our  Families  engaged  us  j  wiierefore  ask  thou  Pardon  for  us.  They  say  ^  ^  ^•
that  with  their  tongues  which  is  not  in  their  hearts  ; — Say  ; — And  who
could  procure  for  you  any  other  thing  from  God,  if  He  intended  against
you  Evil, — or  if  He  intended  for  you  Good.  Verily  God  is  acquainted
with  that  which  ye  do.  Truly  ye  thought  that  the  Apostle  and  the
Believers  would  not  return  to  their  Families  again  for  ever  ;  this  thought
was  decked  out  in  your  hearts  ;  ye  imagined  an  evil  Imagination  ;  and
ye  are  a  corrupt  people.  *  *  *  Those  that  stayed  behind  will  say  when  v.  15
ye  go  forth  again  for  the  Spoil,  Suffer  us  to  follow  you.  They  seek  to
change  the  word  of  God.  Say  ; — Ye  shall  not  follow  us  !  for  thus  hath
God  already  spoken.  And  they  will  say  ; — Nay  but  ye  grudge  us  (a  share
in  the  booty).  By  no  means.  They  are  a  People  that  understandeth
little.  Say  unto  the  Bedawin  that  stayed  behind,  Ye  shall  hereafter  be
called  out  against  a  People  of  great  might  in  war,  with  whom  ye  shall
fight,  or  else  they  shall  profess  Islam.  Then  if  ye  obey,  God  will  give
you  a  fair  reward  ;  but  if  ye  turn  back  as  ye  have  turned  back  heretofore.
He  shall  chastise  you  with  a  grievous  chastisement.


The  pilgrims  who  took  the  solemn  oath  under  the  Acacia Further
tree  are  then  applauded  for  their faithfulness. It  was  the "j^g^ex^peji.
hand  of  God  himself,  not  the  hand  of  His  Apostle  merely, tion  in  the
which  then  was  struck.^ Victory  and  great  spoil  should  be •  °^  ^"
their  reward  : —

Verily  God  was  well  pleased  with  the  Believers,  when  they  pledged Siira  xlviiL
themselves  to  Thee  under  the  Tree. He  knew  what  was  in  their  hearts, ^° *
and  He  caused  Tranquillity^  to  descend  upon  them,  and  granted  them  a
speedy  Victory  ; — And  Spoils  in  abundance,  which  they  shall  take.* God
hath  promised  you  great  Spoil,  which  ye  shall  seize  ;  and  He  hath  sent

^  The  meaning  apparently  is  that  these  Arabs  would  first  have  to
prove  themselves  in  real  and  severe  fighting  (perhaps  in  Syria  or  else-
where) before  they  were  again  allowed  to  join  in  easy  expeditions  for
booty.

2  The  hand  of  God  is  upon  their  hands,  v.  10.

2  Seklna  (Shechina),  Divine  influence  overshadowing  the  heart.
According  to  Sprenger,  the  tree  having  been  mentioned  in  the  Kor'an,
'Omar  had  it  cut  down,  lest  it  should  become  an  object  of  worship.

*  Mohammad  had  no  doubt  Kheibar,  and  other  expeditions  north-
ward, in  his  mind's  eye  at  the  moment :  the  prospect  also  would  no
doubt  aggravate  the  chagrin  of  the  Bedawin  at  the  loss  of  so  fine  a
prize.


362


AL-HODEIBIYA


[chap.


V.  24


Nature  and
effects  of
the  'Victory,


this  (truce)  beforehand.  He  hath  restrained  the  hands  of  men  from  you,
that  it  may  be  a  sign  unto  the  Believers,  and  that  He  may  guide  you  into
the  right  way.  And  yet  other  (Spoils  are  prepared  for  you),  over  which
ye  have  as  yet  no  power.  But  God  hath  encompassed  them  ;  for  God
is  over  all  things  powerful.  If  the  Unbelievers  had  fought  against  you,
verily  they  had  turned  their  backs.  *  *  *  It  is  God  that  restrained  their
hands  from  you,  and  your  hands  from  them,  in  the  valley  of  Mecca,  after
that  He  had  already  made  you  superior  to  them  ;  and  God  observed  that
which  ye  did.  These  are  they  which  disbelieve,  which  hindered  you
from  visiting  the  holy  Temple  ;  and  the  Victims  also,  which  were  kept
back,  so  that  they  reached  not  their  destination.  And  had  it  not  been
for  believing  men,  and  believing  women,  whom  ye  know  not,  and  whom
ye  might  have  trampled  upon,  and  blame  might  on  their  account
unwittingly  have  fallen  upon  you  (God  had  not  held  thee  back  from
entering  Mecca ;  but  he  did  so)  that  God  might  cause  such  as  He
pleaseth  to  enter  into  His  Mercy.  If  these  had  been  separable,  verily
We  had  punished  those  of  them  (the  inhabitants  of  Mecca)  that  dis-
believe,^ with  a  grievous  punishment.  When  the  Unbelievers  raised
scruples  in  their  own  hearts, — the  scruples  of  the  Ignorance, — then  God
sent  down  Tranquillity  upon  His  Apostle,  and  upon  the  Believers,  and
fixed  in  them  the  word  of  Piety  ;  ^  and  they  were  the  best  entitled  to  it,
and  worthy  of  the  same  ; — for  God  comprehendeth  all  things.

Now  hath  God  verified  unto  His  Apostle  the  Vision  in  truth  ; — Ye
shall  surely  enter  the  Holy  Temple,  if  it  please  God,  in  security,  having
your  heads  shaven  and  your  hair  cut.  Fear  ye  not :  for  He  knoweth
that  which  ye  know  not.  And  He  hath  appointed  for  you  after  this  a
speedy  Victory  besides.  It  is  He  who  hath  sent  His  Apostle  with
Guidance,  and  the  true  Religion, — that  He  may  exalt  it  above  every
other.

The  '  evident  Victory,'  with  which  the  SiJra  opens,  has
I  puzzled  many  of  the  commentators,  who  apply  it  to  other
occasions ;  but  their  applications  are  all  far-fetched.  When
the  passage  was  ended,  a  bystander  inquired  :  '  What !  is
this  the.  Victory?'  'Yea,'  Mohammad  replied,  'by  Him  in
whose  hand  is  my  breath,  it  is  a  Victory.'  Another  reminded
him  of  the  promise  that  they  should  enter  Mecca  unmolested.
'  True ;  the  Lord  indeed  hath  promised  this,'  said  the
Prophet ;  'but  did  He  ever  promise  it  for  the  present  year?'
The  comments  of  Az-Zuhri,  though  somewhat  exaggerated,

^  That  is,  the  unbelieving  Koreish.  Mohammad  thus  makes  it
appear  that  there  were  numerous  Believers  at  Mecca  unknown  to  him,
and  that  God  held  him  back  from  attacking  Mecca  lest  these  should  have
been  involved  in  the  common  destruction.

2  This  refers  to  the  words  in  the  preamble  of  the  treaty  objected  to  by
Koreish,  and  is  in  efifect  an  apology  for  having  yielded  to  Suheil  in
respect  of  the  epithets  there  used.


XIX.]  EFFECTS  OF  THE  TRUCE  363

are  much  to  the  purpose.  '  There  was  no  previous  Victory,'
he  says,  '  in  Islam,  greater  than  this.  On  all  other  occasions
there  was  fighting  :  but  here  war  was  laid  aside,  tranquillity
and  peace  restored  ;  the  one  party  henceforward  met  and
conversed  freely  with  the  other,  and  there  was  no  man  of
sense  or  judgment  amongst  the  idolaters  who  was  not  led
thereby  to  join  Islam.  And  truly  in  the  two  years  that
followed,  as  many  persons  entered  the  Faith  as  there  be-
longed to  it  altogether  before,  or  even  a  greater  number.*
'And  the  proof  of  this,'  adds  Ibn  Hisham,  'is  that,  whereas
Mohammad  went  forth  to  Al-Hodeibiya  with  only  fifteen
hundred  men,  he  was  followed  two  years  later,  in  the  attack
on  Mecca,  by  ten  thousand.'  ^

One  of  the  first  effects  of  the  treaty  was  that  the  tribe  of  Beni  Khoza'a
Khoza'a, who had long shown favour to  the new  faith, alliance  with
entered  immediately  into  alliance  with Mohammad. The Mohammad
Beni  Bekr,  another  tribe  resident  in  the  vicinity  of  Mecca,  on
the  other  hand,  adhered  to  Koreish. The  stipulation  for  the
surrender  of  converts  at  the  instance  of  their  guardians  soon
gave rise to one or  two peculiar incidents. The son of  Suheil's  son
Suheil,  the  representative  of  Koreish  who  had  just  concluded ^^^^^^  ^^
the  treaty,  rushed  into  the  Muslim  camp  at  Al-Hodeibiya,
and  desired  to  follow  Mohammad.^ But  his  father  claimed
him  under  the  compact  already  ratified,  and,  although  the
lad  earnestly  remonstrated,  the  claim  was  admitted, '  Have
patience,  Abu  Jandal ! '  said  Mohammad  to  him  as  he  was
dragged  away, — '  put  thy  trust  in  the  Lord. He  will  work

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  751.  The  truth  is,  that  tradition  depreciates  the
treaty  in  the  light  of  subsequent  events.  It  appeared  strange  in  after
days  that  he,  who  within  two  years  was  supreme  at  Mecca,  could  now  be
suing  for  permission  to  enter  it,  and  that  he  was  not  only  satisfied  with
the  scanty  terms  obtained,  but  could  even  call  them  a  'Victory.'  His
present  weakness  was  overlooked  in  the  consideration  of  later  triumphs.
Hence  the  vaunting  speech  at  Al-Hodeibiya  put  into  'Omar's  mouth,
that  'had  these  terms  been  settled  by  any  other  than  by  Mohammad
himself, — even  by  a  commander  of  his  appointment,  he  had  scorned  to
listen  to  them ' ;  and  the  indignant  conversation  he  is  said  to  have  held
with  Abu  Bekr:  'What!  Is  not  Mohammad  the  Prophet  of  God?
Are  we  not  Muslims  ?  Are  not  they  Infidels  ?  Why  then  is  our  divine
religion  to  be  thus  lowered?'  Hence  also  the  alleged  unwillingness  of
the  people  to  kill  their  victims  at  Al-Hodeibiya  ;  for,  says  Ibn  Hisham,
they  were  like  men  dying  of  vexation.

2  At-Tabari,  i.  1547  ff.


364  AL-HODEIBIYA  [chap.

out  for  thee,  and  for  others  like-minded  with  thee,  a  way  of

deliverance.'  ^
Abu  Basir  Some  little  time  after  Mohammad had returned  home,

gathers  band  ^j^^  Baslr.  a  voung  convert,  effected  his  escape  from  Mecca,

of  marauders  '  ,_ o  1  •

and  harasses  and  appeared  at  Medma.^  His  guardians  sent  two  servants
Koreish  ^j^j^  ^  letter  to  bring  the  deserter  back.  The  obligation  of
surrender  was  at  once  admitted,  and  Abu  Baslr  was  led
away.  But  he  had  travelled  only  a  few  miles,  when  he  seized
the  sword  of  one  of  the  servants  and  slew  him.  The  other
fled  back  to  Medma  ;  Abu  Baslr  himself  followed,  the  naked
sword  in  his  hand  still  reeking  with  blood.  Both  soon
reached  the  presence  of  Mohammad  ;  the  servant  to  complain
of  the  murder,  Abu  Baslr  to  plead  for  his  freedom.  The
youth  contended  that  as  the  Prophet  had  once  for  all  fulfilled
the  letter  of  the  treaty  in  delivering  him  up,  he  was  now  free
to  remain  behind.  Mohammad  gave  no  direct  reply.  His
answer  was  enigmatical ;  but  after  an  exclamation  in  praise
of  his  bravery,^  he  added  aside:  *  What  a  kindler  of  war,  if
he  had  but  with  him  a  body  of  adherents  !  *  Thus  encouraged,
Abu  Baslr  quitted  Medina  and,  accompanied  by  five  other
Meccan  youths,  took  up  his  position  by  the  seashore  on  the
caravan  road  to  Syria.  The  words  of  Mohammad  were  not
long  in  becoming  known  at  Mecca,  and  the  restless  youth  of
Koreish,  receiving  them  as  a  suggestion  to  follow  the  same
example,  set  out  to  join  Abu  Baslr,  who  was  soon  surrounded
with  about  seventy  followers  desperate  as  himself.  They
waylaid  every  caravan  from  Mecca  (for  since  the  truce,  trafific
with  Syria  had  again  sprung  up)  and  spared  the  life  of  no
one. Koreish  were  at  length  so  harassed  by  these  attacks,

^  The  story  is  told  with  much  over-colouring.  Abu  Jandal  came  up
just  as  the  treaty  was  completed,  having  escaped  from  Mecca  in  his
chains.  His  father  beat  him  and  dragged  him  away.  He  screamed
aloud  to  the  Muslims  to  save  him  :  but  Mohammad  said  that  he  could
not  diverge  from  the  terms  of  the  treaty  just  concluded.  'Omar  walked
by  the  lad  as  he  was  being  led  back,  and  comforted  him  with  such  words
as  these  :  '  The  blood  of  these  infidels  is  no  better  than  the  blood  of
dogs.'  The  whole  story  is  so  exaggerated,  that  it  is  difficult  to  say  what
degree  of  truth  there  is  in  it.  But  it  must  have  had  some  foundation  on
fact.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  751  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1551  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  261  f.

^  'Alas  for  his  mother  !'  signifying  that  his  bravery  would  surely  lead
him  to  be  killed  in  some  daring  conflict.


XIX.] WOMEN  NOT  SURRENDERED  UNDER  TRUCE 365

that  they  soh'cited  the  interference  of  Mohammad,  and,  on
condition  that  the  outrages  were  stopped,  waived  their  right
to  have  the  deserters  delivered  up.  Mohammad  acceded  to
the  request,  and  summoned  the  marauders  to  desist.  Abu
BasTr  was  on  his  death-bed  when  he  received  the  order ;  but
the  rest  returned  and  took  up  their  abode  at  Medlna.i

The  stipulation for  the  surrender  of  deserters  made  no Rule  as  to
distinction  as  to  sex.2 A  female  having  fled  to  Medina,  her  gg'^Joi^''*'
brothers  followed  and demanded  her  restoration  under  the  Mecca  to
terms of truce. Mohammad demurred. The Oracle was ^^'^^^^
called in,  and it  gave  judgment  in  favour  of  the  woman.
Women  who  came  over  to  Medina  were  to  be  '  tried,'  and,  if
their profession was found sincere, to be retained. The
unbelief of their husbands had, in fact, dissolved their
marriage ; they  now  might legally  contract fresh nuptials
with  Believers,  provided  only  that  restitution  were  made  of
any  sums  expended  by  their  former  husbands  as  dower  upon
them. The  marriage  bond  was  similarly  annulled  between
Believers and their wives who had remained behind at
Mecca;  —  their dowers, moreover, might be reckoned in
adjusting  the payments  due  to  Koreish  on  account  of  the
women  retained at  Medina. Though  the  rule  is  thus  laid
down  at  length  in  the  Kor'an,  few  instances  are  cited  by
tradition.^

^  The  whole  story  is  probably  exaggerated  ;  for  Mohammad,  though
within  the  letter  of  the  treaty,  was  bound  by  its  spirit  to  promote  amity
and  peace.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  754  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1553  f.

^  Al-Wakidi,  p.  262  f.  The  woman  here  mentioned  as  coming  over
to  Medina  was  Um  Kulthum,  daughter  of  'Okba,  so  cruelly  executed  by
Mohammad  after  Bedr.  Another  similar  refugee  is  noticed  by  C.  de
Perceval  as  married  to  'Omar.  On  the  other  hand,  'Omar  divorced
Koreiba,  his  wife,  who  remained  at  Mecca,  and  thereafter  was  married
by  Mu'awiya,  son  of  Abu  Sufyan.  Another  similar  case  is  cited  by  Ibn
Hisham.

The  rule  is  given  in  the  60th  Sura,  which  opens  with  strong  remon-
strances against  making  friends  of  unbelievers  ;  and  proceeds  thus  : —

*0  ye  that  believe  !  When  believing  women  come  over  unto  you  as  v.  10  ff.
Refugees,  then  try  them  ;  God  well  knoweth  their  faith.  And  if  ye  know
them  to  be  Believers,  return  them  not  again  unto  the  infidels  ;  they  are
not  lawful  (as  wives)  unto  the  infidels  ;  neither  are  the  infidels  lawful  (as
husbands)  unto  them.  But  give  unto  them  (the  infidels)  what  they  may
have  expended  (on  their  dowers).  It  is  no  sin  for  you  that  ye  marry
them,  after  that  ye  shall  have  given  them  (the  women)  their  dowers.


366  DREAM  OF  UNIVERSAL  SUPREMACY  [chap.

Mohammad's  The  pilgrimage  to  Al-Hodeibiya  is  the  last  event  of
dream  of  importance  during  the  sixth  year  of  Mohammad's  residence
conformity  at  Medina.  But  towards  its  close  a  new  and  singular  project
to  Islam  occupied  his  attention.  It  was  nothing  less  than  to  summon
the  sovereigns  of  the  surrounding  States  and  Empires  to
listen  to  his  teaching.  The  principles  of  Mohammad  had  been
slowly  but  surely  tending  towards  this  end.  Wherever  his
arms  had  reached,  the  recognition  of  his  Mission  had  been
peremptorily  demanded.  Throughout  the  Peninsula  it  was
his  object  that  there  should  be  no  other  religion  than  Islam.
An  exception  indeed  was  made  in  favour  of  Jews  and  Chris-
tians ;  but  even  these,  if  they  retained  their  faith,  must  pay
tribute,  as  an  admission  of  inferiority.  He  now  dreamed  of
something  even  beyond  Arabia.  It  may  seem  a  chimerical
and  wild  design  in  the  Prophet  of  Medina, — scarcely  able
as  yet  to  maintain  his  own  position,  helplessly  besieged
twelve  months  before,  and  forced  but  lately  to  retire  from
Mecca  with  the  purpose  of  pilgrimage  unfulfilled, — that  he
should seek to extend his Mission to Egypt, Abyssinia,

And  retain  not  the  patronage  of  the  unbelieving  women  ;  but  demand
back  that  which  ye  have  spent  (in  their  dowers) ;  and  let  the  infidels
demand  back  what  they  have  spent  (on  the  women  which  come  over  to
you).  This  is  the  judgment  of  God,  which  He  establisheth  between  you  ;
and  God  is  knowing  and  wise.

'And  if  any  of  your  wives  escape  from  you  unto  the  infidels,  and  ye
have  your  turn  (by  the  elopement  of  their  wives  unto  you),  then  give  to
those  whose  wives  have  gone  (out  of  the  dowers  of  the  latter)  a  sum
equal  to  that  which  they  have  expended  (on  the  dowers  of  the  former) ;
and  fear  God  in  whom  ye  believe.  O  Prophet !  when  believing  women
come  unto  thee,  and  plight  their  faith  unto  thee  that  they  will  not
associate  any  with  God,  that  they  will  not  steal,  neither  commit  adultery,
that  they  will  not  kill  their  children,  nor  promulgate  a  calumny  forged
between  their  hands  and  their  feet,  and  that  they  will  not  be  disobedient
unto  thee  in  that  which  is  reasonable, — then  pledge  thy  faith  unto  them,
and  seek  pardon  of  God  for  them. For  God  is  gracious  and  merciful.'

Stanley  (on  i  Cor.  vii.  1-40)  quotes  the  above  passage,  and  says  that
the  rule  it  contains  '  resembles  that  of  the  Apostle.'  But  there  is  really
no  analogy  between  them  ;  the  Christian  inculcation  differs  toto  ccelo
from  that  of  Mohammad  :  '  If  any  brother  hath  a  wife  that  believeth  not,
and  she  be  pleased  to  dwell  with  him,  let  him  not  put  her  away ' ;— and
similarly  the  case  of  a  believing  wife  with  an  unbelieving  husband  (i  Cor.
vii.  12-16).  Whereas  Mohammad  declares  the  marriage  bond  ipso  facto
annulled  by  the  unbelief  of  either  party,  which  indeed  was  only  to  be
expected  from  the  ideas  he  entertained  regarding  the  marriage  contract.


XIX.]  DESPATCHES  TO  KINGS  AND  PRINCES  367

and  Syria,  nay  even  to  the  Roman  and  Persian  Empires.
But  so  it  was.  Apart  from  the  steadfast  and  lofty  conviction
which  he  had  of  his  duty  as  the  Apostle  of  God,  it  is  not  to
be  supposed  that  one  so  sagacious  and  discerning  should  have
failed  to  perceive  an  ominous  disintegration  in  the  signs  of
the  times.  The  Roman  Empire,  broken  and  wearied  by
successive  shocks  of  barbarous  invasion,  was  now  wasted  by
a  long  and  devastating  war  with  Persia.  Schism  had  rent
and  paralysed  the  Christian  Church.  The  Melchites  and  the
Jacobites,  the  Monothelites,  and  the  Nestorians,  regarded
each  other  with  a  deadly  hatred,  and  were  ready  to  welcome
any  intruder  who  would  rid  them  of  their  adversaries.  The
new  faith  would  sweep  away  all  the  sophistries  about  which
they  vainly  contended  :  still  holding  fast  the  groundwork  of
previous  Revelations,  it  would  substitute  a  reformed  and
universal  religion  for  the  effete  and  erring  systems  which
man  had  overlaid  them  with.  Superstition,  Mariolatry,  and
every  form  of  Polytheism  would  fall,  and  the  claims  of  truth
in  the  end  prevail.  Such  probably  were  the  thoughts  of
Mohammad,  when  he  determined  to  send  embassies  to  the
Kaiser  and  the  Chosroes,  to  Abyssinia,  Egypt,  Syria,  and
Al-Yemama.

It  was  suggested  by  one  of  his  followers  that  the  kings  of  Seal  en-
the  earth  accepted  no  communication  unless  attested  by  a fespatclies"
seal. Accordingly  Mohammad  had  one  made  of  silver,  and prepared  for
engraved  with the  words Mohammad the Apostle of  p°inSs
GOD.^ Letters  were  written  and  sealed,  and  six  messengers
simultaneously  despatched to  their  various destinations  on
the  opening  of  the  new  year,  as  shall  be  further  related  in  the
following  chapter.

'  We  are  told  that  his  messengers,  Mike  the  Apostles  of  Jesus,'  were
immediately  endowed  with  the  faculty  of  speaking  the  language  of  the
country  to  which  they  were  deputed.  But  Mohammad  evidently  selected
for  the  purpose  men  who,  as  travellers,  merchants,  or  otherwise,  had
before  visited  the  respective  countries.  Thus  Dihya  was  sent  to  Syria.
(See  ante,  p.  346.)  Less  trustworthy  authorities  make  these  embassies  to
have  started  from  Medina,  on  various  dates.  But  Ibn  Sa'd  states  dis-
tinctly that  all  set  out  07t  the  same  day,  in  Moharram,  A.H.  vii.


princes


CHAPTER XX

EMBASSIES TO VARIOUS SOVEREIGNS  AND PRINCES^
A.H.  VII,— A.D.  627

Struo-ele FROM  a  period  as  far  back  as  the  assumption  by  Mohammad
between  the of  the  prophetic  office,  the  Roman  and  Persian  kingdoms  had
a!d.  609-62^7  been  waging  with  each other a ceaseless deadly  warfare.
Until the year A.D. 621 unvarying success attended the
Persian  arms. Syria,  Egypt,  and  Asia  Minor  were  overrun.
Constantinople itself  was  threatened. At last, Heraclius
A.H.  I.  awoke  from  his  inglorious  lethargy ;  and,  about  the  time  of

A.D.  622  Mohammad's  flight  from  Mecca,  was  driving  his  invaders
A.H.  ii.-iv.  from  their  fastnesses  in  Asia  Minor.  In  the  second  campaign
A.D.  623-625  jjg  carried  the  war  into  the  heart  of  Persia.  During  the
three  years  in  which  the  Kaiser  was  by  this  brilliant  stroke
retrieving  the  fortunes  of  the  Empire,  Mohammad  was
July,  A.D.  engaged  in  his  doubtful  struggle  with  Koreish.  Then  came
^^^  the  critical  siege  of  Constantinople  by  the  Avars  and  Persians

which  preceded  by  little  more  than  half  a  year  the  siege  of
March,  A.D.  Medina  known  as  the  battle  of  the  Ditch.  It  is  curious  to
627  remark that while the Muslims attributed the sudden

departure  of  Abu  Sufyan  and  his  Arab  hosts  to  the  inter-
position of  the  Almighty,  the  Greeks  equally  ascribed  their
signal deliverance from  the  hordes  of  the  Chagan  to  the
AH  VI. favour of  the Virgin. In the third campaign,  627 A.D.,
A.D.  627 Heraclius  followed  up  his  previous  success,  and  at  the  close  of
the  year  achieved  the  decisive  victory  of  Nineveh. In  this
action  the forces  of  Persia  were  irretrievably  broken  ; the
February, Chosroes  fled  from  his  capital ; and,  early  in  the  following
March,  A.D. yga.r,  was  murdered  by  his  son  Siroes,  who  ascended  the
throne  and  concluded  a  treaty  of  peace  with  the  Emperor.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  971  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1559  ff.
868


CHAP.  XX.]


DESPATCH  TO  HERACLIUS


369


About  the  same  period  Mohammad  was  at  Al-Hodeibiya
ratifying  his  truce  with  the  chiefs  of  Mecca.

During  the  autumn,  Heraclius,in  fulfilment  of  his  vow  for  the
splendid  success  which  had  just  crowned  his  arms,  performed
on  foot  the  pilgrimage  from  Edessa  to  Jerusalem,  where  the
'  True  cross,'  recovered  from  the  Persians,  was  with  solemn
pomp  restored  to  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  While  preparing  for
this  journey,  or  during  the  journey  itself,  an  uncouth
despatch,  in  the  Arabic  character,  was  laid  before  him.
It  was  forwarded  by  the  Governor  of  Bosra,  into  whose
hands  it  had  been  delivered  by  an  Arab  envoy.  The  epistle
was  addressed  to  the  Emperor  himself,  from  '  Mohammad  the
Apostle  of  God,'  the  rude  impression  of  whose  seal  could  be
deciphered  at  the  foot.  In  strange  and  simple  accents,  like
those  of  the  Prophets  of  old,  it  summoned  Heraclius  to
acknowledge  the  mission  of  Mohammad,  to  cast  aside  the
idolatrous  worship  of  Jesus  and  his  Mother,  and  to  return  to
the  Catholic  faith  of  the  one  only  God.^  The  letter  was
probably  cast  aside,  or  preserved,  it  may  be,  as  a  strange
curiosity,  the  effusion  of  some  harmless  fanatic.^

Not  long  after,  another  despatch,  bearing  the  same  seal,

'  The  terms  of  this  and  the  other  despatches  are  altogether  uncertain.
The  drafts  given  by  tradition,  with  the  replies,  are  apocryphal,  and
tinged  with  the  idea  of  universal  conquest,  as  yet  existing  (if  at  all)  only
in  embryo.  The  ordinary  copy  of  the  letter  to  Heraclius  contains  a
passage  from  the  Kor'an  which,  as  shown  by  Weil,  was  not  revealed  till
the  Ninth  year  of  the  Hijra.  Dihya  was  desired  by  Mohammad  to
forward  this  despatch  through  the  Governor  of  Bosra.

^  Here  is  another  tradition.  '  Now  the  Emperor  was  at  this  time  at
Hims,  performing  a  pedestrian  journey,  in  fulfilment  of  the  vow  which  he
had  made  that,  if  the  Romans  overcame  the  Persians,  he  would  travel  on
foot  from  Constantinople  to  ^Elia  (Jerusalem).  So  having  read  the  letter,
he  commanded  his  chief  men  to  meet  him  in  the  royal  camp  at  Hims.
And  thus  he  addressed  them  :  "  Ye  chiefs  of  Rome  !  Do  ye  desire
safety  and  guidance,  so  that  your  kingdom  shall  be  firmly  established,
and  that  ye  may  follow  the  commands  of  Jesus  son  of  Mary?"  "And
what,  O  King!  shall  secure  us  this?"  "Even  that  ye  follow  the
Arabian  Prophet,"  said  Heraclius.  Hearing  this  they  all  started  aside
like  wild  asses  of  the  desert,  each  raising  his  cross  and  waving  it  aloft  in
the  air.  Whereupon,  Heraclius,  despairing  of  their  conversion,  and
unwilling  to  lose  his  kingdom,  desisted,  saying  that  he  had  only  wished
to  test  their  constancy  and  faith,  and  that  he  was  now  satisfied  by  this
display  of  firmness  and  devotion.  The  courtiers  bowed  their  heads  ;  and
so  the  Prophet's  despatch  was  rejected.'

2  A


I.  Despatch
of  Moham-
mad to
Heraclius.
A.H.  VII.
A.D.  628


n.  Despatch
to  Ghassanid
Prince


370


EMBASSIES  TO  SOVEREIGNS


[chap.


III.  De-
spatch to
King  of
Persia


Conversion
of  Badiian,
Governor
Yemen.
A.H.  VI.
A.D.  628


and  couched  in  similar  terms,  reached  the  court  of  Heraclius.
It  was  addressed  to  Al-Harith  VII.,  prince  of  the  Beni
Ghassan,  who  forwarded  it  to  the  Emperor,  with  an  address
from  himself,  soliciting  permission  to  chastise  the  audacious
impostor.^  But  Heraclius,  regarding  the  ominous  voice  from
Arabia  beneath  his  notice,  forbade  the  expedition,  and  desired
that  Al-Harith  should  be  in  attendance  at  Jerusalem,  to  swell
the  imperial  train  at  the  approaching  visitation  of  the  Temple.
Little  did  the  Emperor  imagine  that  the  kingdom  which,  un-
perceived  by  the  world,  this  obscure  Pretender  was  founding
in  Arabia,  would  in  a  few  short  years  wrest  from  his  grasp  that
Holy  city,  and  the  fair  provinces  which,  with  so  much  toil
and  so  much  glory,  he  had  just  recovered  from  the  Persians  !

The  despatch  for  the  King  of  Persia  reached  the  court
probably  some  months  after  the  accession  of  Siroes.  It  was
delivered  to  the  Monarch,  who,  on  hearing  the  contents,  tore
it  in  pieces.  When  this  was  reported  to  Mohammad,  he
prayed  and  said  :  '  Even  thus,  O  Lord  !  rend  thou  his  kingdom
from  him ! '

An  incident  of  date  somewhat  earlier,  in  connection  with
the  Court  of  Persia,  was  followed  by  results  of  considerable
importance,^  A  few  months  before  his  overthrow,  the
Chosroes,  receiving  strange  reports  of  the  Prophetical  claims

^  In  the  account  of  these  events,  it  is  dif^cult  to  say  what  grains  of
truth  mingle  with  fiction.  The  messenger  of  Mohammad  found  Al-
Harith  in  the  gardens  of  Damascus,  busied  with  preparations  for  the
reception  of  the  Emperor  shortly  expected  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem.  He
waited  at  the  gate  of  Al-Harith  three  or  four  days,  audience  being
granted  at  certain  intervals.  During  this  delay,  the  Porter  having  been
instructed  about  Mohammad  and  his  doctrine,  wept  and  said  :  '  I  read
the  Gospel,  and  I  find  therein  the  description  of  this  Prophet  exactly  as
thou  tellest  me:'  thereupon  he  embraced  Islam,  and  desired  his  saluta-
tion to  be  given  to  the  Prophet.  On  a  set  day,  Al-Harith,  sitting  in
state,  called  for  the  messenger,  and  had  the  despatch  read.  Then  he
cast  it  aside  and  said:  'Who  is  he  that  will  snatch  my  kingdom  from
me  ?  I  will  march  against  him,  were  he  even  in  the  Yemen.'  He  became
very  angry,  and,  having  called  out  his  army  in  battle  array,  said  to  the
messenger  :  '  Go,  tell  thy  Master  that  which  thou  seest.'  The  messenger,
however,  was  afterwards  permitted  to  wait  for  the  reply  of  Heraclius  :  on
its  receipt,  Al-Harith  dismissed  him  with  a  present  of  one  hundred
mithcals  of  gold.  When  it  was  reported  to  the  Prophet,  he  said  that  the
kingdom  had  departed  from  Al-Harith  ;  and  so  Al-Harith  died  the
following  year.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  46  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1572  f.


XX.]  PERSIA  AND  EGYPT  371

of  Mohammad,  and  of  the  depredations  committed  on  the
Syrian  border  by  his  marauding  bands,  had  sent  orders  to
Badhan,  the  Persian  Governor  of  the  Yemen,  to  despatch  two
envoys  to  Medina,  and  thus  procure  trustworthy  information
regarding  the  Pretender,  Badhan  obeyed,  and  with  the
messengers  sent  a  courteous  despatch  to  Mohammad.  By  this
time,  however,  tidings  had  reached  the  Prophet  of  the  deposition
and  death  of  the  Persian  Monarch.  When  the  letter,  therefore,
was  read  before  him,  Mohammad  smiled  at  its  contents,  and
summoned  the  envoys  to  embrace  Islam.  He  apprised  them
of  the  murder  of  the  Chosroes,  and  accession  of  his  son  :  '  Go,'
said  he,  '  inform  your  master  of  this,  and  require  him  to  tender
his  submission  to  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord.'  The  glory  of
Persia  had  now  departed.  Long  ago  she  had  relaxed  her
grasp  upon  Arabia ;  and  the  Governor  of  the  Yemen  was
now  free  to  choose  a  protectorate  more  congenial  to  his
people.  Badhan  therefore  gladly  recognised  the  rising
fortunes  of  Islam,  and  signified  his  adhesion  to  the  Prophet.
PVom  the  distance,  however,  his  allegiance  was  at  the  first  little
more  than  nominal ;  but  the  accession  served  as  a  point  for
further  action,  and  meanwhile  added  fresh  prestige  to  the
Prophet's  name.

The  envoy  sent  by  Mohammad  to  Egypt  was  courteously  IV.  De-
received  by  the  Mukaukis,  the  Roman  Governor,  but  dismissed  Governor  of
with  a  gentle  and  evasive  answer.  While  declining  to  admit  Egypt
the  claims  of  the  Prophet,  he  gave  substantial  proof  of
friendly  feeling  in  valuable  presents  which  he  forwarded  with
this  reply  : — '  I  am  aware  that  a  prophet  is  yet  to  arise ;  but
I  am  of  opinion  that  he  will  appear  in  Syria.  Thy  messenger
hath  been  received  with  honour.  I  send  for  thine  acceptance
two  sisters,  such  as  are  prized  among  the  Copts,  a  present  of
raiment,  and  a  mule  for  thee  to  ride  upon.'  Though
Mohammad  ascribed  the  unbelief  of  the  Mukaukis  to  fear  lest
the  government  should  slip  from  his  hands,  yet  he  willingly
accepted  the  gifts.  The  two  slave  girls,  indeed  (strange
present  from  a  Christian  prince),  were  well  suited  to  his  tastes.
Mary,  the  fairest,  was  retained  for  his  own  harim ;  Sirin,
the  other,  was  presented  to  Hassan,  the  Poet,  who,  since  his
reconciliation  with  'A'isha,  had  regained  the  Prophet's  favour.
The  mule  was  white, — a  rarity  in  Arabia  ;  it  was  greatly
prized,  and  was  constantly  ridden  by  Mohammad.


372


EMBASSIES  TO  SOVEREIGNS


[chap.


V.  Despatch
to  King  of
Abyssinia


Um  Habiba
betrothed  to
Mohammad


Abyssinian

refugees
reach
Medina.
August,
A.D.  628


The  court  of  Abyssinia  stood  in  a  different  relation  to
Mohammad  from  that  of  the  other  kingdoms  to  which  he
addressed  his  apostoHc  summons.  Tliere  his  followers  had
long  ago  found  a  secure  and  hospitable  retreat  from  the
persecutions  of  Koreish ;  and  although  about  forty  had
rejoined  the  Prophet  after  his  flight  to  Medina,  there  still
remained  fifty  or  sixty  enjoying  the  protection  of  the
Abyssinian  Prince.  'Amr  ibn  Omeiya  was  now  the  bearer  of
two  despatches  to  him.^  One  was  couched  in  language  like
that  addressed  to  the  other  Christian  kings ;  and  to  this  the
Negus  replied  in  terms  of  humble  acquiescence, — embracing
the  new  faith,  and  mourning  over  his  inability  to  join  in
person  the  standard  of  the  Prophet.^  In  the  second  despatch,
the  Prophet  begged  that  his  remaining  followers  might  now
be  sent  to  Medina ;  and  the  request  was  added  that,  before
their  departure,  the  Prince  would  betroth  to  him  Um  Habiba,
daughter  of  Abu  Sufyan,  whose  early  charms,  though  she  was
now  five-and-thirty  years  of  age,  still  held  a  place  in  his
imagination.^  Her  former  husband,  'Obeidallah,  one  of  the
'  Four  Inquirers,'  after  emigrating  a  Muslim  to  Abyssinia,
had  there  embraced  Christianity,  and  died  in  its  profession.
By  this  alliance  Mohammad  at  once  gratified  his  desire  for
fresh  nuptials  (he  had  been  now  a  whole  year  without  adding
any  new  inmate  to  his  harim)  ;  and,  perhaps,  further  hoped  to
make  Abu  Sufyan,  the  father  of  Um  Habiba,  more  favourable
to  his  cause.*  The  prince  performed  with  readiness  the  part
assigned  him  in  the  ceremony.  He  also  provided  two  ships
for  the  exiles,  in  which  they  all  embarked,  and  in  the  autumn
reached  Medina  safely.

^  Mentioned  above,  p.  351.

2  I  have  before,  p.  92,  given  grounds  for  doubting  the  conversion  of  the
Negus.  It  was  quite  possible  for  a  Christian  Prince,  more  especially  if  he
held  Arian  or  Nestorian  views,  and  had  seen  only  certain  portions  of  the
Kor'an  (those  for  example  containing  attestations  of  the  Jewish  and  Chris-
tian Scriptures,  and  exhortations  against  idolatry),  to  have  expressed  an
assent  to  the  terms  of  Mohammad's  epistle.  For  the  efforts  of  the  various
Christian  sects  to  gain  over  the  Abyssinians,  see  Gibbon,  chapter  xlvii.

3  At-Tabari,  i.  1570.

*  Sprenger  questions  this  view,  and  thinks  that,  with  the  Arab  senti-
ments regarding  women,  Mohammad's  inarriage  with  his  daughter  must,
so  long  as  he  was  unconverted,  have  been  a  mortification  to  Abu  Sufyan,
rather  than  a  satisfaction.  Um  Habiba  survived  Mohammad  some  thirty
years,  and  died  during  the  Caliphate  of  her  brother  Mu'awiya.


XX.]  ABYSSINIA  AND  AL-YEMAMA  373

The  sixth  messenger  was  sent  to  Haudha,  chief  of  the vi.  De-
Beni  Hanifa,  a Christian tribe, in Al-Yemama.^ He  was ^P/^.^^j^  \°

'  Chief  of

hospitably  entertained  ;  and  the  chief,  having  presented  him  Al-Yemama
with  change  of  raiment  and  provisions  for  the  journey  home,
dismissed  him  with  this  reply  for  his  master :  '  How
excellent  is  that  Revelation  to  which  thou  invitest  me,  and
how  beautiful !  Know  that  I  am  the  Poet  of  my  tribe,  and
an  Orator.  The  Arabs  revere  my  dignity.  Grant  unto  me,
therefore,  a  share  in  the  rule,  and  I  will  follow  thee.'  When
Mohammad  had  read  the  answer,  he  said  :  '  Had  this  man
asked  of  me  but  an  unripe  date,  as  his  share  in  the  land,  I
would  not  have  given  it.  Let  him  perish,  and  his  vainglory
with  him  !  '  Thus  cursed,  Haudha  died,  we  are  told,  in  the
following  year.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  971  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1560  f.


CHAPTER XXI


Expedition

against

Kheibar


Army
marches.
A.H.  VII.
August,  A.D.
628


Kheibar
surprised


THE CONQUEST OF KHEIBAR  ^
A.H.  VII. — August  and  September^  A.D.  628

JET  AT.  60

On  his  way  back  from  Al-Hodeibiya,  in  the  spring  of  the  year,
Mohammad,  as  we  have  seen,  had  foretold  '  a  speedy  victory
and  spoils  in  abundance  elsewhere.'  The  summer  passed
quietly,  and  it  was  autumn  before  measures  were  taken  to
fulfil  the  promise.  The  destined  prey  was  the  Jewish  settle-
ment of  Kheibar  on  the  way  to  Syria.

The  army  marched  from  Medina,  1,600  strong ;  being
about  the  same  number  as  had  followed  the  Prophet  on  his
pilgrimage  to  Al-Hodeibiya.  But  the  force  was  greatly  more
powerful  in  cavalry,  the  number  being  estimated  at  above  a
hundred,  while  it  had  never  before  exceeded  thirty.  Many
of  the  citizens  and  the  Bedawin  who  had  neglected  the
former  summons,  would  gladly  now  have  joined  the  tempting
expedition  ;  but,  according  to  the  divine  injunction,  they  were
not  permitted,  and  their  mortification  was  great  at  being  left
behind.  Um  Selama  was  again  the  favoured  companion  of
the  Prophet.

The  distance,  about  a  hundred  miles,  was  accomplished  in
three  forced  marches.  So  quick  was  the  movement,  and  the
surprise  so  complete,  that  the  cultivators  of  Kheibar,  issuing
forth  in  the  morning  to  their  fields,  suddenly  found  themselves
confronted  by  a  great  army,  and  rushed  back  to  the  city  in
dismay.  The  rapidity  of  the  approach  cut  off  all  hope  of
timely  aid  from  the  Beni  Ghatafan.^

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  755  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1575  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  264  ff.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  ']^  ff.

^  According  to  Ibn  Hisham,  Mohammad  took  up  a  position  so  as  to
cut  off  their  assistance,  and  he  adds  that  the  Ghatafan  did  go  forth  to  aid

374


CHAP.  XXI.] ATTACK  ON  THE  FORTS  OF  KHEIBAR


375


The  rich  vale  of  Kheibar  was  studded  with  villages  and
fortresses  rudely  built  but  posted  strongly  on  the  rocks  or
eminences  which  here  and  there  rose  from  amidst  the  luxu-
riant date-groves  and  fields  of  corn.  One  by  one,  before
any  opposition  could  be  organised,  these  forts  were  attacked
and  carried.  *•  Kharibat  Kheibarl  cried  Mohammad,  with  a
jubilant  play  upon  the  name,  as  he  passed  from  one  strong-
hold triumphantly  to  another ;  '  KJicibar  is  undone.  Allah
Akbar  !  Great  is  the  Lord  I  Truly  zvhen  I  light  upon  the  coasts
of  any  People,  zvoe  unto  them  in  that  day  !^  From  the  villages
first  attacked,  which  were  gained  with  little  loss,  Mohammad
proceeded  to  the  strong  fortress  of  Al-Kamus.  Here  the
Jews,  who  now  had  time  to  rally  round  their  chief  Kinana
(the  successor  of  his  grandfather,  Abu  Rafi',  assassinated
some  months  before),  posted  themselves  in  front  of  the
citadel,  resolved  on  a  desperate  struggle.  After  some  vain
attempts  to  dislodge  them,  Mohammad  planned  a  general
attack:  'I  will  give  the  Eagle,'  he  said — 'the  great  black
Flag, — into  the  hands  of  one  that  loveth  the  Lord  and  His
Apostle,  even  as  he  is  beloved  of  them  ;  he  shall  gain  the
victory.'  i  Next  morning  the  flag  was  placed  in  'All's  hands,
and  the  troops  advanced.  At  this  moment,  a  soldier
stepped  forth  from  the  Jewish  line,  and  challenged  his
adversaries  to  single  combat :  '  I  am  Marhab,'  he  cried,  '  as
all  Kheibar  knoweth,  a  warrior  bristling  with  arms  when  the
war  fiercely  burneth.'  The  first  Muslim  who  answered  the
challenge,  aimed  a  blow  at  the  Jewish  champion  with
deadly  force,  but  the sword  recoiled  upon  himself,  and  he


The  for-
tresses one
by  one  fall
before  Mo-
hammad


General
action  before
the  fort  of
Al-Kamus


their  allies,  but  returned  on  a  rumour  that  their  own  homes  were  being
attacked.  The  fact,  however,  is  that  Mohammad's  advent  was  totally  un-
expected. '  When  the  Muslim  army  alighted  before  Kheibar,  they  did  not
stir  that  night,  nor  did  a  fowl  cackle  at  them,  till  the  sun  arose.  At  dawn,
the  inhabitants  opened  their  fortresses  as  usual,  and  went  forth  with  their
cattle,  their  spades,  hoes,  and  other  instruments  of  husbandry  ;  suddenly
perceiving  the  army  in  front  they  f^ed  back  into  their  forts,  screaming :
"  //  is  Mohammad  and  his  hosts  !  " '

1  There  had  been  no  great  standard  like  this  before.  It  is  said  to
have  been  made  out  of  a  black  mantle  worn  by  'A'isha, — a  gallant  device,
and  was  called  'Okab,  the  '  Black  Eagle.'  There  were  two  other  smaller
banners  of  white,  held,  one  by  Al-Hobab,  the  other  by  Sa'd  ibn  'Obada,
both  Citizens.


376


CONQUEST  OF  KHEIBAR


[chap.


Jews  beaten
back  with
loss


Kinana
tortured
and  put  to
death


fell  fatally  wounded.^  Marhab  repeating  his  vainglorious
challenge,  'All  advanced  saying : — '  I  am  he  whom  my
mother  named  the  Lion ;  like  a  lion  of  the  howling  wilder-
ness, I  weigh  my  foes  in  the  giant's  balance.'  The
combatants  closed,  and  'Ah  cleft  the  head  of  Marhab  in  two.
Marhab's  brother  having  rashly  renewed  the  challenge,
Az-Zubeir  went  forth  and  slew  him.^  The  Muslim  line  now
made  a  general  advance,  and,  after  a  sharp  conflict,  drove
back  the  enemy.  In  this  battle,  'All  performed  great  feats  of
prowess.  Having  lost  his  shield,  he  seized  the  lintel  of  a
door,  which  he  wielded  effectually  in  its  stead.  Tradition  has
magnified  the  shield  into  a  gigantic  beam,  and  the  hero  into
a  second  Samson.^  The  victory  was  decisive,  for  the  Jews
lost  93  men;  while  of  the  Muslims,  only  19  were  killed
throughout  the  whole  campaign.

After  this  defeat,  the  citadel  of  Al-Kamus  surrendered,
on  condition  that  the  inhabitants  were  free  to  leave  the
country,  but  that  they  should  give  up  all  their  property  to
the  conqueror.  With  the  rest,  came  forth  Kinana,  chief  of
Kheibar,  and  his  cousin.  Mohammad  accused  them  of
keeping  back,  in  contravention  of  the  compact,  some  part  of
the  treasure,  and  notably  the  marriage  portion  Kinana  had
obtained  with  his  bride  Saflya,  whose  father  perished  in  the
slaughter  of the Beni  Koreiza. *  Where  are  the  vessels  of


^  The  people  cried  out  'He  hath  killed  himself:  his  works  are  vain'
(because  of  his  suicidal  death).  'Nay,'  said  Mohammad,  'he  shall  have
a  double  reward  ! '  On  the  road  to  Kheibar,  this  man  had  recited  some
martial  verses  before  Mohammad,  who  thanked  him,  saying:  'The
Lord  have  mercy  on  thee  !'  It  is  said  that  this  mode  of  blessing  from
Mohammad,  invariably  portended  impending  martyrdom.  The  verses,
by  the  way,  are  the  same  as  those  ascribed  to  Mohammad  at  the  battle
of  the  Ditch.

2  As  Az-Zubeir  walked  forth  to  the  combat,  his  mother  Saflya  ran  up
to  Mohammad  in  alarm,  crying  out  that  her  son  would  be  killed :  '  Not
so,  my  Aunt  !'  replied  Mohammad  ;  'he  will  slay  his  fellow,  if  the  Lord
will ! '  Many  women  went  from  Medina  on  this  campaign  to  minister  to
the  wounded.  A  story,  very  illustrative  of  the  combined  simplicity  and
coarseness  of  Arab  manners,  is  given  in  the  conversation  of  Mohammad
with  a  young  woman  of  the  Beni  Ghifar,  who  rode  on  the  same  camel,
and  confided  to  hun  certain  of  her  ailments.

^  The  story  is  in  the  ordinary  cast  of  exaggerated  tradition.  Abu  Rafi',
Mohammad's  servant,  went  after  the  battle  to  see  the  beam,  in  company
with  seven  others,  who  together  tried  to  turn  it  over,  and  were  unable.


XXI.]


WEDS  BRIDE  OF  MURDERED  CHIEF


377


gold,'  he  asked  further,  *  the  vessels  ye  used  to  lend  to  the
people  of  Mecca  ? '  They  protested  that  they  no  longer
possessed  them.  'If  ye  conceal  anything  from  me,'  said
Mohammad, 'and  I  should  gain  knowledge  of  it,  then  your
lives  and  the  lives  of  your  families  shall  be  at  my  disposal*
They  answered  that  it  should  be  so.  A  recreant  Jew,
having  divulged  to  Mohammad  the  place  in  which  some  of
the  valuables  lay  hid,  he  sent  and  fetched  them.  On  their
appearance,  Kinana  was  subjected  to  cruel  torture  — '  fire
being  placed  upon  his  breast  till  his  breath  had  almost
departed ' — in  the  hope  that  he  would  confess  where  the
remainder  was  concealed.  Mohammad  then  gave  command,
and  the  heads  of  both  chief  and  cousin  were  severed  from
their  bodies.

On  this,  Bilal  was  sent  to  fetch  Kinana's  bride,  Saflya,  a
damsel  some  seventeen  years  of  age,  whose  beauty  was
probably  well  known  at  Medina.^  He  speedily  performed
his  errand,  and  finding  her  with  her  cousin,  brought  them
both  across  the  battlefield  strewed  with  the  dead,  and  close
by  the  corpses  of  Kinana  and  his  cousin.  At  the  ghastly
sight,  Safiya's  companion  screamed  wildly,  beating  her  face,
and  casting  dust  upon  her  head.  '  Take  that  she-devil
hence,'  said  Mohammad,  angrily :  but  aside  he  chided  Bilal
for  his  want  of  consideration  in  taking  them  by  the  bodies
of  their  relatives.  '  Truly,'  said  the  heartless  negro,  '  I  did
it  of  purpose,  to  see  their  anger  and  their  fright.'  But
Mohammad  was  moved  by  tenderer  feelings ;  turning  to
Saflya,  he  cast  his  mantle  over  her,  in  token  that  she  was
to  be  his  own,  and  then  made  her  over  to  the  care  of  Bilal.
One  of  his  followers  had  coveted  this  Jewish  beauty;  but
Mohammad  contented  him  with  her  cousin.

Saflya,  nothing  loth,  transferred  her  affections  to  the
conqueror,  who  tarried  not to take her to himself.^ The

^  No  doubt  this  was  the  case,  because  (i)  she  was  the  daughter  of  a
chief  who  had  long  lived  at  Medina,  and  was  well  known  there  ;  and  (2),
because  Mohammad,  immediately  upon  Kinana's  execution,  sent  for  her
and  cast  his  mantle  over  her.

2  The  interval  is  not  stated  anywhere,  but  it  could  not  have  been  of
long  duration.  Ibn  Hisham  says  the  marriage  took  place  at  Kheibar,  or
on  the  way  returning  from  it,  and  other  traditions  imply  no  delay.  [Al-
Wakidi  (p.  291  f.)  says  on  the  return  journey  at  Wadi  al-Kora.]  I  have
met  no  credible  tradition  intimating  Safiya's  conversion,  as  is  commonly


Marriage  of
Mohammad
with  Safiya,
Kinana's
bride


Consum-
mated at
Kheibar


378  CONQUEST  OF  KHEIBAR  [CHAP.

wedding  was  celebrated  by  an  abundant  feast  of  dates,
curdled  milk,  and  butter.  Earth  was  heaped  up  into  the
shape  of  tables ;  on  these  the  viands  were  spread,  and  the
guests  ate  and  made  merry.  Meanwhile  the  Prophet  had
charged  a  female  attendant  suitably  to  array  the  bride,  and
make  her  ready  for  him.  When  the  repast  was  ended,  the
people  prepared  for  the  march ;  and  they  watched
Mohammad,  saying:  'We  shall  see  now  whether  he  hath
taken  her  for  his  wife  or  as  a  slave  girl.'  So  when  he  called
for  a  screen  to  hide  her  from  the  public  gaze,  they  knew
that  he  had  taken  her  as  his  wife.  Mohammad  lowered  his
knee  to  help  her  to  ascend  the  camel :  and  she,  after  some
coy  demur,  placed  her  foot  upon  his  bended  knee,  while  he
(a  bridegroom  now  of  sixty  years  of  age)  raised  her  into  the
litter,  and  seating  himself  thus  before  her,  guided  the  camel
in  the  evening  to  the  bridal  tent.  In  the  morning  he  heard
the  noise  of  one  rustling  at  the  curtain  of  the  tent.  It  was
Abu  Eiyub,  who  had  kept  watch  there  all  night  with  his
drawn  sword.  'What  has  brought  thee  here?'  asked
Mohammad,  surprised  at  the  inopportune  presence  of  his
friend  :  '  O  Prophet ! '  he  replied,  '  I  bethought  me  that  the
damsel  is  young ;  it  is  but  as  yesterday  that  she  was
married  to  Kinana,  whom  thou  hast  slain.  And  thus,
distrusting  her,  I  said  to  myself,  /  will  watch  by  the  tent  and
be  close  at  hand,  in  case  she  attempt  anything  against  thee*
Mohammad  blessed  him  for  his  careful  though  ill-timed
vigilance,  and  desired  him  to  withdraw  in  peace.  The
Safiya's  precaution  was  unnecessary ;  for  while  Mohammad  was
dream  evidently  enamoured  of  his  bride,  she  not  the  less  readily

accommodated  herself  to  the  new  alliance.  It  is  related
that  she  bore  the  mark  of  a  bruise  upon  her  eye  ;  when  the
Prophet  asked  her  tenderly  the  cause,  she  told  him  that,
being  yet  Kinana's  bride,  she  saw  in  a  dream  as  if  the  moon
had  fallen from  the  heavens  into her lap ; and  that  when

supposed,  before  her  marriage.  Anyhow,  it  is  clear  that  the  period
before  marrying  a  woman  previously  the  wife  of  another  was  not  observed.
Either  such  ordinance  had  not  yet  been  imposed,  or  Mohammad
exempted  himself  from  its  operation.  Um  Suleim  (mother  of  the
Prophet's  servant  Anas)  bathed  Saflya,  dressed  her  hair,  and,  having
arrayed  her  in  bridal  attire,  carried  her  to  Mohammad.  Safiya's  dower
was  her  freedom.


XXI.]  MOHAMMAD  POISONED  BY  A  JEWESS  379

she  told  it  to  Kinana,  he  struck  her  violently,  saying :
'  What  is  this  thy  dream  but  that  thou  covetest  the  new-
king  of  the  Hijaz,  the  Prophet,  for  thy  husband!'  The
mark  of  the  blow  was  the  same  which  Mohammad  saw.^

But  all  the  fair  sex  of  Kheibar  were  not  so  fickle  and  so  Mohammad
faithless.  The  nuptials  of  Mohammad  were  damped  by  the  po[soned°  ^
revenge  of  Zeinab,  sister  of  the  warrior  Marhab,  who  had  kid
lost  her  husband,  as  well  as  father  and  brothers,  in  the
battle.  She  dressed  a  kid  with  dainty  garnishing,  and,
having  steeped  it  in  poison,  placed  the  dish  with  fair  words
before  Mohammad  at  his  evening  repast.^  Graciously
accepting  the  gift,  he  took  for  himself  the  shoulder,  his
favourite  piece,  and  distributed  portions  to  Abu  Bekr  and
other  friends,  including  one  called  Bishr,  who  sat  next  him.
'  Hold ! '  cried  Mohammad,  as  he  swallowed  the  first
mouthful,  '  surely  this  shoulder  hath  been  poisoned  ; '  and  he
spat  forth  what  remained  in  his  mouth.^  Bishr,  who  had
eaten  more  than  Mohammad,  at  once  changed  colour,  and
stirred  neither  hand  nor  foot  until  he  died.  Mohammad
was  seized  with  excruciating  pain,  and  caused  himself,  and
all  those  who  had  with  him  partaken  of  the  dish,  to  be
freely  cupped  between  the  shoulders.  Zeinab,  when  put
upon  her  defence  answered  bravely  : — '  Thou  hast  inflicted
grievous  injuries  on  my  people ;  thou  hast  slain  my  father,
and  my  uncle,  and  my  husband.  Therefore  I  said  within
myself,  if  he  be  a  Prophet  he  will  reject  the  gift  knowing
that  the  kid  is  poisoned  ;  but  if  a  mere  pretender,  then  we
shall  be  rid  of  him,  and  the  Jews  again  will  prosper.'  She
was  put  to  death.*  The  effect  of  the  poison  was  felt  by
Mohammad  to  his  dying  day.^

^  Safiya  survived  Mohammad  forty  years,  and  died  A.H.  52.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  764  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1583

^  Mohammad,  according  to  the  favourite  tradition,  cried  out,  'The
shoulder  tells  me'  (ht.  lets  jne  Ic7iozu)  'that  it  is  poisoned.'  But,  however
this  story  may  have  grown  up,  the  statement  is  clear  that  he  'swallowed'
the  first  mouthful  before  he  perceived  the  evil  taste.

*  Some  say  that  she  was  set  free  upon  making  this  exculpatory  state-
ment. But  the  balance  of  tradition  is  according  to  the  text.  Certain
traditions  state  that  she  was  made  over  to  the  relatives  of  Bishr,  to  be
put  to  death  judicially  for  having  poisoned  him.

^  Hence  the  conceit  that  Mohammad  had  the  merit  of  a  'martyr';
and  the  same  is  also  said  of  Abu  Bekr.


38o


CONQUEST  OF  KHEIBAR


[chap.


Remaining
fortresses,
with  Fadak,
capitulate


Siege  of
Wadi  al-
Kora.
A.H.  VII.
September,
A.D.  628

Division  of
the  rich
plunder


Territory,
how  dis-
posed of


After  the  victory  of  Al-Kamus,  the  only  remaining
strongholds,  Al-Watlh  and  Sulalim,  were  invested,  and,
seeing  no  prospect  of  relief,  capitulated.^  Both  were  thus
saved  from  being  sacked  ;  but,  like  the  rest  of  Kheibar,  their
lands  were  subjected  to  a  tax  of  half  the  produce.  Fadak,
a  Jewish  town,  not  far  from  Kheibar,  profited  by  the  example,
and,  having  tendered  a  timely  submission,  was  admitted  on
the  same  terms.  On  his  march  homeward,  Mohammad
laid  siege  to  the  Jewish  settlement  of  Wadi  al-Kora,  which,
after  a  resistance  of  one  or  two  days,  surrendered  upon  like
conditions.^  The  authority  of  Mohammad  was  thus
established  over  all  the  Jewish  tribes  north  of  Medina.

The  plunder  of  Kheibar  was  rich  beyond  experience.
Besides  vast  stores  of  dates,  oil,  honey  and  barley,  flocks
of  sheep  and  herds  of  camels,  the  spoil  in  treasure  and
jewels  was  very  large.^  A  fifth  was  as  usual  set  apart  for
the  Prophet's  use  and  for  distribution  at  will  among  his
family  and  the  destitute  poor.  The  remaining  four-fifths
were  sold  by  outcry,  and  the  proceeds,  according  to  the
prescribed  rule,  divided  into  1,800  shares,  being  one  for  a
foot  soldier,  and  three  for  a  horseman.

The  villages  and  lands  were  disposed  of  in  another  way.
One  half,  embracing  all  the  places  which  surrendered  with-
out fighting,  was  reserved  for  Mohammad,  and  constituted
thereafter  a  species  of  Crown  domain.  The  other  moiety
was  allotted  in  freehold  plots,  by  the  same  rule  as  the
personal  booty.  A  large  and  permanent  reward  was  thus
secured  for  all  who  had  given  proof  of  their  faith  and  loyalty
by  accompanying  Mohammad  to  Al-Hodeibiya,  and  the
promise  made  on  that  expedition  thus  amply  redeemed.
The  Prophet,  too,  had  now  an  ample  revenue  at  his  disposal.
From  this  he  made  liberal  assignment  for  the  maintenance
of  his  wives  in  so  many  measures  yearly  to  each  of  dates  and
barley.  The  poor  also  were  not  forgotten.  The  remainder
formed  a  reserve  for  the  entertainment  of  visitors,  support  of


1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  764  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1582  f.  2  At-Tabari,  i.  1584  f.

^  Ibn  Hisham  says  that,  from  the  time  of  Kheibar,  slaves  became
very  plentiful  among  the  Muslims.  I  do  not,  however,  find  that,  except-
ing the  family  of  Kinana,  any  mention  is  made  of  slaves  taken  at
Kheibar.  But  money,  which  the  victors  obtained  plentifully  at  Kheibar,
could  purchase  them  cheaply  in  any  part  of  Arabia.


XXI.]  ORDINANCES  PROMULGATED  381

auxiliaries,  and  other  purposes  of  State.  The  power  of
Mohammad  no  longer  rested  on  spiritual  resource  alone,
but  on  the  more  substantial  basis  also  of  the  thews  and
sinews  of  war.

Even  where  the  lands  having  been  gained  by  storm  were Jewish
apportioned  as  private  property,  it  was  found  expedient,  in {eVin^o°cu-
the  absence  of  other  cultivators,  to  leave  the  Jews  in  posses- pation
sion, on the same condition as with the public lands,
namely,  surrendering  half  the  produce. An  appraiser  was
deputed yearly  to  assess the  amount,  to  realise  the  rents,
and bring them  to  Medina.^ This  arrangement  continued
till  the  Caliphate  of  'Omar,^  when,  there  being  no  longer  any
scarcity  of  Muslim  husbandmen,  the  Jews  were  expatriated,
and  entire  possession  taken  of  the  land.^

Some  special  ordinances  were  promulgated  in  this  cam- Special
paign. The  flesh  of  the  domestic  ass  (which  the  army  on ordinances

" t>  V ^  J  promulgated

their first approach to Kheibar were driven by  want of  at  Kheibar
other food to eat) was forbidden, as  well as  that  of  all
carnivorous  animals.* Some  restrictions  were  laid  upon  the

^  'Abdallah  ibn  Rawaha  first  performed  this  duty,  being  a  sort  of
arbiter  between  the  Jewish  cultivators  and  the  Muslim  proprietors.
Whenever  the  former  charged  him  with  exceeding  in  his  estimate,  he
would  say:  'If  it  seem  good  unto  you,  take  ye  the  estimated  sum  and
give  us  the  crop,  or  give  us  the  estimated  sum,  and  keep  ye  the  crop.'
The  Jews  greatly  esteemed  his  justice.  He  was  killed  the  year  following
at  Muta.

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  779  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1590.

^  Such  is  the  reason  assigned  by  Al-Wakidi.  Advantage  was
naturally  taken  by  'Omar,  when  he  decided  on  the  expatriation  of  the
Jews,  of  the  fact  that  his  son  'Abdallah  had  been  wounded  in  his
possessions  at  Kheibar;  but  it  is  admitted  that  there  was  no  proof  as  to
who  committed  the  outrage.  'Omar  concluded  that  it  must  have  been
the  Jews,  simply  because  it  was  the  second  instance  of  the  kind.  The
previous  case  was  one  of  murder  ;  but  the  perpetrator  was  not  discovered,
and  therefore  Mohammad  justly  paid  the  blood-money  as  a  public
charge.

Two  other  grounds  to  justify  'Omar's  expulsion  of  the  Jews  are  given
by  tradition,  (i)  Mohammad  had  stipulated  that  the  Jews  were  to  hold
possession,  pending  his  pleasure, — they  were  mere  tenants-at-will.  (2)
Mohammad  said  on  his  death-bed  that  no  religion  but  Islam  was  to  be
permitted  throughout  the  peninsula.  According  to  Sprenger,  'Omar
paid  the  Jews  of  Kheibar  half  the  value  of  their  lands  as  compensation.
See  the  Caliphate,  p.  156.

*  See  similar  prohibitions  in  the  Kor'an  as  to  what  is  torn,  or  dicth  of
itself,  &c.  (Sura  v.  i  ff.). There  are  some  curious  traditions  on  this  part


38i  CONQUEST  OF  KHEIBAR  [chap.

immediate  liberty  of  cohabitation  heretofore  enjoyed  in
respect  of  female  captives  ;  but,  of  whatever  nature,  it  is
clear  that  they  did  not  fetter  Mohammad  in  his  marriage
with  the  captive  Saflya.^  The  most  stringent  rules  were
issued  to  prevent  fraudulent  appropriation  from  the  common
stock  of  booty.  '  No  Believer  shall  sell  aught  of  the  spoil,
until  it  has  been  divided ;  nor  shall  he  take  a  beast  there-
from and,  after  riding  upon  it  until  it  become  lean,  return
it  to  the  common  stock ;  nor  shall  he  take  and  wear  a
garment,  and  then  send  it  back  threadbare.'  A  follower
was  convicted  of  the  theft  of  two  sandal-straps ;  the  articles
were  insignificant;  yet,  said  the  Prophet  to  the  thief:
'  Verily  there  shall  be  cut  out  for  thee  hereafter  two  thongs
like  unto  them  of  fire.'  When  the  army  alighted  before
Wadi  al-Kora,  one  of  Mohammad's  servants  was  shot  by  an
arrow  while  in  the  act  of  taking  the  litter  down  from  one  of
the  camels.  '  Welcome  to  Paradise ! '  exclaimed  the  by-
standers. 'Never,'  said  Mohammad,  'by  Him  in  whose
hand  my  life  is !  Even  now  his  vestment  is  burning  upon  him
in  the  fire  of  Hell ;  for  he  pilfered  it  before  Kheibar  from
amongst  the  booty.' ^
A  martyr  As a Counterfoil, the following tradition assumes the

dise  who'^had  Certainty  of  Paradise  by  the  mere  profession  of  Islam. Al-

P  ^  of  the  narrative  ;  the  soldiers  were  everywhere  boiling  asses'  flesh  in
their  pots  throughout  the  camp,  when  the  order  was  given,  and  forth-
with they  all  overturned  their  pots. Horseflesh  is  allowed.

^  The  subject  is  one  into  which,  from  its  nature,  I  cannot  enter  with
much  detail.  Some  traditions  hold  that  Mohammad  now  prescribed
that  the  '  istibra^  or  interval  required  of  a  woman  before  re-marriage,  was
to  be  equally  observed  with  respect  to  women  taken  in  war.  The  Sunna
has  fixed  this  period  for  female  slaves  at  half  the  interval  required  for
free  women, — that  this,  two  months  (or  possibly  a  month  and  a  half),
before  the  lapse  of  which,  consorting  with  slave  girls  so  captured  (suppos-
ing the  restriction  to  apply  to  such)  would  be  unlawful.  Some  traditions
make  the  prohibition  delivered  on  the  present  occasion  to  apply  to
pregnant  women  only.  Certainly,  in  the  campaigns  of  the  Caliphate,
female  captives  were  immediately  consorted  with  by  their  captors  even  on
the  field  of  battle.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  765  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  292.  The  story  is  very
possibly  exaggerated,  it  being  an  object  among  the  Muslims  to  make  the
general  right  of  the  army  in  all  the  booty  taken  by  it  as  sacred  as
possible.  But  it  shows  the  tendency  and  spirit  of  the  system,  under
which  a  tradition  of  this  nature  could  be  put  into  the  mouth  of  the
Prophet,  and,  as  such,  gain  currency.


XXI.]


MOHAMMAD  MARRIES  UM  HABlBA


383


Aswad,  shepherd  of  one  of  the  Jews  of  Kheibar,  came  over
to  Mohammad,  and  declared  himself  a  believer.  Abandon-
ing his  flock,  he  straightway  joined  the  Muslim  army  and
fought  in  its  ranks.^  He  was  struck  by  a  stone  and  killed,
before  he  had  as  yet  offered  up  a  single  prayer.  But  he
died  fighting  for  the  faith,  and  had  secured  the  Martyr's
crown.  Surrounded  by  a  company  of  his  followers,  Moham-
mad visited  the  corpse,  which  had  been  laid  out  for  him  to
pray  over.  When  he  drew  close  to  the  spot,  he  stopped  and
modestly  looked  aside.  '  Why  dost  thou  thus  avert  thy
face  ? '  asked  those  about  him.  '  Because,'  said  Mohammad,
'two  black-eyed  "  Houries"  of  Paradise  are  with  the  Martyr
now ;  they  wipe  the  dust  from  off  his  face,  and  fondly
solace  him.'  ^

On  the  way  home,  Mohammad  had  the  pleasure  of
welcoming  his  cousin  Ja'far,  who,  with  some  of  the  exiles  just
returned  from  Abyssinia,  went  out  to  meet  him.^  '  I  know
not,'  said  Mohammad  on  this  occasion,  'which  of  the  two
delighteth  me  the  most,  the  conquest  of  Kheibar  or  the
return  of  Ja'far.'  The  army,  no  less  pleased,  acceded  cheer-
fully to  his  proposal  that  Ja'far  and  his  companions  should
share  equally  with  them  in  the  spoil  of  Kheibar.

On  his  return  to  Medina,  Mohammad  took  to  wife  Um
Hablba,  daughter  of  Abu  Sufyan,  thus  consummating  the
marriage  which  the  Negus  had  contracted  for  him  in
Abyssinia.  There  were  now  nine  wives,  besides  two  female
slaves,  in  the  harim  of  the  Prophet.

Before  closing  this  chapter,  which  contains  the  last
notice  of  the  Jews,  I  ought  to  mention  the  tale  of  Moham-

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  769  f.  It  is  said  that  he  asked  Mohammad  what  he
was  to  do  with  his  flock.  On  the  principle  that  a  believer  must  first
discharge  all  his  trusts  and  obligations,  even  those  contracted  with
idolaters,  before  joining  the  standard  of  Islam,  the  Prophet  desired  him
to  throw  a  handful  of  gravel  in  the  face  of  his  sheep  and  goats,  and  they
all  ran  off  forthwith  to  their  owner  in  the  fortress.  On  the  same  principle,
it  is  said  that  'All  and  other  converts  first  scrupulously  discharged  the
trusts  which  Koreish  had  committed  to  them,  before  leaving  Mecca  to
join  Mohammad  at  Medina.

^  'Whenever  a  martyr  is  slain  in  battle,'  so  runs  the  tradition,  'his
two  black-eyed  "  Houries  "  embrace  him,  wipe  the  dust  from  his  face,  and
say, — "  The  Lord  cast  dust  on  the  face  of  him  who  hath  cast  dust  on  thine ^
and  slay  him  who  slew  thee  !  " '

3  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  781  fif.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  282.


Mohammad
welcomes
Ja'far  and
other

Abyssinian
exiles.
Autumn,
A.H.  VII.
A.D.  628


And  marries
Um  Hablba


Mohammad
bewitched
by  Jews


384


CONQUEST  OF  KHEIBAR


[chap.


Siiras  cxiii.,
cxiv.


Considera-
tions as  to
credibility
of  the  tale


Its  credi-
bility partly
sustained


mad's  having  been  bewitched  by  a  Jewish  spell.  On  his
return  from  Al-Hodeibiya,  the  Jews  still  remaining  at
Medina  (ostensibly  converted  but  hypocrites  at  heart)  bribed
the  sorcerer  Labid  and  his  daughters  to  bewitch  Mohammad.
This  they  did  by  secretly  procuring  hairs  combed  from  the
Prophet's  head,  and  tying  eleven  knots  with  them  on  a  palm-
branch,  which  was  then  sunk  in  a  well  and  covered  with  a
large  stone.  The  enchantment  took  effect.  Mohammad
began  to  pine  away,  to  fancy  he  had  done  things  which  in
reality  he  never  had  done,  to  lose  his  appetite  and  neglect
his  wives.  At  last,  Gabriel  having  told  him  the  secret,  the
well  was  emptied,  and  the  knots  untied.  Immediately  the
spell  broke,  and  the  Prophet  was  relieved.

I  confess  myself  unable  to  say  what  portion  of  the  tale  is
likely  to  be  true,  or  whether  it  has  any  foundation  in  fact  at
all.  The  common  tradition  is,  that  the  last  two  Suras  in
the  Ko'ran  were  revealed  on  this  occasion,  containing  a
charm  (still  used  as  such)  against  spells  and  incantations ;
and  that,  during  the  recitation  of  the  eleven  verses  which
they  contain,  the  knots  unravelled  themselves  one  by  one  till
the  whole  were  unloosed,  and  the  charm  dissolved.  One  of
these  Siaras  is  as  follows  : —

Say: — I  flee  for  Refuge  to  the  Lord  of  the  Daybreak,— from  the  evil
of  that  which  he  hath  created  ;  and  from  the  evil  of  the  darkness  when  it
overshadoweth  ;  and  from  the  evil  of  the  Women  that  blow  upon  the
knots  ;  and  from  the  evil  of  the  Envious  man  when  he  envieth.

The  story  may  possibly  have  grown  out  of  the  penulti-
mate verse  of  this  Sura,  in  which  Mohammad  prays  to  be
delivered  '  from  the  evil  of  women  blowing  upon  knots.'  Or,
on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  founded  on  suspicions  actually
entertained  by  Mohammad  against  the  Jews,  of  sorcery  by
the  tying  of  knots  and  other  forms  of  incantation ;  and  these
suspicions  may  have  led  to  the  composition  of  the  Siira.
The  latter  alternative  is  the  more  likely,  as  Mohammad  had
already  suspected  the  Jews  of  bewitching  the  Muslim  women
into  barrenness.^  On  the  present  occasion,  he  is  said  to  have
caused  the  well  into  which  the  mysterious  knots  were  cast
to  be  dug  up,  and  another  sunk  in  its  place._  After  visiting
the  garden  watered  by  the  well,  he  told  'A'isha  that  '  the
* Vide  supra,  p.  199.


XXI.]  MOHAMMAD  BEWITCHED  BY  THE  JEWS  385

date-trees  in  it  were  like  devils'  heads,  and  the  water  dark  as
a  decoction  of  Henna.'  She  inquired  whether  the  incident
might  with  propriety  be  spoken  of;  he  replied  that  it  would
be  better  not  to  divulge  it,  lest  the  evil  of  witchcraft  should
spread  amongst  his  people. The  well  was  filled  up.^

^  Some  traditions  say  that  the  sorcerer  was  put  to  death  ;  but  the
more  reliable  account  is,  that  Mohammad  let  him  go  free,  but  turned
with  aversion  from  him.  Al-Wakidi  has  a  profusion  of  traditions  on  the
episode.  Some  say  it  was  Labld's  sisters  who  aided  him  ;  and  that  it
was  two  angels  that  revealed  the  plot  to  the  Prophet.


2  B


CHAPTER XXII

THE FULFILLED PILGRIMAGE  ^


Expeditions
in  autumn
and  winter.
AH.  VII.
A.D.  628


Mohammad
sets  out  on
Lesser  Pil-
grimage.
A.H.  VII.
February,
A.D.  629


A.H.  Vll.— February,  A.D.  629

The  remainder  of  the  Seventh  year  of  the  Hijra,  that  is,  the
autumn  and  winter  of  628  A.D.,  was  passed  by  Mohammad  at
Medina.  Several  expeditions  were,  during  this  period,  des-
patched, under  different  leaders,  in  various  directions.  Be-
yond the  chastisement  and  plunder  of  some  offending  tribes,
and  an  occasional  reverse,  they  were  not  attended  by  any
important  results.  But  they  served  to  extend  the  influence
of  Mohammad  and  bring  him  gradually  into  relations,  hostile
or  friendly,  with  surrounding  and  even  distant  tribes,^

The  month  at  length  came  round  when  Mohammad,
according  to  treaty,  might  visit  Mecca  and  fulfil  the  'Omra
or  Lesser  Pilgrimage,  from  the  rites  of  which  he  had  been  in
the  previous  year  debarred.  Besides  those  who  had  made
the  unsuccessful  pilgrimage  to  Al-Hodeibiya,  many  others
accompanied  him,  so  that  the  cavalcade  numbered  now  about
2,000  men. Each  was  armed,  according  to  stipulation,  only

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  788  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1594  f. ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  300  ff.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  87  f.

^  Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar  were  among  the  commanders,  and  the  expedi-
tions were  to  distant  parts  ;  one  beyond  Mecca  towards  Nejran,  the
others  to  Nejd  in  the  east,  and  towards  Kheibar  in  the  north.  One  of
the  parties  consisting  of  thirty  men  was  cut  to  pieces,  the  leader  only
escaping.  On  another  occasion  many  prisoners  were  taken,  and  among
them  (according  to  Sprenger)  a  female  of  great  beauty  who  was  sent  to
Mecca  in  ransom  for  certain  prisoners  ;  it  seems  doubtful,  however,
whether  there  were  now  any  Muslim  prisoners  there.  In  another
expedition,  Mohammad  chid  Osama,  son  of  Zeid,  for  killing  an  antagonist
who  shouted  aloud  the  Muslim  creed  ;  '  What !  didst  thou  split  open
his  breast  to  see  whether  he  told  the  truth  or  not.''  Osama  promised
not  to  do  the  like  again.

386


CHAP.  XXII. ] SETS  OUT  ON  LESSER  PILGRIMAGE  387

with  a  sword  ;  but,  as  a  precaution  against  treachery,  a  heavy
reserve  of  armour  was  carried  separately.  Mohammad,  son
of  Maslama,  with  a  hundred  horse,  marched  in  advance  of
the  pilgrims.  Sixty  camels  for  sacrifice  were  also  driven  in
front.  At  Marr  az-Zahran,  a  stage  from  Mecca,  Mohammad  Precaution-
sent forward the store of  armour to  a  valley  outside  the  ^^'^  ^""''f  "?«-

.  ■'  ments  before

sacred territory,  where it remained guarded by  200  men, entering
while  the  rest  advanced  to  the  Ka'ba. The  victims  were -^^^"^
also  sent forward to  a  spot  in the immediate  vicinity  of
Mecca.

Meanwhile,  Koreish,  apprised  of  Mohammad's  approach,  Mohammad
according  to  agreement  evacuated  the  city  in  a  body ;  and  ^^^'^  .
ascending  the  adjacent  hills,  expected  with  curious  eye  the  performs
Exile  so  long  the  troubler  of  their  city.  At  last  the  cava!-  ^aTa  "'^
cade  was  seen  emerging  from  the  northern  valley.  At  its
head  was  Mohammad,  seated  on  Al-Kaswa ;  'Abdallah  ibn
Rawaha,  on  foot  in  front,  held  the  bridle  ;  around  on  every
side  crowded  the  chief  Companions ;  and  behind,  in  a  long
extended  Hne,  the  rest  of  the  pilgrims  on  camels  and  on  foot.
Seven  years  had  passed  since  Mohammad  and  the  Refugees
last  saw  their  native  valley,  and  now  with  quickened  step  and
long-repressed  desire,  they  hastened  forward  and,  as  the
Holy  Temple  came  in  view,  raised  high  the  pilgrim  cry,
Labbeik  !  Labbeik  !  Still  mounted  on  his  camel,  the  pilgrim
mantle  drawn  under  his  right  arm  and  thrown  over  the  left
shoulder,  Mohammad  approached  the  Ka'ba,  touched  the
Black  Stone  reverentially  with  his  staff,  and  made  the  seven
circuits  of  the  sacred  spot.  The  people  followed,  and,  at  the
bidding  of  Mohammad,  to  show  Koreish  they  were  not
weakened  (as  their  enemies  pretended)  by  the  climate  of
Medina,  they  ran  the  first  three  circuits  at  a  rapid  pace.
Just  then  'Abdallah,  as  he  led  the  Prophet's  camel,  shouted
at  the  pitch  of  his  voice  warlike  and  defiant  verse.  But
'Omar  checked  him  ;  and  Mohammad  said  :  —  '  Gently  !
son  of  Rawaha !  Recite  not  this.  Say  rather,  There  is  no
God  but  the  Lord  alone !  It  is  He  that  hath  upJiolden  His
servant^  and  exalted  His  people  !  Alone  hath  He  put  to  flight
the  hosts  of  the  Confederates.''  'Abdallah  proclaimed  the
words  accordingly :  and  the  people  taking  them  up  shouted
the  cry  aloud  as  they  encircled  the  Ka'ba,  till  the  mighty
sound  rang  round  the  valley.


388


THE  FULFILLED  PILGRIMAGE


[chap.


And  slays
the  victims


Guard  over
weapons  do
the  same


Public
prayer  per-
formed at
the  Ka'ba


Singular
sight  pre-
sented at
Mecca


The  circuits  completed,  Mohammad,  still  upon  his  camel,
proceeded  to  the  adjoining  eminences  of  the  Safa  and
Merwa,  and  rode  seven  times  from  one  to  the  other,  according
to  ancient  custom.  The  victims  having  then  been  placed  in
line  at  the  Merwa,  were  sacrificed ;  Mohammad  calling
aloud :  '  This  is  the  place  of  sacrifice,  and  so  is  every  open
valley  of  Mecca.'  Then  he  shaved  his  head,  and  thus  ended
the  ceremonies  of  the  Lesser  Pilgrimage.  His  next  care  was
to  relieve  his  followers  on  guard  over  the  weapons  at  Yajaj,
who  then  fulfilled  their  pilgrimage  after  the  same  example.

On  the  morrow,  Mohammad  ascended  the  inner  chamber
of  the  Ka'ba  and  remained  there  till  the  hour  of  prayer.
Notwithstanding  that  the  Temple  was  still  garnished  with
the  emblems  of  idolatry,  Bilal,  mounting  its  roof,  summoned
the  pilgrims  with  the  usual  cry  to  mid-day  prayer.  They
crowded  round  from  every  quarter  ;  and  so  under  the  shadow
of  the  Holy  House  the  service  was  led  by  the  Prophet  in  the
same  form  as  in  the  Mosque  of  Medina.

It  was  surely  a  strange  sight  which  at  this  time  presented
itself  in  the  vale  of  Mecca — a  sight,  one  might  almost  say,
unique  in  history.  The  ancient  city  is  for  three  days  evacu-
ated altogether  by  its  inhabitants,  and  every  house  deserted.
As  they  retire,  the  exiles,  many  years  banished  from  their
birthplace,  accompanied  by  their  allies,  fill  the  valley,  revisit
the  empty  homes  of  their  childhood,  and  within  the  short
allotted  period  fulfil  the  rites  of  pilgrimage.  The  ousted
citizens  with  their  families,  climbing  the  heights  around,  take
refuge  under  tents  or  rocks  amongst  the  hills  and  glens  ;
and,  clustering  on  the  overhanging  peak  of  Abu  Kobeis,
thence  watch  the  movements  of  the  visitors  beneath,  as
with  the  Prophet  at  their  head  they  perform  the  sacred  rites
— anxiously  scanning  every  figure,  if  perchance  to  recognise
among  the  worshippers  some  long-lost  friend  or  relative.^  It
was  a  scene  rendered  possible  only  by  the  throes  that  gave
birth  to  Islam.


^  Her  Highness  the  Begum  of  Bhopal  thus  describes  the  hill  Abu
Kobeis:  'The  ascent  of  this  hill  is  only  about  one  mile  from  the  base.
The  view  from  its  summit  of  the  house  of  God,  its  enclosure,  and  of  the
whole  district  comprised  within  the  sacred  boundary,  is  very  distinct  and
picturesque.  It  is  possible  even  to  see  distinctly  the  worshippers  employed
at  their  devotions  within  the  holy  shrine.' — Pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  p.  204.


takes  Mei-
muna  to


XXII.]  MOHAMMAD  WORSHIPS  AT  THE  KA'BA  389

While  at  Mecca,  Mohammad  entered  none  of  the  houses  Mohammad
there,  but  lived  in  a  tent  of  leather  pitched  for  him  near  the
Ka'ba,  Yet  he  held  friendly  converse  with  several  of  the  wife
citizens.  Nor  was  he  deterred  either  by  his  sacred  errand,
his  advancing  years,  or  having  lately  welcomed  three  new
inmates  to  his  harim,  from  negotiating  another  marriage^
Meimuna,  the  favoured  lady,  six-and-tvventy  years  of  age,
was  sister-in-law  of  his  uncle  Al-'Abbas,  into  whose  keeping
since  her  widowhood  she  had  committed  the  disposal  of  her
hand.  Mohammad  must  have  listened  to  the  overtures  of
marriage  the  more  readily  as  two  of  her  sisters  had  already
married  into  his  family ;  but  in  truth  the  proposal  of  the
young  and  charming  widow  who  now  offered  herself  as  his
bride  was  too  congenial  to  the  Prophet's  tastes  to  require
much  pressure  on  the  uncle's  part.


Mohammad  endeavoured  to  turn  the  present  opportunity Mohammad

warned  to
leave  Mecca


for  conciliating  the  citizens  of  Mecca  to  the  best  effect,  and, ^'^''"'^'^ '°


as  the  sequel  will  show,  not  without  success.  But  the  time
was  short.  Already  the  stipulated  three  days  were  ended,
and  he  had  entered  on  a  fourth,  when  Suheil  and  Huweitib,
chief  men  of  Koreish,  appeared  before  him  and  said  :  '  The
period  allowed  thee  hath  elapsed :  depart  now  therefore  from
amongst  us.'  To  which  the  Prophet  courteously  replied  :
'  And  what  harm  if  ye  allowed  me  to  stay  a  little  longer,
celebrate  my  nuptials  in  your  midst,  and  make  for  the  guests
a  feast  at  which  ye  too  might  all  sit  down  ? '  '  Nay,'  they
roughly  answered;  'of  any  food  of  thine  we  have  no  need-
Withdraw  from  hence  ! '  Mohammad  gave  immediate  orders  Consum-
for  departure  :  and  by  night  not  one  of  the  pilgrims  was  left "'^^^f  "'^

"  ...  r o  marriage

behind.  Placing  his  bride  in  charge  of  his  servant  Abu  Rafi',  with  Mei-
he  himself  proceeded  at  once  to  Sarif,  distant  from  the  city  ™""^
eight  or  ten  Arabian  miles.  In  the  evening,  Meimuna
having  come  up,  the  marriage  was  there  consummated.
Early  next  morning,  the  march  was  resumed,  and  the  cortege
returned  to  Medina.  Meimuna  survived  the  Prophet  fifty
years,  and  was,  by  her  desire,  buried  on  the  spot  on  which
she  had  celebrated  her  marriage  with  him.^

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  790;  At-Tabari,  i.  1595.  She  died  A.H.  LXI.,  aged
eighty.  Burton  states  that  her  tomb  is  still  visited  at  this  place  in  the
Wadi  Fatima. The  following  anecdote  may  be  of  interest  to  the  reader  :


39°


THE  FULFILLED  PILGRIMAGE


[chap.


Number  of
his  harim
now  complete


Sister  and
niece  of  his
bride  ac-
company
him  to
Medina


Khalid,
'Amr,  and
'Othman
ibn  Talha
go  over  to
Mohammad


The  harIm  of  Mohammad  had  now  reached  its  Hmit ;  for
this  was  the  last  marriage  contracted  by  him.  There  were
in  it  at  this  time  ten  wives,  besides  two  servile  concubines,
but  Zeinab,  daughter  of  Khozeima,  died  before  him  ;  so  that
the  number  was  then  reduced  to  nine,  or,  including  concubines,
eleven.  Some  other  women  are  mentioned  by  tradition,
whose  intended  marriage  was  at  the  last  stage  broken  off.
The  details  in  most  instances  are  obscure.  Of  one  case,  at
any  rate,  there  can  be  no  doubt :  for  a  few  years  afterwards
'Ikrima,  having  married  the  lady  in  question,  was  subjected
to  grave  animadversion  by  his  troops,  as  if  a  slight  had
thereby  been  cast  on  the  Prophet's  memory.  Abu  Bekr,
however,  relieved  him  of  all  blame,  on  the  ground  that  the
marriage  had  been  broken  off  by  the  Prophet  before  it  was
consummated. 1

Mohammad  carried  with  him  his  bride's  sister,  Salma,
widow  of  Hamza  (who,  apparently,  had  not  accompanied  her
husband  to  Medina),  and  'Omarah,  her  unmarried  daughter.
Ja'far,  'All,  and  Zeid,  each  contending  for  the  honour  of
receiving  the  damsel  into  his  family,  Mohammad  decided
in  favour  of  Ja'far,  because  he  was  married  to  her  aunt
Asma.

Another  sister  of  Meimuna  was  the  mother  of  Khalid,  the
famous  warrior  who  had  turned  the  tide  of  the  battle  at  Ohod
against  the  Muslims.  Not  long  after  the  marriage  of  his
aunt  to  the  Prophet,  Khalid  repaired  to  Medina,  and  gave  in
his  adhesion  to  the  cause of  Islam.^ Two  others  followed


A  deputation  from  a  certain  tribe  came  to  Medina,  asking  Mohammad
for  help  to  discharge  a  debt,  which  he  promised  to  give  when  the  tithes
came  in.  A  nephew  of  Meimuna,  being  with  this  party,  went  to  see  his
aunt.  Mohammad  coming  suddenly  into  the  place,  was  disconcerted  at
the  sight  of  a  young  man  in  such  a  place  ;  his  visage  showed  marks  of
wrath,  and  he  turned  to  go  away.  '  It  is  only  my  sister's  son,'  cried
Meimuna  after  him.  So  he  returned.  Then  he  took  the  young  man
into  the  Mosque  for  the  mid-day  prayer  ;  and  dismissed  him  with  a
blessing,  placing  both  hands  upon  his  head,  and  drawing  them  over  his
nose.

^  See  Caliphate,  p.  40.  The  details  regarding  these  unfulfilled
marriages  are  not  very  edifying  ;  neither,  since  they  are  in  none  of  our
early  biographies,  are  they  very  trustworthy.  A  paper  will  be  found
with  details  of  the  wives,  concubines,  and  broken-off  marriages,  by  J.  D.
Bate,  Indian  Antiquary,  April  1878,

2  Al-Wakidi,  p.  303  ff.


XXII.]  POSITION  AT  MECCA  IMPROVES  391

him.  One,  his  friend,  the  equally  famous  'Annr,  whose  poetic
talents  had  often  been  used  for  the  annoyance  and  injury  of
Mohammad.  Of  versatile  ability  and  weighty  in  council,  he
had  been  employed  by  Koreish  in  their  embassy  to
Abyssinia.^  The  other  was  'Othman,  son  of  Talha,  a  chief  of
some  note,  and  custodian  of  the  Ka'ba.  He  had,  no  doubt,
in  that  capacity,  attended  with  the  keys  of  office  to  give
Mohammad  admittance  to  the  Holy  House  ;  and,  perhaps,
like  many  others,  who  gazed  from  a  respectful  distance  on
that  memorable  scene,  was  gained  over  by  the  devotion  of
the  Prophet  to  the  national  shrine,  and  the  elevation  and
beauty  of  the  services  which  he  there  performed.

The position of Mohammad at Mecca was greatly Moham-
strengthened by  the  accession of  such leading  men. The ^o'sitfonat
balance  was  already  wavering  ;  it  required  little  now  to  throw Mecca  im-
it  entirely  on  the  side  of  Islam. To  what  extent  persons  of  P''°^'"S
less  note  and  influence  about  this  time  came  over  to  Medina
or  remaining  at  Mecca  declared  in  favour  of  Mohammad,  is
not  told  to  us. But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  movement
was  not  confined  to  those  just  mentioned,  but  was  wide  and
general ;  and  that  the  cause  of  Islam  was  gaining  popularity
day  by  day.

His  visit  to  Mecca  enabled  Mohammad  thus  to  see  and  Coup  d'etat
estimate  the  growth  of  his  own  influence  there,  as  well  as  the  possible
waning  power  and  spirit  of  Koreish.  The  citizens  of  Mecca
were  weary  of  intestine  war  and  bloodshed.  The  advocates
of  peace  and  compromise  were  growing  in  numbers  and  in
confidence.  Among  Koreish  there  were  no  chiefs  of  marked
ability  or  commanding  influence.  A  bold  and  rapid  stroke
might  put  an  end  to  the  struggle  which  for  so  many  years
had  depressed  and  agitated  Mecca.  A  coup  d'etat  was  fast
becoming  possible.

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  716  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1601  f.  [His  name  is  often,  but
wrongly,  written  Amru  or  Amrou,  because  the  Arabs  add  a  w  to  it  to
distinguish  it  from  the  name  'Omar,  which  has  the  same  consonants.
This  w,  however,  is  never  pronounced.]  He  was  one  of  the  envoys  sent
by  Koreish  to  Abyssinia  ;  vide  supra,  p.  92.


CHAPTER  XXIII


Unfortun-
ate expedi-
tion against
Suleim.
A.H.  VII.
April,  A.D.
629


Marauding
party  sent
against  Beni
Leith.
A.H.  vni.
June,  A.D.
629


Beni  Murra
chastised


BATTLE OF MUTA, AND OTHER EVENTS IN THE FIRST
EIGHT MONTHS OF A.H. VII. — A.D. 629

MTAT.  61

During  the  spring  and  summer  of  the  Eighth  year  of  the
Hijra,  several  miUtary  excursions  were  undertaken,  some  of
which  ended  disastrously.  About  a  month  after  returning
from  pilgrimage,  Mohammad  despatched  a  party  of  fifty  men
to  the  Beni  Suleim,  under  a  converted  chief  of  their  own,
with  the  view  apparently  of  winning  them  over  to  the  faith.
But,  suspicious  of  their  designs,  they  received  the  strangers
with  a  cloud  of  arrows.  Most  of  them  were  slain,  and  the
leader  with  difficulty  escaped.  The  tribe,  however,  must
have  seen  cause  to  change  their  views,  for  we  find  them
amongst  those  who  shortly  after  sent  embassies  of  submission
to  the  Prophet,  and  also  contributed  an  important  contingent
in  the  coming  attack  on  Mecca.^

A  month  or  two  later  an  expedition  was  planned  against
a  petty  branch  of  the  Beni  Leith,  on  the  road  to  Mecca,  the
object  of  which  is  not  stated.  The  encampment  was  surprised,
and  their  camels  plundered.  But  the  marauders  were  in  their
turn  pursued,  and  only  saved  by  rapid  flight.^  In  the
preceding  winter,  a  small  party,  sent  by  Mohammad  towards
Fadak,  had  been  cut  to  pieces  by  the  Beni  Murra.  A
detachment  of  200  men  was  now  despatched  to  inflict
chastisement  upon  them  :  '  If  the  Lord  deliver  them  into  thy
hands,'  said  Mohammad  to  the  leader,  '  let  not  a  soul  of  them
escape.'  The  commission  was  executed  with  success.  All
who  fell  within  the  reach  of  the  avenging  force  were  slain,  and
their  camels  carried  off  in  triumph  to  Medina.^

1  Al-Wakidi,  p.  303  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  89.

2  Al-Wakidi,  p.  307  f. ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  89  f.

3  Al-Wakidi,  p.  297  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  91.


CHAP,  xxili.]  CAUSE  OF  WAR  393

Soon  after,  a  party  of  fifteen  men  was  sent  to  Dhat  Atlah, Mishap  at
on  the  borders  of  S\'ria.^ There  they  found  a  great  multitude ?'?f',^;!^'^'
assembled,  who  were  called  upon  to  embrace  Islam. A  shower  July,  a.d.
of  arrows  was  the decisive  answer. The Muslims fought ^^
desperately ;  one  man  alone  survived  to  tell  the  tale. Mo-
hammad was  much  afflicted  by  this  calamity,  and  planned  an
expedition  to  avenge  it.^ But  tidings  reached  him  that  the
place  had  been  deserted,  and  he  relinquished  the  idea  for  the
moment. As  in  the  case  of  similar  mishaps,  this  reverse  is Perhaps
described  by  tradition  with  enigmatical  brevity,  so  that  it  is the  cause  of
difficult  to  determine  the  object  of  the  expedition. It  may on  Muta
have  been  an  embassy  to  certain  tribes,  or  a  secret  mission
to  spy  out  the  cause  of  rumoured  gatherings  on  the  Syrian
frontier.

This  disaster  not  improbably  paved  the  way  for  the  grand Army
attack  directed  shortly  after  against  the border-districts  of  ["^'"'^^ff  ,.
Syria. The cause, however, ordinarily assigned for this upon  Muta.
invasion  of  the  Roman  territory  was  the  murder  by  the  chief- t'^'  ^'"•

_  _,  _  September,

tarn  Shurahbil,  at  Maab  or  Muta,  of  a  messenger  on  his  way  a.d.  629
with  a  despatch  from  Mohammad,  to  the  Ghassanid  prince  at
Bosra.  It  was  immediately  resolved  to  punish  the  offending
chiefs  A  general  call  of  all  the  fighting  men  was  made,  and
a  camp  of  3,000  soldiers  formed  outside  the  city  at  Al-Jurf
A  white  banner  was  mounted  ;  and  the  Prophet,  placing  it  in
the  hands  of  his  adopted  son  Zeid,  bade  him  march  to  the
spot  where  his  messenger  had  been  slain,  summon  the  inhabi-
tants to  embrace  Islam,  and,  should  they  refuse,  then  in  the
name  of  the  Lord  to  draw  the  sword  against  them.  If  Zeid
were  cut  down,  then  Ja'far  was  to  command ;  if  Ja'far,  then
'Abdallah  ibn  Rawaha  ;  and  if  he  too  were  disabled,  then
the  army  should  choose  their  own  commander.  Mohammad
accompanied  them  as  far  as  the  Mount  of  Farewell,  a  rising
ground  some  little  distance  from  Medina ;  and,  as  they
passed  onwards,  blessed  them  thus  :  '  The  Lord  shield  you
from  every  evil,  and  bring  you  back  in  peace,  laden  with
spoil  ! '

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  983  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1601  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  308  ;  Ibn
Sa'd,  p.  92.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  791  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1610  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  309  ff.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  92  f.

^  [Ibn  Hisham  does  not  mention  Shurahbil.]


394  BATTLE  OF  MUTA  [chap.

Preparations Tidings  of  the  coming  army  reached  Shurahbil,  who  forth-
made  by with  summoned  to  his  aid the  tribes  of  the  vicinity. The

Syrian  trioes  ,  ,, .  .  .  .  .  .  , r- . , ,

for  its  repulse  hostile  mcursions  from  time  to  time  against  the  Syrian  border,
the  repeated attacks  on  Dumat  al-Jandal,  the  conquest of
Kheibar,  and  the  generally  aggressive  attitude  of  Mohammad
towards  the  north,  had  no  doubt  led  to  precautionary  measures
along  the  frontier. Thus,  upon  the  alarm  of  invasion,  there
quickly  rallied  round  Shurahbil  a  large  and  (com^pared  with
Council  of the  troops  of  Medina)  a  well-appointed  army.^ Zeid first
Muslims  at^ received  the  startling  intelligence  on  reaching  Maan, The
Maan  enemy,  he  heard,  was  encamped  at  Maab ;  and  his  apprehension

was  increased  by  the  rumour  that  cohorts  were  with  the
force,  and  that  the  Kaiser  himself  was  at  their  head.  He
halted.  A  council  of  war  was  called,  and  for  two  days  the
Muslim  chiefs  discussed  the  difficulties  of  their  position.
Many  advised  that  a  letter  should  be  sent  to  Mohammad  ;
he  had  not  contemplated  an  encounter  with  the  Imperial
forces  ;  they  were  sent  only  to  avenge  the  treachery  of  a  petty
chief,  and  ought  not  to  risk  battle  with  an  enemy  so  vastly
their  superior  :  at  least,  the  Prophet  should  be  apprised  of  the
new  aspect  of  affairs,  and  fresh  instructions  asked.  '  Abdallah,
on  the  contrary,  urged  an  immediate  advance :  '  What  have
we  marched  thus  far  for,'  he  cried  indignantly,  '  but  for
this?  Is  it  in  our  numbers,  or  in  the  help  of  the  Lord,  that
we  put  our  trust?  Victory  or  the  martyr's  crown,  one  or
other,  is  secure.  TJien  forward !'  Overcome  by  the  fervid
appeal,  they  all  responded  :  '  By  the  Lord !  The  son  of
Rawaha  speaketh  truth.  Let  us  hasten  onwards  ! '  And  so
the  camp  advanced.
Battle  of  On  entering  the  Belka,  by  the southern shore  of  the

Dead  Sea,  they  suddenly  found  themselves  confronted  by  an
enemy  in  numbers  and  equipment  surpassing  anything  they
had  ever  seen  before.^  Alarmed  at  the  glittering  array,  they
fell  back  on the village of  Muta. There,  finding advan-

^  A  passage  in  Theophanes  makes  it  probable  that  this  great  army
was  brought  together  by  Theodorus,  brother  of  Heraclius,  which  may
account  for  the  rumour  reaching  the  Muslim  camp  that  the  Kaiser
himself  was  in  the  field  with  200,000  men.

^  The  Syrian  army  was  composed  partly  of  Greek  troops,  partly  of
the  semi-Christian  tribes  of  the  desert — the  Bahra,  Bali,  Wa'il,  Bekr,
Lakhm,  and  Judham.


Miita


XXIII.]  DISASTER  TO  MUSLIMS  395

tageous  ground,  they  halted,  and,  forming  front,  resolved  to
offer  battle.  The  Roman  phalanx,  with  its  cloud  of  Arabs
on  either  flank,  moved  steadily  down  upon  them.  Zeid,
seizing  the  white  flag,  led  his  columns  forward,  till,  fighting
bravely  at  their  head,  he  fell.  Then  Ja'far  leaped  from  his
horse,  and,  maiming  it  in  token  of  either  death  or  victory,
raised  aloft  the  banner,  and  urged  forward  the  attack.  Soon
covered  with  wounds,  he  yet  fought  on,  till  a  Roman  closing
with  him  dealt  the  fatal  blow.^  Seeing  Ja'far  fall,  'Abdallah
seized  the  standard,  but  he,  too,  speedily  met  the  same  fate.
Then  a  Citizen  rescuing  the  ensign  planted  it  in  the  ground,
and  cried  aloud, — Hither,  ye  Muslims,  hi  I  her  !  and  there  was
a  temporary  rally.  The  leadership  being  now  vacant,  a
council  hastily  called  together  fixed  their  choice  on  Khalid,
who  forthwith  assumed  the  command.  But  the  chance  of
victory  had  passed  away.  The  ranks  were  broken  ;  and  the
Romans  in  full  pursuit  were  already  making  havoc  amongst
the  fugitives.  It  remained  for  Khalid  but  to  save  the  Khalid
dispersed  columns  from  destruction,  and  even  this  taxed  his  ^^^^^
skill  and  prowess  to  the  utmost.  By  a  series  of  ingenious
and  rapid  movements,  he  drew  off  the  shattered  remains  of
the  army  to  a  safe  retreat.  But  he  dared  not  linger  longer
in  the  dangerous  vicinity,  and  so,  without  further  attempt
to  retrieve  the  day,  he  marched  back  straightway  to  Medina.
As  they  drew  nigh  the  city,  the  people  came  out  hooting  at
them,  cast  dust  in  their  faces,  crying  out :  '  Ah  ye  runaways,
who  flee  before  the  enemy  when  fighting  for  the  Lord  ! '
'  Nay,'  cried  Mohammad,  who  had  ridden  out  to  meet  them
on  his  mule,  carrying  the  little  son  of  Ja'far  before  him,
*  Nay,  these  are  not  runaways :  they  are  men  who  will  yet
again  return  to  battle,  if  the  Lord  will.'

The  loss  of  Ja'far,  brother  of 'All,  and  of  Zeid  the  faithful Moham-
and  beloved  friend  of  five-and-thirty  years,  affected  Moham- ™^^'^  ?"^^

-ii-r  ■  at  death  of

mad  deeply. On  the  first  intelligence  of  the  reverse,  and  of  ja'far  and
their  death,  which  he  received  early  in  the  day,  through  a

1  The  song  with  which  Ja'far  led  the  attack  is  no  doubt  apocryphal,
but  it  strongly  illustrates  the  fanatical  feeling  now  rapidly  growing  up :
Paradise!  he  cried,  amid  the  glare  and  heat  of  the  dusty  battlefield, —
'  Oh  Paradise  !  how  fair  a  resting-place  !  Cold  is  the  water  there,  and
sweet  the  shade.  Rotne,  Rome  !  thine  hour  of  tribulation  draweth  nigh.
When  I  close  with  her,  I  will  hurl  her  to  the  ground.^


Zeid


of  Farwa


396  BATTLE  OF  MUTA  [chap.

confidential  messenger,  he  went  to  the  house  of  Ja'far.  His
widow,  Asma,  had  just  bathed  and  dressed  her  little  ones
when  the  Prophet  entered,  embraced  the  children  tenderly,
and  burst  into  tears,  Asma  guessed  the  truth,  and  sobbed
aloud.  A  crowd  of  women  soon  gathering  round  her,
Mohammad  silently  left  the  place,  and  returning  home,
desired  them  to  send  provisions  to  Ja'far's  house.  *  No  food,'
he  said,  *  will  be  prepared  there  this  day ;  for  they  are  sunk
in  grief  at  the  loss  of  their  master.'  ^  He  then  went  to  the
house  of  Zeid  ;  and  Zeid's  little  daughter  rushed  into  his
arms,  crying  bitterly.  Mohammad  was  overcome,  and  wept
with  her.  A  bystander,  thinking  to  check  his  grief,  said  to
him  :  '  Why  thus,  O  Prophet  ? '  '  This,'  he  replied,  '  is  not
forbidden  grief;  it  is  but  the  fond  yearning  in  the  heart  of
friend  for  friend.'  ^
Martyrdom  In connection with  Muta,  may  be mentioned  here  the

story  of  the  Arab  Farwa,  Governor  of  Maan,  represented  by
tradition  (though  upon  imperfect  evidence)  as  one  of  the
early  martyrs.^  He  sent  a  despatch  announcing  his  conver-
sion to  Mohammad,  with  several  presents, — a  white  mule,  a
horse,  an  ass,  and  raiment  inwrought  with  gold.  The
presents  were  graciously  acknowledged  in  a  letter  from  the
Prophet,  which  contained  directions  for  the  spiritual  guidance
of  the  convert.  The  Roman  government,  hearing  of  his
defection,  sought,  by  offers  of  promotion,  to  bribe  his  return
to  the  Christian  faith. He  refused,  and  was  put  to  death.*

^  Asma  afterwards  married  Abu  Bekr,  and  on  his  death  'All,  and
bore  sons  to  both.

^  Next  morning,  he  entered  smihng  into  the  Mosque,  and  when  the
people  accosted  him  he  said  :  '  That  which  ye  saw  in  me  yesterday  was
because  of  sorrow  for  the  slaughter  of  my  Companions,  until  I  saw  them
in  Paradise,  seated  as  brethren,  opposite  one  another,  upon  couches.
And  in  some  I  perceived  marks,  as  it  were  wounds  of  the  sword.  And  I
saw  Ja'far  as  an  angel  with  two  wings,  covered  with  blood, ^his  limbs
stained  therewith.' Hence  Ja'far  is  known  as  'the  winged  martyr.'

3  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  958  ;  (At-Tabari,  1783  f.).

*  The  tradition  which  is  given  both  by  Al-Wakidi  and  Ibn  Hisham  is
surrounded  by  much  that  is  marvellous  ;  but  there  must  have  been  some
foundation  of  fact  for  the  story.  Farwa's  reply  is  in  the  usual  style : —
'  I  will  not  quit  the  faith  of  Mohammad.  Thou  knowest  well  that  Jesus
prophesied  before  of  him.  But  as  for  thee,  the  fear  of  losing  thy  kingdom
deterreth  thee.' And  so  he  was  crucified.

Theophanes  mentions  about  this  period  the  secession  of  the  Arabs


XXIII.]  PRESTIGE  RESTORED  397

The  repulse  at  Muta  affected  the  prestige  of  Mohammad 'Amr  and
amoncr the  northern tribes. There  were  rumours  that  the ^^"  'Obeida

restore  pres—

Bedawin  of  the  neighbourhood  had  assembled  in  great  force,  tige  on
and  even  threatened  a  descent  upon  Medina. 'Amr,  the  late Syrian

'■  border.

convert,  was  therefore  placed  at  the  head  of  300  men,  including  a.h.  viii.
30  horse,  with  instructions  to  subjugate  the  hostile  tribes  and  r'^.'^g^'^'
incite  those  whom  he  found  friendly,  to  harass  the  Syrian
border.^  The  name  of  'Amr  justified  the  selection ;  con-
nected, moreover,  with  the  Beni  Ball,  a  powerful  tribe  in  the
vicinity,  he  was  possessed  of  personal  influence  which  might
aid  in  effecting  the  objects  of  the  campaign.  In  the  event  of
serious  opposition,  he  was  to  call  upon  the  Arabs  in  that
quarter  who  had  already  tendered  their  submission  to  come
to  his  aid.  After  a  ten  days'  march  he  encamped  at  a  spring
near  the  Syrian  confines.  There  he  found  that  the  enemy
were  assembled  in  great  numbers,  and  that  he  could  look  for
little  aid  from  the  local  tribes.  He  halted  and  despatched
a  messenger  for  reinforcements.  Mohammad  at  once
complied,  and  sent  200  men  (among  whom  were  both  Abu
Bekr  and  'Omar)  under  command  of  Abu  'Obeida.  On
joining  'Amr,  Abu  'Obeida  wished  to  assume  the  leadership
of  the  whole  force,  or  at  least  retain  the  chief  authority  over
his  own  detachment;  but  'Amr,  giving  promise  of  the
decision  which  characterised  him  in  after  days,  insisted  on
retaining  the  sole  command.  Abu  'Obeida,  a  man  of  mild
and  pliant  temper,  succumbed.  '  If  thou  refusest  to  acknow-
ledge my  authority,'  he  said,  '  I  have  no  resource  but  to
obey  thee ;  for  the  Prophet  charged  me  to  suffer  no  alter-
cation, nor  any  division  of  command.'  'Amr  replied  im-
periously ;  '  I  am  the  chief  over  thee.  Thou  hast  only
brought  a  reinforcement  to  my  army.'  '  Be  it  so,'  said
Abu  'Obeida.  'Amr  then  assumed  command  of  the  united
troops,  and  led  their  prayers ;  for  thus  early  were  the
spiritual  functions  in  Islam  blended  with  the  political  and

employed  in  guarding  the  Syrian  frontier,  as  occasioned  by  the  refusal
of  a  Greek  officer  to  pay  them  their  perquisites,  on  which  they  are  said
to  have  organised  an  attack  on  Gaza.  Such  a  movement  may  have
occurred  in  connection  with  the  numerous  accessions  to  Mohammad's
cause  about  this  time,  and  the  expedition  to  Tebuk  the  following
year.

Ibn  Hisham,  p.  984  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1604  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  315  f.  ;
Jbn  Sa'd,  p.  94  f.


BATTLE  OF  MUTA


[chap.


Expedition
of  the  Fish.
A.H.  VIII.
November,
A.D.  629


Raid  on
Nejd.
December,
A.D.  629


Various
tribes

tender  their
submission


military.!  Thus  strengthened,  *Amr  again  advanced,  dis-
persed the  hostile  gatherings,  and  confirmed  the  friendly
tribes.  He  had  then  the  satisfaction  of  despatching  a
messenger  to  announce  the  complete  success  of  his  first
campaign,  and  the  re-establishment  of  the  Prophet's  influ-
ence on  the  frontier  of  Syria.  Having  accomplished  this
important  object,  he  returned  to  Medina.

In  the  month  following,  to  compensate  Abu  'Obeida  for
his  disappointment  in  giving  up  the  command  to  'Amr,
Mohammad  sent  him,  at  the  head  of  300  men  to  chastise  a
refractory  branch  of  the  Juheina  on  the  seacoast.^  There
was  no  fighting  in  this  expedition,  but  it  has  become  famous
from  the  occurrence  of  a  curious  incident.  Provisions  failed,
and  the  troops  were  already  well-nigh  famished,  when  to
their  joy  a  prodigious  fish  was  cast  opportunely  on  the  shore,
so  large  that  it  sufficed  amply  to  relieve  their  hunger.^  One
other  petty  expedition  during  the  winter,  against  a  tribe  of
the  Ghatafan  in  Nejd,  yielded  large  plunder  in  camels,  flocks,
and  prisoners.*  The  object  is  not  stated.  A  fair  damsel
fell  to  the  lot  of  the  leader.  He  presented  her  to  Moham-
mad, who  again  gave  her  to  one  of  his  followers.

Besides  the  Syrian  tribes  gained  over  by  the  success  of
*Amr,  several  others,  as  the  Beni  'Abs,  Murra,  and  Dhubyan,
now  gave  in  their  adhesion ;  and  the  Fezara  with  their  chief
'Oyeina,  who  had  so  long  caused  anxiety  and  alarm  at
Medina,  at  last  tendered  submission.  The  Suleim  also,  who
had  taken  part  in  the  siege  of  Medina,  joined  the  cause
about  this  time,  and  engaged  to  bring,  when  called  on,  a
thousand men into the field. Most of  the  tribes  in the

^  It  is  interesting  to  notice  in  each  of  these  commanders  the  same
character  already  showing  itself  at  this  early  period  as  after  the  death  of
Mohammad  marked  their  career  in  the  Syrian  wars.  The  same  may  be
said  of  Khalid  and  other  Companions,  and  is  a  satisfactory  confirmation
of  the  credibility  of  our  authorities.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  992  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1605  f.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  317  f.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  95.  [At-Tabari  places  these  two  expeditions  before  that  of
Muta.]

^  So  Al-Wakidi.  Ibn  Hisham  deals  in  extravagances  ;  the  whole
army,  which  had  been  reduced  to  a  famishing  state,  fed  for  twenty  days
upon  it,  and  from  being  lean  and  famished  became  strong  and  fat.  One
of  its  bones,  being  set  up  as  an  arch,  a  camel  with  its  rider  passed  under
without  touching  it,  &c.

*  Al-Wakidi,  p.  318  f. ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  96.


XXIII.]  VARIOUS  EXPEDITIONS  399

vicinity  of  Medina  had  already  recognised  the  supremacy  of
Mohammad.^  The  courteous  treatment  which  the  deputa-
tions which  now  began  to  come  in  from  all  directions
experienced  from  the  Prophet,  his  ready  attention  to  their
grievances,  the  wisdom  with  which  he  composed  their
disputes,  and  the  politic  assignments  of  territory  by  which  he
rewarded  early  declaration  in  favour  of  Islam,  made  his
name  to  be  popular,  and  his  fame  as  a  great  and  generous
Prince  to  spread  throughout  the  Peninsula.  The  accession
of  so  many  tribes,  moreover,  enabled  him,  whenever  occasion
might  arise,  to  call  into  the  field  a  far  more  imposing  force
than  he  had  ever  before  aspired  to  command.

^  The  Beni  Ashja',  who  had  joined  in  the  siege  of  Medina,  gave  in
their  adhesion  shortly  after  the  massacre  of  the  Beni  Koreiza  ;  they  told
Mohammad  that  they  were  so  pressed  by  his  warring  against  them,  that
they  could  stand  out  no  longer.  In  the  Secretary's  chapter  of  'Deputa-
tions from  the  Tribes,'  &c.,  we  learn  that  the  Beni  Ash'ar  from  Jidda,
the  Khushain,  and  the  Daus,  came  to  Mohammad  during  the  campaign
of  Kheibar,  the  latter  with  sixty  or  seventy  followers,  to  whom  were
assigned  shares  in  the  booty.  The  Beni  Sa'd  ibn  Bekr  came  over,
A.H.  v. ;  and  the  Beni  Tha'laba,  A.H.  viil.  The  Beni  'Abd  al-Keis
(partly  at  least  Christian)  from  Al-Bahrein,  in  the  same  year.  The  Beni
Judham  (see  ante^  p.  346)  also  in  that  year.  The  chief  of  the  latter  tribe
carried  back  a  letter  from  Mohammad,  of  this  tenor  :  '  Whoever  accepteth
the  call  to  Islam,  he  is  amongst  the  confederates  of  the  Lord  :  whoever
refuseth  the  same,  a  truce  of  two  months  is  allowed  him  for  considera-
tion.' The  tribes  of  the  vicinity  all  accepted  the  invitation.


CHAPTER XXIV


Pretext  arises
for  advance
upon  Mecca


Beni  Bekr
attack  Beni
Khoza'a
A.H.  VIII.
December,
A.D.  629

Khoza'a
appeal  to
Mohammad,
who  promises
aid


CONQUEST OF MECCA  ^
Rajnadim,  A.H.  Vlll. — January,  A.D.  630

JET  AT.  61

The  truce  of  Al-Hodeibiya  had  been  now  nearly  two  years
in  force,  when  the  alleged  infraction  of  its  terms  afforded
Mohammad  a  plausible  reason  for  the  grand  object  of  his
ambition,  the  conquest  of  Mecca.  Acting  on  the  discretion
allowed  by  the  treaty,  the  Khoza'a  and  Beni  Bekr  tribes,
inhabiting  Mecca  and  its  neighbourhood,  declared  their
adhesion,  the  former  to  Mohammad,  the  latter  to  the
Koreish.  There  had  been  sanguinary  feuds  of  old  standing
between  them,  and,  though  these  paled  before  the  excite-
ment of  the  war  with  Mohammad,  the  blood  which  had  been
shed  on  either  side  caused  hatred  still  to  rankle  in  their
breasts.  The  peace  of  Al-Hodeibiya  allowed  the  Beni  Bekr
again  to  brood  over  their  wrongs,  and  they  sought  oppor-
tunity to  make  reprisals.  Aided  by  a  party  of  the  Koreish
in  disguise,  they  attacked  by  night  an  unsuspecting
encampment  of  Khoza'a,  and  slew  several  of  them.^  A
deputation  of  forty  men  from  the  injured  tribe,  mounted  on
camels,  hastened  to  Medina,  spread  their  wrongs  before  the
Prophet,  and  pleaded  that  the  treacherous  murders  might
be  avenged.  Entreaty  was  little  needed.  The  opportunity
long expected had at last arrived. Starting up, with

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  802  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1618  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  319  ff. ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  96  ff.

2  Weil  thinks  the  outrage  to  have  been  in  consequence  of  the  defeat
at  Muta,  which  emboldened  the  enemies  of  Islam. — Ei7ileittmg,  p.  27.
Beladhuri  gives  other  instances  of  Koreish  having  abused  Mohammad
and  encouraged  his  enemies,  p.  30.


fc=


in"'


^^|ir.--- p^Vi^liJ


1  ,.*^


?^'i'


[To /ace  ;i.  400.


CHAP.  XXIV.]  MISSION  OF  ABU  SUFYAN  401

raiment  yet  ungirded,  he  thus  pledged  himself  to  the  sup-
pliants :  *  If  I  help  you  not  in  like  wise  as  if  the  wrong  were
mine  own,  then  let  me  never  more  be  helped  by  the  Lord  !
See  ye  not  yonder  cloud  ?  As  the  rain  now  poureth  from  it,
even  so  shall  help  descend  upon  you  speedily  from  above.'

Koreish,  hearing  of  this  deputation,  were  thrown  into  Unsuccessful
great  alarm.  They  despatched  Abu  Sufyan  to  protest  Tif^'c^o-
against  the  imputed  breach,  and  maintain  the  compact  of  to  Medina
peace.  On  his  way,  he  met  Budeil,  chief  of  the  Khoza'a,
returning  from  Medina  after  his  interview  with  Mohammad.^
The  mission  of  Abu  Sufyan  was  not  followed  by  any
satisfactory  result.  He  could  gain  from  Mohammad  no
promise,  nor  any  assurance  of  pacific  designs.  Foiled  in
his  endeavours,  he  took  the  only  course  open  to  him  of
expressing  the  desire  of  Koreish  to  maintain  friendly
relations.  Standing  up  in  the  court  of  the  Mosque,  he  cried
aloud  :  '  Hearken  unto  me,  ye  people !  Peace  and  protection
I  guarantee  for  all.'  To  which  Mohammad  answered :  '  It
is  thou  that  sayest  this,  not  we,  O  Abu  Sufyan  ! '  Thereupon
he  departed  home,  and  reported  the  affair  to  Koreish.  They
perceived  that  they  were  in  evil  plight,  but  did  not  suspect
how  imminent  the  hostile  designs  of  their  enemy  at  the
moment  were ;  ^  for  Mohammad  had  already  resolved  on  an

^  It  will  be  seen  below  that  there  is  reason  for  suspecting  collusion
between  Abu  Sufyan  and  Budeil  ;  it  may  possibly  have  begun  at  this
interview.

2  'Abbasid  tradition,  in  its  hatred  of  the  Omeiyads,  delights  to  cast
contumely  on  Abu  Sufyan.  On  the  present  occasion  it  turns  him  into  a
laughing-stock  ;  but,  from  what  follows,  there  is  room  for  conjecturing
that  communications  of  a  less  unfriendly  character  than  those  here
represented  passed  between  him  and  the  Prophet.

The  following  narrative  is  strongly  tinged  with  'Alid  tendencies :
Arrived  at  Medina,  Abu  Sufyan  entered  the  house  of  his  daughter  Um
Habiba,  Mohammad's  wife.  He  was  about  to  seat  himself  on  the  carpet
or  rug  spread  upon  the  floor,  when  she  hastily  drew  it  away  and  folded  it
up.  '  My  daughter  ! '  he  said,  '  whether  is  it  that  thou  thinkest  the  carpet
is  too  good  for  me,  or  that  I  am  too  good  for  the  carpet  ? '  '  Nay,  but  it
is  the  carpet  of  the  Prophet,'  she  replied  ;  'and  I  choose  not  that  thou,
an  impure  idolater,  shouldst  sit  upon  the  Prophet's  carpet.'  'Truly,  my
daughter,  thou  art  changed  for  the  worse  since  thou  leftest  me '  So
saying,  he  went  to  Mohammad,  but  could  get  nothing  satisfactory  from
his  lips.  'Omar,  to  whom  he  next  addressed  himself,  received  him  with
indignation.  'All  was  more  cordial :  '  Let  me  not  go  back  unsuccessful
as  I  came,'  urged  Abu  Sufyan; 'intercede  for  me  with  the  Prophet.'

2  C


402  CONQUEST  OF  MECCA  [chap.

Preparations  immediate  and  grand  attack  upon  his  native  city. But  the
for  attack- (jgsjcrn  was  kept  sccrct  even  from  his  closest  friends  as  long

ing  Mecca  a  r  o

as  it  was  possible.^  Meanwhile  he  summoned  his  allies  from
amongst  the  Bedawi  tribes  to  join  him  at  Medina,  or  at
certain  convenient  points  upon  the  road.  But  he  held  their
destination  hid,  and,  to  divert  attention,  despatched  a  small
body  of  men  in  another  direction.  At  the  last  moment  he
ordered  his  followers  in  the  city  to  arm  themselves,
announced  his  project,  and  enjoined  on  all  the  urgent
command  that  no  hint  regarding  it  should  by  any  possible
way  reach  Mecca.  To  this  effect  he  prayed  : — '  O  Lord !  Let
not  any  spy  carry  tidings  to  Koreish :  blind  their  eyes  and  take
their  sight  away  until  that  I  come  suddenly  upon  them  and
seise  them  unawares  !^  Such  was  the  petition  daily  offered
up  by  him  in  the  Mosque.
Hatib's  en-  Notwithstanding  this  injunction,  Hatib,  one  of  Moham-

communicate  ^^d's  most  trusted  followers,  secretly  despatched  a  female
intelligence  messenger  with  a  letter  to  Mecca  containing  intimation  of
the  intended  assault.  Information  of  this  coming  to  the
Prophet's  ear,  he  sent  'All  with  Az-Zubeir  in  pursuit.  They
overtook  the  messenger,  and  after  a  long  search  discovered
the  letter  carefully  hidden  in  her  locks.  Hatib  excused
himself  by  the  natural  desire  he  had  to  save  his  unprotected
family  at  Mecca ;  and  the  plea,  in  view  of  his  former
services,  was  graciously  accepted.

'  Alas  for  thee  ! '  said  'All ;  '  truly,  the  Prophet  hath  resolved  on  a  thing
concerning  which  we  may  not  speak  with  thee.'  Then  Abu  Sufyan
adjured  Fatima  ('All's  wife)  to  let  her  little  son  Al-Hasan  take  him  under
his  protection,  'and  he  will  be  the  lord  of  the  Arabs  till  the  end  of  time.'
But  she  told  him  that  no  one  could  be  his  protector  against  Mohammad.
On  this,  he  besought  'All  for  his  advice.  'All  said  that  he  saw  no  other
course  for  him  but  to  arise  and  call  aloud  that  he  took  all  parties  under
the  guarantee  of  his  protection  :  '  But  will  this  benefit  me  at  all  ?'  '  Nay,
I  do  not  say  so,  but  I  see  nothing  else  for  thee.'  Having  followed  this
advice,  Abu  Sufyan  returned  to  Mecca,  and  told  Koreish  what  he
had  done.  '  But  did  Mohammad  sanction  thy  guarantee?'  asked  they.
He  replied  in  the  negative.  '  Out  upon  thee  ! '  they  cried  ;  'this  will  not
benefit  us  at  all  ;  the  man  meant  only  to  make  sport  of  thee.'  '  I  know
it,'  said  Abu  Sufyan,  'but  I  could  think  of  nothing  else  that  I  could  do.'
^  Even  Abu  Bekr  was  kept  in  ignorance.  Entering  'A'isha's  house,
found  her  busy  preparing  the  accoutrements  of  the  Prophet ;  and,
inquiring  the  cause,  was  told  that  an  expedition  had  been  resolved  on,
but  she  did  not  know  in  what  direction.


XXIV,]


THE  MARCH


403


On  January  i,  a.d.  630,  the  army  commenced  its  march.
It  was  the  largest  force  Medina  had  ever  seen.  The  tents
of  the  Bedawi  auxiliaries  darkened  the  plain  for  miles
around,  and  heavy  contingents  joined  the  Prophet  on  the
line  of  march.  Two  of  these,  the  Muzeina  and  Suleim,
contributed  as  many  as  1,000  soldiers  each.  Mohammad
now  found  himself  at  the  head  of  between  eight  and  ten
thousand  men.  Az-Zubeir  with  two  hundred  men  led  the
van.  Zeinab  and  Um  Selama  were  the  Prophet's  companions
on  the  march,^  which  was  made  with  such  rapidity  that
within  a  week  the  army  encamped  at  Marr  Az-Zahran,  but
a  single  stage  from  Mecca.

Al-'Abbas,  secretly  apprised,  had  already  quitted  Mecca
and  joined  Mohammad  on  the  road.  The  'Abbasids  claim
him  as  having  been  long  a  true  Believer,  and  indeed  number
him  among  the  Refugees,  whose  favoured  ranks  were  now
about  to  close.  But  Al-'Abbas  was  only  worldly  wise.  He
had  waited  till  the  supremacy  of  his  nephew  was  beyond  a
doubt ;  and  now,  at  the  last  moment,  when  there  was  no
merit  in  the  act,  openly  espoused  his  cause.  Nevertheless,
he  was  welcomed  by  the  Prophet  with  favour  and  affection.^

And  now  we  come  to  a  curious  and  somewhat  mysterious
passage.  Mohammad  commanded  his  followers  to  kindle
every  one  a  fire  that  night  on  the  heights  above  the  camp.
The  Prophet  trusted  that  this  first  intimation  of  his  approach


Army
marches.
A.H.  VIH.
January,
A.D.  630


Al-'Abbas
joins  Mo-
hammad


Abu  Sufyan
visits  camp  of
Mohammad


^  Um  Selama  seems  to  have  been  the  favourite  companion  of
Mohammad  on  his  marches.  'A'isha  is  not  mentioned  as  accompanying
him  after  the  affair  in  the  expedition  against  the  Beni'l-MustaHk.

^  He  is  said  to  have  joined  Mohammad  near  Rabigh,  about  half-way
between  Medina  and  Mecca.  It  is  possible  that  he  came  by  previous
appointment.  'Abbasid  tradition  naturally  makes  everything  as  favour-
able as  possible.  The  truth  is  that  he  always  sailed  with  wind  and  tide.
It  is,  indeed,  quite  possible  that  ever  since  the  Treaty,  and  especially
since  the  Pilgrimage,  he  may  have  been  in  correspondence  with
Mohammad,  and  secretly  forwarding  his  cause  at  Mecca.

Two  others  appeared  on  the  march  to  tender  allegiance  :  Abu  Sufyan,
son  of  Mohammad's  uncle  Al-Harith  ;  and  'Abdallah,  brother  of  his  wife
Um  Selama.  Um  Selama  interceded  for  them  ;  but  Mohammad  at  first
refused  to  receive  them.  Both  had  incurred  his  severe  displeasure, — the
former  for  his  satires  ;  and  the  latter  as  a  keen  opponent.  Abu  Sufyan,
being  repulsed,  declared  that  he  would  go  forth  into  the  desert  with  his
little  son,  and  that  there  they  would  both  die  of  hunger ;  whereat
Mohammad  relented.


404  CONQUEST  OF  MECCA  [chap.

would  burst  upon  the  city  with  alarming  grandeur,  and
prove  the  hopelessness  of  opposition.  No  certain  informa-
tion of  the  march  from  Medina  had  yet  reached  Koreish,
so  carefully  had  all  sources  of  intelligence  been  cut  off.  At
last  the  chief  men,  uneasy  at  the  portentous  calm,  broken
only  by  vague  reports  of  the  coming  storm,  sent  forth  Abu
Sufyan  to  reconnoitre.  In  the  evening,  accompanied  by
Hakim  (Khadlja's  nephew,  who  had  shown  kindness  to
Mohammad  when  shut  up  with  Abu  Talib)  and  Budeil  the
Khoza'ite  chief,  Abu  Sufyan  sallied  forth  on  the  Medina
road.  Ten  thousand  fires  were  by  this  time  blazing  on  the
mountain  tops,  and  appearing  in  full  sight  engaged  their
speculations,  when  suddenly,  in  the  dark,  a  stranger
approaching  thus  accosted  Abu  Sufyan  :  '  Abu  Hanzala  !  ^  is
that  thy  voice  I  hear  ? '  '  Yes,  I  am  he,'  said  Abu  Sufyan,
'  but  what  hast  thou  left  behind  thee  ? '  '  Yonder,'  replied
the  stranger,  'is  Mohammad  encamped  with  10,000  followers.
See  ye  not  the  myriad  fires  which  they  have  kindled  above
their  camp  ?  Believe ;  cast  in  thy  lot  with  us,  else  thy
mother  and  thy  house  shall  weep  for  thee ! '  It  was
Al-*Abbas  who  spoke.  Mounted  on  the  Prophet's  white
mule,  he  had  issued  forth,  hoping  that  he  might  meet  some
wayfarer  on  the  road,  and  send  him  to  Koreish,  if  haply
they  might  come  and  sue  for  peace,  and  thus  save  Mecca
from  destruction.  *  Seat  thee  upon  the  mule  behind  me,'
continued  Al-'Abbas ;  '  I  will  conduct  thee  to  the  Prophet,
and  thou  shalt  seek  for  quarter  from  him.'  They  were  soon
at  the  tent  of  Mohammad.  Al-'Abbas  entered,  and
announced  the  welcome  news  of  the  arrival  of  his  dis-
tinguished friend :  *  Take  him  to  thy  tent,  Al-'Abbas,'  replied
the  Prophet,  '  and  in  the  morning  come  to  me  with  him
again.'  In  the  morning  accordingly  they  sought  the
Prophet's  tent:  ^  Out  tipon  thee  Abu  Sufyan!'  exclaimed
Mohammad  as  the  Koreishite  chief  drew  near  ;  '  hast  thou  not
yet  discovered  that  there  is  no  God  but  the  Lord  alone?'
*  Noble  and  generous  Sire !  Had  there  been  any  God
beside,  verily  he  had  been  of  some  avail  to  me.'  ^  And  dost
thou not acknowledge  that  I  am  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord?'

^  Abu  Sufyan,  so  called  after  his  son,  Hanzala.  Beladhuri  represents
him  as  having  been  now  taken  prisoner,  and  'Omar  as  threatening  to
kill  him.


XXIV.]


ABU  sufyAn  intervenes


405


continued  Mohammad,  '  Noble  Sire !  As  to  this  thing,
there  is  yet  in  my  heart  some  hesitancy.'  '  Woe  is  thee ! '
exclaimed  Al-'Abbas ;  '  it  is  no  time  for  hesitancy,  this.
Believe  and  testify  forthwith  the  creed  of  Islam,  or  else  thy
neck  shall  be  in  danger ! '  It  was,  indeed,  no  time  for  idle
pride  or  scruple ;  and  so  Abu  Sufyan,  finding  no  alternative,
repeated  the  formula  of  belief  in  God  and  in  Mohammad  as
his  Prophet.  What  a  moment  of  exultation  when  the
conqueror  saw  his  great  antagonist  a  suppliant  Believer  at
his  feet !  *  Haste  thee  to  Mecca  ! '  he  said  ;  for  he  knew  well
when  to  show  forbearance  and  generosity ; — '  haste  thee  to
the  city ;  no  one  that  taketh  refuge  in  the  house  of  Abu
Sufyan  shall  be  harmed  this  day.  And  hearken !  speak
unto  the  people,  that  whoever  closeth  the  door  of  his  house,
the  inmates  thereof  shall  be  in  safety.'  Abu  Sufyan
hastened  to  retire.  But  before  he  could  quit  the  camp,  the
forces  were  already  under  arms,  and  were  being  marshalled
in  their  respective  columns.  Standing  by  Al-'Abbas,  he
watched  in  amazement  the  various  tribes,  each  defiling  with
the  banner  given  to  it  by  Mohammad,  into  its  proper  place.
One  by  one  the  different  clans  were  pointed  out  by  name,
and  recognised.  '  And  what  is  that  black  mass,'  asked  Abu
Sufyan,  '  with  dark  mail  and  shining  lances  ? '  *  It  is  the
chivalry  of  Mecca  and  Medina,'  replied  Al-'Abbas — 'the
favoured  band  that  guards  the  person  of  the  Prophet.'
'  Truly,'  exclaimed  the  astonished  chief,  '  this  kingdom  of  thy
Nephew's  is  a  mighty  kingdom.'  '  Nay,  Abu  Sufyan  !  he  is
more  than  a  king — he  is  a  mighty  Prophet!'  'Yes,  thou
sayest  truly ;  now  let  me  go.'  '  Away  ! '  said  Al-'Abbas  ;
'  and  speed  thee  to  thy  people  ! '  Abu  Sufyan  hurried  back
to  Mecca,  and,  as  he  entered,  shouted  at  the  pitch  of  his
voice :  '  Ye  Koreish !  Mohammad  is  close  upon  us.  He
hath  an  army  which  ye  are  not  able  to  withstand.  Whoever
entereth  the  house  of  Abu  Sufyan  shall  be  safe  this  day ;
and  whoever  shutteth  his  door  upon  him  shall  be  safe ;  and
whosoever  entereth  the  Holy  House  he  shall  be  safe  ! '  So  the
people  fled  in  all  directions  to  their  homes,  and  to  the  Ka'ba.
Such  is  the  tradition.  But,  beneath  it,  there  are
symptoms  of  a  previous  understanding  between  Mohammad
and  Abu  Sufyan.  Whether  there  was  any  collusion  so  early
as  the  visit  of  Abu  Sufyan  to  Medina,  whether  Al-'Abbas


Abu  Sufyan
carries  mes
sage  of
quarter  to
Mecca


Was  thete
collusion
between  Abu
Sufyan  and
Mohammad  ?


4o6


CONQUEST  OF  MECCA


[chap.


The  army
moves  for-
ward upon
Mecca


was  charged  by  the  chiefs  of  Mecca  with  the  conduct  of
negotiations  with  the  Prophet,  and  from  which  side  the
overtures  first  came,  can  be  matter  for  conjecture  only.
But  there  seems  reason  to  believe  that  the  meeting  by  night
of  Abu  Sufyan  with  Al-'Abbas  was  a  concerted  measure,  and
not  mere  accident  That  Abu  Sufyan,  wearied  with  the  long
struggle  about  to  be  renewed  with  all  the  prospects  of
internecine  strife,  assured  also  that  the  chances  of  victory
lay  on  Mohammad's  side,  and  anxious  to  avert  bloodshed,
should  now  have  conspired  to  lull  alarm  and  prevent  Mecca
rising  against  the  invader,  seems  perhaps  hardly  less
probable.  As  hereditary  leader  he  possessed  more  influence
for  that  object  than  any  other  chief  at  Mecca,  and  of  his
influence  Mohammad  willingly  availed  himself.  To  the
treason,  or  one  might  rather  say  the  patriotism,  of  Abu
Sufyan,  it  is  mainly  due  that  the  submission  of  Mecca  was
thus  peaceably  secured.  Such  at  least  is  the  conclusion
which  may  be  drawn  from  the  uncertain  tale  of  tradition.

We  return  to  the  camp.  The  army  was  now  in  full
march  on  Mecca.  The  anxieties  of  a  lifetime  crowded  into
the  moment.  But  as  the  city  opened  on  the  Prophet's  view
it  became  evident  that  his  precautions  had  been  effectual.
Had  any  general  opposition  been  organised,  it  was  here  that
a  stand  would  have  been  made  ;  yet  no  army  appeared  in
sight.  In  token  of  his  gratitude,  he  bowed  low  upon  his
camel,  and  offered  up  thanksgiving  to  the  Lord.  The  troops
were  told  off  in  four  divisions,  and  to  each  was  assigned  a
different  road,  by  which  simultaneously  to  advance.  From
Dhu  Towa  they  separated  to  perform  their  several  parts,
with  strict  injunctions  not  to  fight  excepting  in  the  last
extremity,  nor  offer  violence  to  any  one.  Az-Zubeir,  leading
the  left  battalion,  was  to  enter  from  the  north.  Khalid,
with  the  Bedawi  marshalled  on  the  right,  was  to  make  his
way  into  the  southern  or  lower  suburb.  The  men  of
Medina  under  Sa'd  ibn  'Obada  were  to  force  their  way  into
the  western  quarter.  The  mild  but  vigilant  Abu  'Obeida,
commanding  the  Refugees  and  followed  by  Mohammad
himself,  took  the  nearest  road  skirting  Jebel  Hind,  This
disposition  of  his  forces  was  wisely  made :  if  opposition  were
offered  anywhere,  one  of  the  other  divisions  would  be  at
hand  to  take  the  enemy  in  the  rear. As  Sa'd  led  on  the


XXIV.]  MUSLIMS  ENTER  THE  CITY  407

citizens  of  Medina,  he  sang  :  '  To-day  is  the  day  of  slaughter  ;
there  is  no  safety  this  day  for  Mecca ! '  Hearing  these
martial  and  threatening  words,  and  fearing  evil  from  the  fiery
temper  of  Sa'd,  Mohammad  took  the  Medina  banner  from
his  hands,  and  gave  it  to  his  son  Keis — a  man  of
towering  stature,  but  of  gentler  disposition  than  his  father.

Just  then,  an  old  man,  blind  and  decrepit,  might  be  seen Abu  Kohafa
climbing,  with  the  help  of  his  daughter,  over  the  heights  of  watches

A  1 T7- i • 1-1  1  1  •  T  A1 T7- 1 -/- advance  of

Abu  Kobeis  which  overhang  the  city,  it  was  Abu  Kohafa,  Muslim
the  aged  parent  of  Abu  Bekr,  To  his  frequent  inquiry  ^'"™y
whether  anything  was  yet  in  sight,  the  maiden  at  last
replied  :  '  A  dark  moving  mass  has  just  emerged  from  yonder
valley.'  '  It  is  the  army  ! '  said  the  aged  man.  '  And  now  I
see  a  figure  hasting  to  and  fro  amid  the  columns  of  that
mass.'  '  This  is  the  leader  marshalling  the  force.'  '  But  the
blackness  is  dispersing  rapidly.  It  spreads ' — continued  the
girl.  'Ah!  then  the  army  is  advancing!  Haste  thee,  my
daughter,  and  lead  me  home.'  It  was  full  time,  for  the
troops  were  already  sweeping  along  the  approaches  to  the
town  on  every  side ;  and  a  rude  assailant  snatched  the
maiden's  silver  necklace  from  her  neck  while  she  was  yet
guiding  her  father's  tottering  steps  toward  their  house.

The  several  columns  entered  peaceably,  excepting  that  of  Khalid
Khalid.  The  southern  quarter,  assigned  to  him,  was  inhabited  opposition^
by  Mohammad's  bitterest  enemies  and  those  most  deeply
implicated  in  the  attack  upon  the  Beni  Khoza'a ;  these  had
now  taken  up  a  defensive  position,  or  perhaps  in  despair  were
preparing  for  hasty  flight.  They  were  led  by  Safwan,  Suheil,
and  '  Ikrima,  son  of  Abu  Jahl.  As  the  battalion,  composed  of
Bedawin,  difficult  at  any  time  to  hold  in  hand,  appeared  in
view,  it  was  saluted  by  a  shower  of  arrows.  But  Khalid,
ready  to  receive  his  opponents,  soon  put  them  all  to  flight.
Flushed  with  success,  and  unmindful  of  the  Prophet's  order,
he  pursued  with  his  wild  troops  the  fugitive  Koreish  into  the
streets  of  Mecca.  The  leaders  escaped ;  but  eight-and-
twenty  Citizens  were  killed  in  the  conflict.  Khalid  lost  only
two  men,  and  those  because  they  missed  their  way.  While  Moham-
this  encounter  was  going  forward,  Mohammad,  following  the ™1  f  ^  ♦

° °  '  •  '  o  concern  at

column  of  the  Refugees,  crossed  an  eminence  from  whence the  encounter
the  full  view  of  the  vale  and  city  burst  upon  him. But  his
pleasure  at  the  grateful  prospect  was  turned  into  concern  as


4o8  CONQUEST  OF  MECCA  [chap.

his  eye  caught  the  gleaming  of  swords  on  the  farther  side  of

the  city,  and  the  troops  of  Khalid  in  pursuit. '  What ! '  he  cried

in  surprise  and  anger,  '  did  I  not  strictly  command  that  there

should  be  no  fighting  ? ' The  cause  was  soon  explained,  and

Mohammad  said  :  '  That  which  the  Lord  decreeth  is  the  best'

Mohammad  From  the  pass,  Mohammad  descended  into  the  valley  at

ris*tenV" ^  ^P°^  "°^  ^^^  from  the  tombs  of  Abu  Talib  and  Khadija.

He  was  there  joined  by  the  division  of  Az-Zubeir,  and,  having

assured himself  that Mecca was now  wholly at his will,

directed  his  tent  of  leather  to  be  pitched  in  the  open  space

to  the  north  of  the  city.^ '  Wilt  thou  not  alight  at  thine  own

house  ?  '  inquired  his  followers. *  Not  so,'  he  said  '  for  have

they left me  yet any  house  within the  city  ? ' The  great

banner  was  planted  at  the  door  of  his  tent,  and  he  retired  to

repose  therein,  and  to  reflect  on  the  accomplishment  of  his

life's  dream. The  abused,  rejected,  exiled  Prophet  now  had

the  rebellious  city  at  his  feet. Mohammad  was  Lord  of  Mecca.

Worships  But  he  did  not  long  repose. Again  mounting  Al-Kaswa,

at  the  Ka'ba,  j^^  proceeded  to  the  Ka'ba,  reverently  saluted  with  his  staff

and  destroys  ^  '  -^  _

its  idols  the  Sacred  Stone,  and  made  the  seven  circuits  of  the  temple.
Then,  pointing  with  his  staff  to  the  idols  one  by  one  that
stood  around,  he  commanded  them  to  be  hewn  down.
'  Truth  hath  come,'  he  cried  in  the  words  of  the  Kor'an,  as  the
great  image  of  Hubal,  reared  in  front  of  the  Ka'ba,  fell  with
a  crash  ; — *  TrutJi  hath  come,  and  falsehood  gone  ;  for  falsehood
verily  vanisheth  away' ^ Advancing  now  to  the Station  of

^  See  map  facing  Chapter  I.  The  pathway  north  of  Jebel  Hind
brought  him  into  the  valley  near  the  burying-ground  ;  a  little  below  this
he  pitched  his  tent,  and  in  the  same  vicinity  the  two  northern  divisions
of  the  army  encamped.  The  two  other  divisions  probably  occupied
ground  to  the  south  of  the  city.  The  tradition  of  the  Prophet's  route  is
still  retained,  though  loose  and  inaccurate.  '  Mounting  our  animals,'
says  Burton,  iii.  349,  'we  followed  the  road  to  the  Jannat  al-Maala,  the
sacred  cemetery  of  Mecca.  A  rough  wall,  with  a  poor  gateway,  encloses
a  patch  of  barren  and  grim-looking  ground  at  the  foot  of  the  chain  which
bounds  the  city's  western  suburb  ;  and  below  El  Akabah,  the  gap  through
which  Khalid  bin  Walid  entered  Meccah  with  the  triumphant  Prophet.'
As  regards  Khalid,  this  is  a  mistake.

^  Sura  xvii.  82.  Tradition  says  there  were  360  idols  ranged  round
the  Ka'ba,  and  that  as  Mohammad  pointed  to  each  in  succession  with
his  staff,  reciting  this  verse,  the  idol  of  its  own  accord  fell  forwards  on  its
face.  The  use  of  metaphorical  language  in  describing  the  actual  scene
would  easily  give  rise  to  such  tales.


XXIV.]  IMAGES  DESTROYED  409

Abraham,  twenty  or  thirty  paces  from  the  Ka'ba,  he  bowed
himself  in  worship ;  and,  sitting  down,  sent  Bilal  to  summon
'Othman  ibn  Talha  with  the  key  of  the  temple.  Ascending
the  steps  of  the  threshold,  and  unlocking  the  door,  he  entered
the  sacred  hall,  and  there  again  performed  devout  prostra-
tions. He  then  returned  to  the  doorway,  and,  standing  upon
its  elevated  step,  caught  hold  of  the  two  rings  attached  to  the
door,  and  gazed  in  thankfulness  on  the  thronging  multitude
below.  '  Othman  ibn  Talha  ! '  he  cried,  naming  the  hereditary
Guardian  of  the  Temple, — '  Here,  take  back  the  key  to  be
kept  a  perpetual  charge  by  thee  and  thy  posterity.  None
shall  take  it  from  thee  save  the  unjust.  And  thou  Al-
'Abbas,'  turning  to  his  uncle,  *  I  confirm  thee  in  the  giving
drink  from  out  of  the  well  Zemzem  to  the  pilgrims :  it  is  no
mean  office  this  that  I  give  now  unto  thee.'

Having  destroyed  the  images  and  obliterated  the  pictures Mohammad'
of  Abraham and the  angels  painted on  the  walls  of  the attachment

° .  _  to  Mecca

Ka'ba,  Mohammad  desired  Bilal  to  sound  the  call  for  prayer
from  the  top  of  the  Ka'ba,  and  worship  was  performed  by
the  surrounding  multitude,  as  it  has  been  ever  since,  accord-
ing to  the  ritual  of  the  Mosque  of  Medina.  A  crier  was
then  sent  through  the  city  with  this  proclamation  ; — '  Who-
ever believeth  in  God,  and  in  the  day  of  Judgment,  let  him
not  leave  in  his  house  any  image  whatever  that  he  doth  not
break  in  pieces.'  The  Prophet  likewise  deputed  a  party  of
the  Khoza'a  to  repair  the  boundary  pillars  around  the  sacred
territory.^  Thus  he  gave  practical  proof  that,  while  deter-
mined to  uproot  idolatry  from  the  land,  he  was  equally
resolved  to  uphold  the  sanctity  of  Mecca,  and  the  obligation
of  its  worship.  He  won  the  hearts  of  the  inhabitants  by  his
ardent  declaration  of  attachment  to  their  city :  '  Thou  art
the  choicest  spot  on  the  earth  unto  me,'  he  said,  '  and  the
most  delectable.  If  thy  people  had  not  cast  me  forth,  I
never  had  forsaken  thee ! '  The  Citizens  of  Medina  now
began  to  express  their  fear  that,  as  the  Lord  had  given  him

1  Pillars  were  then,  as  at  the  present  day,  placed  at  the  limits  of  the
sacred  territory  on  either  side  of  all  the  main  roads  leading  to  Mecca.
They  had  probably  become  neglected  or  injured,  as  Mohammad  must
have  observed  in  passing.  The  distance  of  these  landmarks  from  Mecca
varies  in  different  directions.  On  the  Jidda  road  they  are  nine  miles
from  Mecca  ;  towards  Al-'Omra,  only  three.


4IO


CONQUEST  OF  MECCA


[chap.


Abu  Bekr
brings  his
father  to  visit
Mohammad


Citizens
proscribed

Al-Huwe-
irith  and
Habbar  :
the  former
executed


Two  mur-
derers and  a
singing  girl
put  to  death


Ibn  abi  Sarh,
an  apostate,
escapes


the  victory  over  his  native  city,  he  would  not  return  to
Medina  as  his  home.  He  overheard  it,  and,  calling  them
around  him,  assured  them  he  would  never  quit  Medina :
*  God  forbid  it,'  he  said  ;  *  where  ye  live,  there  will  I  live,  and
there  too  shall  I  die.'

He  now  retired  again  into  his  tent.  Soon  after,  Abu
Bekr  approached  the  door  leading  his  father,  Abu  Kohafa,
now  bowed  down  with  great  age,  and  his  locks  '  white  as  the
flower  of  the  mountain  grass.' ^  Mohammad  accosted  him
kindly :  *  Why  didst  thou  not  leave  thine  aged  father  in  his
house,  Abu  Bekr  ?  and  I  would  have  gone  and  seen  him
there.'  '  It  was  more  fitting  that  he  should  visit  thee,  O
Prophet,  than  that  thou  shouldst  visit  him.'  Mohammad
seated  the  aged  man  beside  him,  and,  affectionately  pressing
his  hand  upon  his  bosom,  invited  him  to  make  profession  of
the  Muslim  faith,  which  he  readily  did.

From  the  amnesty  extended  to  the  Citizens  of  Mecca,
Mohammad  excluded  ten  or  twelve  persons.  Of  these,  how-
ever, only  four  were  actually  put  to  death,  Al-Huweirith
and  Habbar  were  proscribed  for  their  ruffianly  attack  on  his
daughter  Zeinab,  when  she  escaped  from  Mecca.  The
former  was  put  to  death  by  'All.  The  latter  concealed  him-
self; and  some  months  later,  appearing  at  Medina,  a  re-
pentant convert,  was  forgiven.  The  next  two  were  renegade
Muslims  who,  having  shed  blood  at  Medina,  had  fled  to
Mecca  and  abjured  Islam.  They  were  both  slain,  one  as  he
clung  to  the  curtain  of  the  Ka'ba  ;  and  also  a  singing  girl
belonging  to  them,  who  had  been  in  the  habit  of  annoying
the  Prophet  with  her  satires.

The  rest  escaped.  Among  these  was  another  apostate,
'Abdallah  ibn  abi  Sarh,  w^iom  Mohammad  had  employed  at
Medina  in  writing  down  passages  of  the  Ko'ran  from  his
dictation.  His  foster-brother  'Othman  sheltered  him  till
quiet  was  restored,  then  brought  him  forward  and  implored
forgiveness.  The  Prophet,  unwilling  to  pardon  so  great  an
offender,  for  some  time  held  his  peace ;  but  at  last  granted
him  quarter.  When  'Abdallah  retired,  Mohammad  thus
addressed  the  Companions  about  him  :  '  Why  did  not  one  of

'  The  fine  image  is  spoiled  by  the  addition  that  Mohammad  desired
him  to  dye  his  snow-white  hair.  He  lived  to  see  his  son  Caliph,  and
died  A.H.  XIV.,  aged  97.


ins


XXIV.]  GENERAL  AMNESTY  411

you  arise  and smite 'Abdallah on the neck. I remained
silent  expecting  this.' '  But  thou  gavest  no  sign  unto  us,'
replied  one. '  To  give  signs,'  said  Mohammad, '  is  treachery  ;
it  is  not  fitting  for  a  Prophet  in  such  fashion  to  ordain  the
death  of  any.' ^ Safwan  and  'Ikrima,  after  eluding  the  pursuit Safwjn,
of  Khalid,  fled  towards  the  seashore ;  they  were  on  the  point 'Ikrima,
of  embarking,  when  the assurance of  forgiveness reached Sara  escape
them  and  they  were  persuaded  to  return." Hind,  the  wife  of
Abu  Sufyan, and Sara, a singing girl who had in the
discharge of  her profession given offence  to Mohammad,
escaped  the  sentence  of  death  by  opportunate  submission.^

The proscriptions were thus comparatively few ; and Treatment  of
capital  sentence,  where  actually  carried  into  effect,  was  (with ^^^'^.^^  ^^s-

^  ' _  •'_ _  '  ^  nanimous

perhaps  the  exception  of  the  singing  girl)  justified  probably  and  forbear-
by  other  crimes  than  mere  political  antagonism.  The  mag-
nanimity with  which  Mohammad  treated  a  people  who  had
so  long  hated  and  rejected  him  is  worthy  of  all  admiration.
It  was  indeed  for  his  own  interest  to  forgive  the  past,  and
cast  into  oblivion  its  slights  and  injuries.  But  this  did  not
the  less  require  a  large  and  generous  heart*  And  Moham-
mad had  his  reward,  for  the  whole  population  of  his  native
city  at  once  gave  in  their  adhesion,  and  espoused  his  cause
with  alacrity  and  apparent  devotion. Whatever  the  strength

^  We  shall  hear  more  of  him  in  connection  with  his  foster-brother's
Caliphate. — Caliphate,  p.  203.

^  'Ikrima  was  brought  back  by  his  wife,  who,  having  obtained
pardon  from  Mohammad,  hurried  after  him  to  Jidda.  C.  de  Perceval
tells  a  romantic  story  of  her  reaching  the  shore  just  as  he  had  embarked,
and  waving  her  scarf  to  bring  him  back  'Omeir,  a  Meccan  chief,
sought  out  Safwan,  taking  as  a  pledge  the  red  striped  turban  worn  by
Mohammad  around  his  head  as  he  entered  Mecca.  He  asked  for  two
months'  quarter  ;  Mohammad  gave  him  four.

^  Wahshi,  the  Abyssinian  slave  who  slew  Hamza,  fled  to  At-Ta'if,  and
eventually  obtained  pardon  in  company  with  its  inhabitants.  Um  Hani',
daughter  of  Abu  Talib,  gave  refuge  to  two  men  of  her  husband's  tribe
whom  her  brother  'Ali  wished  to  kill.  She  asked  quarter  for  them  of
Mohammad,  who  received  her  graciously,  saying  :  '  I  give  protection  to
whomsoever  thou  dost  give  protection.'  A  curious  scene  is  here  described
of  Mohammad's  camp  life  ;  the  Prophet,  wearied  and  covered  with  dust,
had  retired  to  a  corner  of  the  tent  across  which  Fatima  held  a  screen  ;
thus  veiled,  he  bathed  himself,  and  then  came  forth  to  meet  the  persons
waiting  for  him.

•*  Mohammad  is  said  to  have  compared  himself  in  his  treatment  of
Mecca  to  Joseph  forgiving  the  injuries  of  his  brethren.


412


CONQUEST  OF  MECCA


[chap.


Bloodshed

prohibited


Parlies  sent
out  to
destroy
images


Cruelty  of
Khalid  to
Benl Jadh-


or  weakness  of  religious  conviction,  there  were  no  '  dis-
affected' inhabitants  at  Mecca  nor  any  relapse  even  in  the
rebellion  that  followed  the  Prophet's  death.  Within  a  few
weeks  we  find  two  thousand  of  the  citizens  fighting  faithfully
by  his  side.

On  the  night  after  the  occupation  of  Mecca,  certain  of  the
Khoza'a,  to  gratify  an  old-standing  enmity,  rose  upon  a
neighbouring  tribe,  and  put  one  of  them  to  death.  The  day
following,  Mohammad  took  advantage  of  the  incident  to
address  the  congregation  assembled  in  front  of  the  Ka'ba  for
mid-day  prayer  :  '  Verily  the  Lord  hallowed  Mecca  in  the  day
that  he  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  Nor  was  it
common  unto  me  but  for  a  single  watch  of  the  day ;  then  it
returned  to  its  sacredness  as  before.  Neither  was  the
plunder  thereof  lawful  unto  me.  Let  him  that  is  present  tell
it  unto  him  that  is  absent.  Ye  Beni  Khoza'a !  withdraw
your  hands  from  shedding  blood.  The  man  whom  ye  have
killed,  I  will  myself  pay  compensation  for  him ;  but  whoso
slayeth  any  man  after  this,  verily  the  blood  of  him  that  is
murdered  shall  be  required  at  the  murderer's  hands.'

During  the  succeeding  fortnight,  while  occupied  in  the
arrangement  of  public  affairs  at  Mecca,  Mohammad  sent
forth  several  armed  parties  to  destroy  the  idolatrous  shrines
in  the  vicinity,  and  secure  the  submission  of  surrounding
tribes.  Khalid  demolished  the  fane  of  Al-'Ozza  at  Nakhla,
the  famous  goddess  of  the  Meccan  tribes ;  'Amr  broke  in
pieces  Suwa',  an  image  adored  by  Hudheil ;  and  Manat,  the
divinity  worshipped  at  Kodeid,  was  destroyed  by  a  band  of
the  citizens  of  Medina  who  had  formerly  been  especially
devoted  to  its  service.^

On  his  return  from  Nakhla,  Khalid  was  sent  with  a
detachment  to  require  the  adhesion  of  the  Jadhlma,  a  tribe

^  Curious  stories  are  told  about  these  deities.  When  Khalid  returned
from  Nakhla,  Mohammad  asked  him  what  he  had  seen.  He  replied,
'Nothing.'  'Then  thou  hast  not  yet  destroyed  the  goddess?  Return
and  do  so.'  On  his  going  back,  a  naked  female,  black,  and  with  dis-
hevelled hair,  rushed  out,  and  Khalid  cut  her  in  pieces.  '  That  was
Al-'Ozza,'  said  the  Prophet,  when  it  was  reported  to  him.  A  similar  tale
is  told  of  Manat.

The  servitor  of  one  of  these  images,  after  suspending  his  sword  about
its  neck,  retired  to  an  adjoining  hill,  and  cried  out  to  the  image  to  wield
the  sword  and  save  itself.


XXIV.] NEIGHBOURING  SHRINES  DESTROYED  413

which  dwelt  a  day's  march  south  of  Mecca.  They  tendered
immediate  submission,  professed  themselves  converts,  and,
at  the  bidding  of  Khalid,  laid  down  their  arms.  But  Khalid,
actuated  by  an  ancient  enmity,  and  thus  giving  early  proof
of  the  sanguinary  temper  which  afterwards  gained  for  him
the  title  of  The  Sword  of  God,  made  them  all  prisoners  and
gave  command  for  their  execution.  A  portion  were  put  to
death  by  his  Bedawi  followers,  but  fortunately  there  were
also  present  some  Citizens  of  Medina  and  Refugees,  who
interposed  and  saved  the  rest.  Mohammad,  grieved  at  the
intelligence,  raised  his  hands  to  heaven,  and  said  :  '  O  Lord  I
I  am  innocent  in  thy  sight  of  that  which  Khalid  hath  done.'
To  prove  the  sincerity  of  his  displeasure,  he  sent  forth  'Ali
with  money  to  make  compensation  for  the  slain,  and  for  the
plunder.


CHAPTER XXV

THE BATTLE OF HONEIN  ^ AND SIEGE OF AT-TA'IF


Beni  Ila-

vvazin

assemble

against

Mohammad


Who  is
therefore
obliged  to
leave  Mecca


A  STORM  that  lowered  in  the  east  cut  short  the  Prophet's
stay  at  Mecca.  The  great  Hawazin  tribe  occupied  (as  they
still  occupy)  the  ranges  and  slopes  of  the  hill  country  south-
east of  Mecca ;  and  with  their  numerous  branches  and
afifiliated  clans,  spread  themselves  over  the  wide  steppes
beyond  At-Ta'if.  That  city,  inhabited  by  the  Beni  Thaklf
of  the  same  descent,  was  their  centre,  and  its  inhabitants,
devoted  to  idol  worship,  and  closely  connected  with  Mecca,
feared  not  unnaturally  that  the  iconoclastic  conqueror  would
strike  his  next  blow  at  their  faith  and  liberties.  Accordingly
they  sent  an  urgent  summons  to  all  the  branches  of  the
Hawazin  stock  to  assemble,  with  the  view  effectively  to  check
the  arrogant  assumptions  of  Mohammad,  now  too  plainly
developing  his  scheme  of  conquest  and  universal  supremacy.
Having  appointed  a  rendezvous  at  Autas,  a  valley  in  the
mountain  range  north-east  of  At-Ta'if,  they  began  rapidly  to
assemble  there.

This  movement  obliged  Mohammad  to  cut  short  his  stay
at  Mecca.  Although  the  city  had  cheerfully  accepted  his
authority,  all  its  inhabitants  had  not  yet  embraced  the  new
religion,  nor  formally  acknowledged  his  prophetic  claim.
Perhaps  he  intended  to  follow  the  course  he  had  pursued  at
Medina,  and  leave  their  conversion  to  be  gradually  accom-
plished without  compulsion.  However  this  may  have  been,
the  threatening  intelligence  called  him  suddenly  away  from
Mecca.  Mo'adh  ibn  Jebel,  a  young  citizen  of  Medina,  well
skilled  in  the  Kor'an  and  all  questions  of  religious  practice,
was  left  behind  to  instruct  the  people  of  Mecca  in  the  tenets

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  840  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1654  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  354  ff.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  108  ff.  ' '


CHAP. XXV.]


THE  HAWAZIN


415


and  requirements  of  Islam  ;  and  'Attab,  a  youthful  Koreishite,
of  the  house  of 'Abd  Shams,  placed  over  the  secular  adminis-
tration of  the  city.

Four  weeks  had  just  elapsed  since  quitting  Medina,  when
Mohammad  marched  forth  from  Mecca  at  the  head  of  all  his
forces,  swelled  now,  by  the  addition  of  2,000  auxiliaries  from
Koreish,  to  the  number  of  12,000  men.  Safwan,  at  his  re-
quest, made  over  to  him  one  hundred  suits  of  mail  and  stand
of  arms  complete,  and  as  many  camels.  The  array  of
tribes,  each  with  a  banner  waving  at  its  head,  was  so  imposing
that  Abu  Bekr  broke  forth  in  admiration  as  they  passed : —
We  shall  not  this  day  be  worsted  by  reason  of  the  smallness
of  our  numbers ! '  Mohammad  smiled  with  a  complacent
assent.  His  vainglorious  attitude  was  remembered  by  the
Prophet  afterwards  with  self-reproach.  In  three  or  four
marches  the  army  arrived  near  the  entrance  of  the  valley  of
Honein.

The  Hawazin,  gathered  in  great  force  at  Autas  under
their  chief  Malik,  had  meanwhile  also  been  advancing
upon  the  same  valley.  The  women  and  children  of  the  tribe,
with  their  herds  and  flocks,  followed  in  the  rear,  Malik
hoped  thus  to  nerve  his  troops  to  victory.  Doreid,  an  aged
warrior  who  accompanied  the  army  in  his  litter,  protested
against  the  fatal  measure.  But  the  youthful  leader  derided  his
advice.  During  the  night  of  Mohammad's  arrival  at  Honein,
Malik  drew  up  his  men  in  a  masked  recess,  commanding  the
steep  and  narrow  defile  which  formed  the  entrance  to  the
valley,  and  awaited  there  in  silence  the  enemy's  approach.^

At  early  dawn,  while  it  was  yet  dark,  the  sky  being
overcast with clouds, the Muslim army was in motion.

1  Malik  was  only  thirty  years  of  age.  Doreid  was  a  famous  chief  in
his  day.  After  the  battle,  he  was  cruelly  put  to  death  by  a  youth  of  the
Suleim,  who  captured  him  as  he  was  endeavouring  to  escape  in  his
camel-litter.  The  first  cut  of  the  youth's  sword  took  no  effect.  '  How
badly  has  thy  mother  furnished  thee  ! '  said  the  old  man,  cold  and
unmoved  at  the  prospect  of  death.  'There,  take  that  sword  hung  up
behind  my  litter,  and  strike  just  between  the  spine  and  the  head.  It  was
thus  I  used  to  slay  the  adversary  in  my  day.  Then  go  and  tell  thy
mother  that  thou  hast  killed  Doreid.  Many  are  the  days  in  which  I  have
saved  the  lives  of  the  women  of  thy  tribe.'  He  had,  in  fact,  saved  the
lad's  mother,  and  his  two  grandmothers.  The  skin  of  his  legs  resembled
paper,  from  constant  riding  on  the  bare  backs  of  horses.


Mohammad
sets  out  for
Honein.
A.H.  VIII.
January  28,
A.D.  630


Hawazin
also  advance
on  Honein


Battle  of
Honein,
February  i
A.D.  630


4i6  BATTLE  OF  HONEIN  [chap.

Mounted  on  his  white  mule  and  clad  in  panoply  as  on  the  day
of  Ohod,  Mohammad  followed  in  the  rear.  The  vanguard  of
the  Beni  Suleim,  led  by  Khalid,  were  defiling  leisurely  up  the
steep  and  narrow  pass,  when  on  a  sudden  the  Hawazin  sprang
from  their  ambuscade,  and  charged  impetuously  down
upon  them.  Staggered  by  the  unexpected  onslaught,
column  after  column  fell  back  and  choked  the  narrow  pass.
Aggravated  by  the  obscurity  of  the  hour,  and  the  straitness
Moham-  of  the  rugged  road,  panic  seized  the  army.  They  all  turned
™  and  fled. '  Whither  away  ?  '  cried  Mohammad,  as  troop  after

army  sur-  ^  •'  ^  ■  '  ^

prised  and  troop  they  hurried  past  him.  '  Whither  away  ?  The
butlvem?-'  Prophet  of  the  Lord  is  here  !  Return  !  return  ! '  But  his
ally  rallied  words  had  no  effect,  excepting  that  a  band  of  devoted  followers
gathered  round  him.i  The  confusion  increased,  the  multitude
of  camels  jostling  wildly  one  against  the  other ;  all  was
noise  and  clamour,  and  the  Prophet's  voice  was  lost  amid  the
din.  At  last,  seeing  the  Medina  column  hurrying  down  in
the  common  flight,  he  bade  Al-'Abbas  who  held  his  mule,  to
cry  aloud  : — '  Citizens  of  Medina  !  Ye  men  of  the  Pledge  of
the  Tree  of  Fealty  !  Men  of  the  Surat  al  -  Bakara  !  2  Al-
'Abbas  forthwith  shouted  these  words  over  and  over  again  at
the  pitch  of  his  stentorian  voice,  till  they  reached  far  and
near.  At  once  they  touched  a  chord  in  the  heart  of  the
Citizens.  Arrested  in  their  flight,  '  like  she  camels  whose
bowels  are  stirred  over  their  young,'  they  flew  to  Mohammad
crying  aloud,  '  Ya  Labbeik  !  Here  we  are,  ready  at  thy  call  ! '
A  hundred  of  these  devoted  followers,  disengaged  with
difficulty  from  the  camels  that  jammed  the  road,  threw  them-
selves across  the  gorge,  and  stayed  the  downward  rush.
Relieved  of  the  pressure  from  above,  the  army  rallied
gradually,  and  returned  to  the  battle.  The  conflict  was
severe ;  and  the  issue,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground  and
the  impetuosity  of  the  Bedawi  foe,  for  some  time  doubtful.

^  The  following  stood  firmly  by  Mohammad  : — Al-'Abbas  and  his  son
Al-Fadl,  'All,  Abu  Bekr,  'Omar,  Osama,  Aiman.  The  last  two  were
sons  of  Mohammad's  slave  Um  Aiman  by  different  husbands.  The
latter  was  among  the  slain.

"  Alluding  to  those  who  took  the  oath  of  fealty  under  the  Acacia  tree
at  Al-Hodeibiya  ;  and  to  Siarat  al-Bakara,  the  chapter  of  the  Kor'an  first
revealed  at  Medina.  The  double  allusion  would  thus  remind  them  at
once  of  their  conversion,  and  of  their  oath  to  defend  Mohammad  to  the
death. [Ibn  Ishak  omits  the  expression,  p.  847.]


XXV.]


DEFEAT  OF  HAWAZIN


417


Mohammad  from  an  eminence  watched  the  struggle.
Excited  by  the  spectacle,  he  began  loudly  to  cry  out : —
'  Noiv  is  the  furnace  heated :  I  am  the  Prophet  that  lieth  not ;
the  seed  of  'A  bd  a/-I\futfalil)  ! '  Then  bidd  ing  A 1-' Abbas  pick
him  up  a  handful  of  gravel,  he  cast  it  at  the  enemy.  '  Rum
seize  them  !  I  swear  they  are  discomfited^  he  shouted  eagerly,
as  he  saw  them  wavering.  '  By  the  Lord  of  the  Ka'ba,  they
yield  !  God  hath  cast  fear  into  their  hearts.'  The  moment
was  critical,  but  in  the  end  the  steadiness  of  the  Medina
band,  and  the  enthusiasm  of  the  rest  when  once  recalled,  had
won  the  day.  The  enemy  fled  ;  and  the  rout  was  so
complete,  and  so  fierce  the  pursuit,  that  some  even  of  the
women  and  children  were  killed,  an  atrocity  strict!)'  forbidden
by  the  Prophet.

Malik,  taking  his  stand,  with  the  flower  of  his  army,  at  the
upper  end  of  the  valley,  covered  the  escape  of  his  broken
forces ;  but  he  was  unable  to  rescue  the  women  and  children,
who  fell  into  the  conqueror's  hands,  with  the  camp  and  all
that  it  contained.  The  spoil  included  24,000  camels,  40,000
sheep  and  goats,  and  4,000  ounces  of  silver.  The  prisoners,
6,000  in  number,  with  the  booty,  were  removed  to  the  neigh-
bouring valley  of  Al-Ji'rana,  and  sheltered  there,  awaiting  the
return  of  the  army  from  At-Ta'if  Mohammad  knew  that
Hawazin  would  seek  to  regain  their  families,  and  an  oppor-
tunity was  skilfully  left  thus  open  for  negotiation.  The
fugitive  army  was  pursued  with  slaughter  as  far  as  Nakhla  ;
from  thence  part  fled  back  to  Autas,  and  part  to  At-Ta'if
The  former  entrenched  themselves  in  their  previous  camp.  A
strong  detachment  was  sent  to  dislodge  them,  which  after
severe  fighting  was  accomplished.  The  dispersed  fragments
found  refuge  in  the  surrounding  hills.

The  victory  was  thus  complete,  but  not  without  some  con-
siderable loss  on  the  part  of  Mohammad,  Only  a  few  of  his
immediate  followers  are  named  among  the  slain.^  But  some
of  the  auxiliaries,  who  being  in  the  van  bore  the  brunt  of  the
enemy's  onset,  suffered  severely,  and  two  tribes  are  spoken  of
as  almost  annihilated.  For  these  Mohammad  offered  up  a
special  prayer,  and  said  :  '  O  Lord  1  recompense  them  because
of  their  calamities  ! '

In  the  passages  which  treat  of  this  battle,  the  reverse  sus-
*  Al-Wakidi  names  only  five  ;  others  ten.

2  D


The  Beni
Hawazin
beaten  back


Their

families  nnd
camp  cap-
tured


Pursuit  of

fugitive

columns


Loss  on  Mo'

hammad's

side


4i8


SIEGE  OF  AT-TA'IF


[chap.


Victory
ascribed  to
angelic  aid


Sura  ix.  25  f-


Siege  of
At-Ta'if.
February,
A.D.  630


Testudos
and  cata-
pults tried
without
success


tained  at  the  outset  is  attributed  to  the  vainglorious  trust  in
their  numbers  with  which  the  army  set  out  from  Mecca,  while
the  eventual  success  is  ascribed  to  the  invisible  hosts  which
fought  against  the  enemy  ; —

Verily  God  hath  assisted  you  in  many  battlefields  ;  and  notably  on
the  day  of  Honein,  when  ye  rejoiced  in  the  multitude  of  your  host.  But
the  multitude  did  not  in  any  wise  benefit  you  :  the  earth  with  all  its
spaciousness  became  too  strait  for  you.^  And  so  ye  turned  your  backs
atid  fled.  Then  after  that  the  Lord  caused  His  peace  to  descend  upon
His  Prophet  and  on  the  Faithful,  and  sent  down  Hosts  which  ye  saw  not,
and  thereby  punished  the  Unbelievers.  And  such  is  the  end  of  them
that  disbelieve.  Then  God  will  be  turned  hereafter  unto  whom  He
pleaseth  ;  for  God  is  gracious  and  merciful.'

As  soon  as  the  detachment  had  returned  from  Autas,
Mohammad  pushed  forward  his  army  by  way  of  Nakhla,  and
laid  siege  to  At-Ta'if,^  But  the  battlements  were  strong,  the
city  well  provisioned,  and  a  plentiful  supply  of  water  within
the  walls.  The  besiegers  were  received  with  showers  of
arrows,  so  thick  and  well  sustained  that  they  darkened  the  sky
like  a  flight  of  locusts.  Twelve  men  were  killed,  and  many
wounded,  among  whom  was  a  son  of  Abu  Bekr.  The  camp
was  therefore  speedily  withdrawn  out  of  range  ;  and  tents  of
red  leather  were  pitched  by  it  for  Um  Selama  and  Zeinab,
who  both  had  followed  their  lord  through  all  the  dangers  of
the  way.  On  a  spot  between  the  two  Mohammad  performed
the  daily  prayers ;  and  here  eventually  was  built  the  great
Mosque  of  At-Ta'if.

The  siege  did  not  advance,  for  no  one  dared  expose  him-
self before  the  galling  archery  from  the  walls.  This  had  been
anticipated,  and  a  novel  remedy  already  sought.  The  Beni
Daus,  a  tribe  one  or  two  days  south  of  Mecca,  were  famous
for  the  use  of  the  testudo and  catapult. At-Tofeil,  one  of

*  That  is  to  say,  in  the  narrow  and  precipitous  pass,  their  great
numbers,  of  which  they  had  been  vaingloriously  proud,  only  added  to
the  difficulty.

2  The  last  verse  is  generally  construed  as  referring  to  the  mercy
afterwards  shown  to  the  Beni  Hawazin  ;  but  it  more  probably  means
forgiveness  for  the  vainglory  and  cowardice  just  described.  As  usual,
the  angels  are  a  favourite  subject  of  tradition.  On  this  occasion  they
wore  red  u7iiform.  A  cloud  was  seen  to  fill  the  valley  as  it  were  a  swarm
of  ants  :  this  was  the  angelic  troop.

3  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  869  fif.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1669  fif.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  368  ff. ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  1 14  f.


XKV.]


SIEGE  RAISED


419


their  chiefs,  having  joined  Mohammad  at  Kheibar,  was
despatched  to  secure  the  allegiance  of  his  people,  and  seek
their  aid.  They  accepted  the  summons  ;  and  At-Tofeil,
having  burned  their  famous  tutelary  image,  joined  Mohammad
four  days  after  siege  had  been  laid  to  At-Ta'if ^  Besieging
engines  were  speedily  prepared,  and  parties  pushed  forward
to  undermine  the  walls.  But  the  citizens,  prepared  for  the
stratagem  cast  down  balls  of  heated  iron  from  the  battle-
ments, and  set  the  machines  on  fire.  The  party  under  their
shelter  fled  in  alarm,  and  a  discharge  of  archery  opened  on
them.  Some  were  killed  and  many  wounded  before  they  got
beyond  the  range.  The  testudo  and  catapult  were  not  tried
again.

Seeing  no  other  way  of  bringing  the  city  to  terms,
Mohammad  gave  command  to  cut  down  and  burn  to  their
roots  the  far-famed  vineyards  which  surrounded  it.-^  This
was  being  done,  as  the  unfortunate  citizens  could  descry,
with  merciless  vigour,  when  they  succeeded  in  conveying
to  Mohammad  an  earnest  expostulation  that  he  would,  '  for
the  sake  of  mercy  and  of  God,'  desist.  He  listened  to  the
appeal,  and  stayed  further  destruction.  But  in  place  of  it  he
caused  a  proclamation  to  reach  the  garrison  which  grievously
displeased  them,  that  if  any  slaves  came  forth  from  the  city,
they  would  receive  their  freedom.  Some  twenty  escaped,  and
became  eventually  valiant  followers  of  their  liberator.

Half  a  month  passed  thus  without  effect.  The  army
became  impatient  to  share  the  spoil  in  store  for  them  at
Al-Ji'rana.  Mohammad  took  counsel  with  the  principal  men,
*  What  thinkest  thou,'  said  he  to  a  Bedawi  leader,  '  of  this
stubborn  city  ? '  'A  fox  in  its  hole,'  replied  the  astute
sententious  chief; — 'sit  long  enough  and  ye  will  catch  it:
leave  it  alone,  and  it  will  not  harm  you.'  A  dream  of  the
Prophet  ratified  the  adage.^ It  was  not  the  divine  will  that


Vineyards
cut  down
and  liberty
offered  to
slaves  of
garrison


Siege  raised,
army  returns
to  Al-Ji'iana,
end  of
February,
A.D.  630


^  At-Tofeil,  but  on  doubtful  authority,  is  said  to  have  been  converted
at  Mecca,  before  the  Hijra. So  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  252  ff.

^  These  charming  gardens,  with  their  rills  of  running  water,  lie  at  the
foot  of  the  low  mountains  encircling  the  sandy  plain  in  the  middle  of
which  At-Ta'if  stands.  They  are  still  as  famous  as  they  were  1,200  years
ago.  The  nearest  is  '  now  about  a  half  or  three-quarters  of  an  hour  from
the  city.' Vt'de  supra,  p.  109  f.

^  Mohammad  dreamed  that  a  bowl  of  cream  was  presented  to  him,
which  a  hen  pecked  at  and  spilled. Abu  Bekr  interpreted  the  dream  to


420


BATTLE  OF  HONEIN


[chap.


Scene
between
Mohammad
and  his
foster-sister


Prisoners  of
Beni
Hawazin
given  up


operations  should  be  continued.  The  siege  was  raised,  and
the  army  marched  back  to  Al-Ji'rana,  which  it  reached  about
the  end  of  February.

Here  occurred  the  interesting  incident  already  noticed
in  the  opening  chapter.  An  aged  female  among  the  cap-
tives, roughly  treated  like  the  rest,  warned  the  rude  soldiery
to  beware, — '  For,'  said  she,  '  I  am  the  foster-sister  of  your
Chief.'  Hearing  this,  they  carried  her  to  Mohammad,  who
recognised  in  the  complainant  the  little  girl  Sheima,  who
used,  when  he  was  nurtured  by  Hallma  among  the  Beni
Sa'd,  to  tend  and  carry  him.  He  seated  her  affectionately
beside  him,  and  offered  to  take  her  to  Medina.  But  as  she
preferred  remaining  with  her  tribe,  he  dismissed  her  with
a  handsome  present.^

Encouraged  by  the  kind  treatment  of  their  kinswoman,
a  deputation  from  the  various  tribes  of  the  Hawazin
presented  themselves  before  the  Prophet,  among  whom
was  an  aged  man  who  claimed  to  be  his  foster-uncle.
They  professed  submission  to  their  conqueror,  recounted
the  calamities  that  had  befallen  them,  and  thus  urged  their
claim  upon  his  favour ; — *  There,  in  these  huts  among  the
prisoners,  are  thy  foster-mothers  and  foster-sisters, — they
that  have  nursed  thee  and  fondled  thee  in  their  bosoms.
We  have  known  thee  a  suckling,  a  weaned  child,  a  youth
generous  and  noble :  and  now  thou  hast  risen  to  this
dignity.  Be  gracious  therefore  unto  us,  even  as  the  Lord
hath  been  gracious  unto  thee ! '  Mohammad  could  not
withstand  the  appeal.  Turning  kindly  to  them,  he  said :
*  Whether of  the two,  your families or  your property,  is

mean  that  he  would  not  at  this  time  obtain  his  desire  against  At-Ta'if,
and  Mohammad  thought  so  too.  A  story  told  of  'Oyeina,  chief  of
Fezara,  illustrates  the  feelings  and  motives  of  Mohammad's  Bedawi
auxiliaries.  'Oyeina  was  lauding  the  garrison  for  their  brave  and
determined  resistance.  '  Out  upon  thee,  'Oyeina  ! '  said  his  neighbour  ;
'dost  thou  praise  the  enemies  of  the  Prophet, — the  very  people  whom
thou  hast  come  to  aid  him  in  destroying  ? '  '  Verily,'  said  the  Bedawi
chief,  '  I  had  another  object  in  coming  hither.  I  hoped  that,  if
Mohammad  gained  the  victory,  I  should  obtain  one  of  the  damsels  of
At-Ta'if ;  then  should  I  have  had  worthy  issue  ;  for  truly  the  tribe  of
Thaklf  are  a  warlike,  noble  race.'

1  See  ante,  p.  7.  The  mark  of  the  bite,  recognised  by  Mohammad  as
having  been  inflicted  by  himself  when  a  child  on  Sheima's  back,  may  be
a  traditional  embellishment.


xxv]


DIVISION  OF  PLUNDER


421


the  dearer  to  you?'  'Our  women  and  our  children/  they
replied;  'we  would  not  take  anything  in  exchange  for  them.'
*  Then,'  continued  the  Prophet,  '  whatsoever  prisoners  fall
to  my  portion  and  that  of  my  family,  I  give  them  up  unto
you  ;  and  I  will  presently  speak  unto  the  people  concerning
the  rest.  Come  again  at  the  mid-day  prayer  when  the
congregation  is  assembled,  and  ask  of  me  to  make  inter-
cession with  them  for  you.'  At  the  appointed  time  they
appeared  and  made  their  petition.  The  citizens  of  Medina,
and  those  of  Mecca  also,  cheerfully  followed  the  example
of  Mohammad ;  but  some  of  the  allied  tribes,  as  Fezara,
with  'Oyeina  at  their  head,  declined  to  do  so.  Mohammad
urged  the  claims  of  his  new  converts,  and  promised  that  such
of  the  allies  as  were  unwilling  to  part  with  their  share  of  the
prisoners  should  be  recompensed  hereafter  from  the  first
booty  the  Lord  might  give  into  their  hands,  at  the  rate  of
six  camels  for  every  captive.  To  this  they  agreed,  and  the
prisoners  were  all  released.

Among  the  captives  were  three  beautiful  women,  who
were  brought  to  Mohammad.  One  was  presented  by  him
to  All,  another  to  'Othman,  and  the  third  to  'Omar.  'Omar
transferred  the  one  allotted  him  to  his  son  'Abdallah,  who
returned  her  as  she  was,  with  the  rest  of  the  prisoners.^
Whether  the  other  two  were  restored  likewise,  is  not  stated  :
but,  be  this  as  it  may,  it  throws  a  curious  light  on  the
domestic  history  of  Mohammad,  that  he  should  have
presented  such  gifts  as  slave  girls  to  the  father  of  one  of  his
wives,  and  the  husbands  of  two  of  his  own  daughters.

Having  arranged  for  the  restoration  of  the  prisoners,
Mohammad  had  already  mounted  his  camel  and  was
proceeding  to  his  tent,  when  the  people,  fearing  lest  the
spoil,  as  well  as  the  prisoners,  should  slip  from  their  grasp,
crowded  round  him  ; — '  Distribute  to  us  the  spoil,'  they
cried,  '  the  camels  and  the  flocks ! '  So  rudely  did  they
jostle,  that  he  was  driven  to  seek  refuge  under  a  tree,  with
his  mantle  torn  from  his  shoulders.  '  Return  to  me  my
mantle,  O  man  : '  cried  Mohammad,  who  had  now  secured
a  more  free  position,  extricating  himself  with  some  difficulty
from  the  crush  ; — '  Return my  mantle  :  for I swear  by  the

^  'AbdalLah  had  sent  the  girl  to  be  kept  in  readiness  for  him  after  he
had  visited  the  Ka'ba  ;  but  meanwhile  the  prisoners  were  surrendered.


Mohammad
presents
slave  girls
to  'All,
'Othman,  and
'Omar


MohamnKid
is  mobbed
on  account
of  the  booty


422


BATTLE  OF  HONNEI


[chap.


Present
made  to
Meccan  and
Bedawi
chiefs


Discontent


Lord  that  if  the  sheep  and  the  camels  were  as  many  as  the
trees  of  the  forest  in  number,  I  would  divide  them  all
amongst  you.  Ye  have  not  heretofore  found  me  niggardly
or  false.'  Then  plucking  from  his  camel's  hump  a  hair,  he
held  it  aloft  and  said  ; — '  Even  to  a  hair  like  this,  I  would  keep
back  nought  but  the  Fifth  ;  and  even  that  I  will  divide  amongst
you.'  They  were  pacified,  and  Mohammad  went  on  his  way.
He  took  an  early  opportunity  of  making  good  his
promise,  and  at  the  same  time  of  gaining,  by  a  princely
liberality,  the  hearts  of  the  leading  chiefs  of  Mecca  and  of
the  Bedawi  tribes.  To  the  most  powerful  he  presented
each  one  hundred  camels.  Among  them  we  find  Abu
Sufyan,  with  his  two  sons,  Yazld  and  Mu'awiya,  Hakim  ibn
Hizam,  Safwan,  Suheil,  Huweitib,  'Oyeina,  and  others  who
but  a  few  weeks  before  were  his  deadly  enemies.  To  the
lesser  chiefs  he  gave  fifty  camels  each.  And  so  liberal  was
he  that  in  some  cases  where  discontent  was  expressed,  the
gift  was  without  hesitation  doubled.

Although  taken  from  the  Prophet's  Fifth,  these  largesses
among  older  ^q  j-^g^  ^^(^  doubtful  Converts  gave  umbrage  to  his  veteran

followers

followers.  Thus  one  complained  that  such  Bedawi  chieftains
as  Al-Akra'  and  'Oyeina  received  each  one  hundred  camels,
while  a  faithful  believer  like  Jo'eil  got  nothing  at  all.  'And
what  of  that  ? '  replied  the  Prophet ;  '  I  swear  that  Jo'eil  is
the  best  man  that  ever  stepped  on  earth,  were  it  filled  never
so  full  of  Al-Akra's  and  'Oyeinas  ;  but  I  wished  to  gain
over  the  hearts  of  these  men  to  Islam,  while  Jo'eil  hath  no
need  of  any  such  inducement,'  A  Bedawi  follower,  who
watched  the  proceeding,  openly  impugned  its  equity.
Mohammad  became  angry,  and  said :  '  Out  upon  thee !
If  justice  and  equity  be  not  with  me,  where  will  ye  find
them?'  But  what  concerned  Mohammad  the  most  was
the  murmurs  of  the  Citizens  of  Medina.  *  Truly  (thus  they
spake  among  themselves)  he  hath  now  joined  his  own  people
and  forsaken  us.'  The  discontent  became  so  serious  that
Sa'd  ibn  'Obada  thought  right  to  represent  it  to  the  Prophet,
who  bade  him  call  the  murmurers  together.  He  then
addressed  them  thus ; — '  Ye  men  of  Medina,^  it  hath  been
reported to me that  ye are disconcerted,  because I have

^  Ansdr, '  Helpers,' as before explained  ; and  so  throughout  this
address.


XXV.] PRESENTS  TO  MECCANS  AND  BEDAWiN  423

given  unto  these  Chiefs  largesses,  and  have  given  nothing
unto  you.  Now  speak  unto  me.  Did  I  not  come  unto
you  whilst  ye  were  wandering,  and  the  Lord  gave  you  the
right  direction?  needy,  and  He  enriched  you; — at  enmity
amongst  yourselves,  and  He  hath  filled  your  hearts  with  love
and  unity?'  He  paused  for  a  reply.  'Indeed,  it  is  even  as
thou  sayest,'  they  answered;  'to  the  Lord  and  to  his
Prophet  belong  benevolence  and  grace.'  *  Nay,  by  the
Lord  ! '  continued  Mohammad  ;  '  but  ye  might  have  answered
(and  answered  truly,  for  I  would  have  vouched  for  it
myself) — Tlioii  earnest  to  ]\Icdhia  rejected,  and  zve  bare  tJiee
witness ;  a  fugitive,  and  we  took  thee  in ;  an  outcast,  and  we
gave  thee  an  asylum ;  destitute,  and  zve  fed  thee.  Why  are
ye  disturbed  in  mind  because  of  the  things  of  this  life
wherewith  I  have  sought  to  incline  these  men  unto  the
faith  in  which  ye  are  already  stablished  ?  Are  ye  not
satisfied  that  others  should  have  the  flocks  and  herds,  while
ye  carry  back  with  you  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord  ?  Nay,
I  will  never  leave  you.  If  all  mankind  went  one  way,  and
the  men  of  Medina  another  way,  verily  I  would  go  the  way
of  the  men  of  Medina.  The  Lord  be  favourable  unto  them,
and  bless  them,  and  their  sons  and  their  sons'  sons  for
ever  1 '  At  these  words  they  wept,  till  the  tears  ran  down
upon  their  beards;  and  they  cried  with  one  voice:  'Yea,
we  are  well  satisfied,  O  Prophet,  with  our  lot ! '

Notwithstanding  this  touching  return  of  kindly  feeling.  Subject
a  grave  misdemeanour  had  been  committed  by  those  who  had  ^or'^ln  '"
found  fault  with  the  distribution,  and  a  passage  was  revealed
bearing  a  divine  reprimand  accordingly.  The  legitimate
recipients  of  public  charity  had  already  been  laid  down  as
the  '  poor  and  needy  and  the  wayfarer,'  and  certain  other
deserving  classes.  It  was  needful  now  for  the  Prophet  to
justify  his  stepping  beyond  these  limits ;  and  so  a  new  class
is  added  as  proper  recipients  of  public  gifts  ; —

There  are  that  blame  thee  in  thy  (distribution  of  the)  alms  ;  1  if  they Siira  ix.  58  f.
receive  therefrom  they  are  well  pleased,  but  if  they  do  not  receive  a  part
they  are  angry. Now,  if  they  had  been  well  pleased  with  whatever  God
and  his  Apostle  gave  unto  them,  and  had  said, — '  God  will  suffice  for  us  ;

'  That  is,  they  complained  that  the  Prophet's  Fifth  destined  for
charity,  &c.,  along  with  the  tithes,  had  been  diverted  by  Mohammad  from
its  proper  use.


424


BATTLE  OF  HONEIN


[chap.  XXV.


Malik,  the
Hawazin
chief,  gained
over


Booty  dis-
tributed,
February,
IVTarch,  a.D.
630

Mohammad
performs
Lesser  Pil-
grimage


'Attab  left
in  the
government

of  Mecca


Despatches
to  Al- Bah-
rein, &c.


God  will  give  unto  us  of  his  bounty,  and  his  Prophet  also, — verily  unto
God  is  our  desire,' — (it  had  been  better  for  them).  Verily,  Alms  are  for
the  poor  and  the  needy,  and  for  the  collectors  of  the  same,  afid  for  them
whose  hearts  are  to  be  gained  over,  and  for  captives,  and  for  debtors,  and
for  the  service  of  God,  and  for  the  wayfarer.  It  is  an  ordinance  from
God  ;  and  God  is  knowing  and  wise.

Thus  Mohammad  made  no  attempt  to  hide  the  motive
which  dictated  these  munificent  gifts,  and  the  chiefs  who
received  them  were  ever  known  as  '  those  zvhose  liearts  had
been  gahted over!  Malik,  the  chief  who  had  led  the  Hawazin,
was  still  in  At-Ta'if.  Mohammad,  desiring  to  gain  him  over
also,  directed  his  tribe  to  make  it  known  that  if  he  embraced
Islam  his  family  and  property  would  be  restored,  and  a  present
of  one  hundred  camels  besides  bestowed  upon  him.  He  soon
joined  Mohammad  and  became  an  exemplary  Believer.  Con-
firmed in  his  chiefship,  he  entered  on  a  constant  warfare  with
the  citizens  of  At-Ta'if,  cut  off  their  cattle  whenever  they
were  sent  away  to  graze,  and  reduced  them  to  great  straits.

Mohammad  spent  about  a  fortnight  at  Al-Ji'rana,  during
which  period  the  booty  captured  at  Honein  was  all  dis-
tributed. Four  camels,  and  forty  sheep  or  goats,  fell  to
the  lot  of  each  foot  soldier,  and  three  times  that  amount  to
every  horseman.  The  distribution  ended,  Mohammad,
having  taken  upon  him  the  pilgrim  vows,  started  for  Mecca,
where  he  fulfilled  the  rites  of  the  Lesser  Pilgrimage.  But
he  made  no  stay  there.  He  returned  to  Al-Ji'rana  that
same  night ;  and  thence,  striking  through  the  valleys,  took
the  direct  route  homewards  to  Medina.

The  youthful  'Attab  was  confirmed  in  the  government
of  Mecca,  and  an  allowance  assigned  him  of  one  dirhem
a  day.^  The  annual  pilgrimage  followed  shortly  afterwards,
but  Mohammad  did  not  go  up  to  it.  'Attab  presided  ;  and
Idolaters  were  still  permitted  to  mingle  freely  with  Believers
in  performance  of  its  ceremonies.  Mo'adh  was  left  behind
to  complete  the  spiritual  instruction  of  the  city.

On  his  return  to  Medina,  Mohammad  despatched  letters  to
the  Chiefs  of  Al-Bahrein,  'Oman,  and  the  Yemen,  the  result
of  which  will  be  told  in  the  narrative  of  the  following  year.

^  'Attab  was  content  with  this  moderate  allowance.  He  said  :  'Let
the  Lord  make  hungry  that  man's  liver,  who  is  hungry  upon  a  dirhem  a
day.  The  Prophet  hath  appointed  that  as  my  subtenance.  I  have  not
further  claim  on  any  one.'


CHAPTER  XXVI

MARY, THE COPTIC MAID,  AND HER SON IBRAIlTM
A.H.  VIII.-X.— A.D.  630,  631
^TAT. 61, 62

In  the  Ninth  year  of  the  HIjra,  Mohammad  lost  his  daughter  Death  of
Zeinab,  who  had  never  recovered  the  ill-treatment  which  she Moham-
suffered  on  her  escape from  Mecca. Um  Kulthum,  whom mad's
'Othman married after Rokeiya's  death,  had  also  died,  so "^
that  of  his  family  Fatima  alone  was  left. His  heart  was  now
for  a  brief  space  to  be  solaced  by  another  child.

We  have  already  seen  that  the  Mukaukis  sent  two  Coptic  Mary,  the
maids,  Sirin  and  Mary,  as  a  gift  to  Mohammad.  They  were  °^  "^  "^^'
both  comely ;  but  it  was  not  lawful,  according  to  his  own
strict  precept,  for  the  Prophet  to  place  two  sisters  in  his
harlm.  The  beauty  of  Mary,  whose  fair  complexion  and
delicate  features  were  adorned  by  a  profusion  of  black  curling
hair,  fascinated  Mohammad.  So  he  kept  Mary,  and  gave
her  sister  to  another.  Um  Suleim,  the  wife  of  his  servant
Abu  Rafi'  (the  same  that  adorned  Saflya  for  him  at  Kheibar),
was  entrusted  with  the  new  charge.  Mary  was  not  at  once
placed  in  the  harlm  at  the  Mosque,  but  a  garden  house  was
prepared  for  her  in  Upper  Medina,  where,  in  the  heat  of  the
summer  and  the  date  harvest,  she  used  to  receive  the  visits
of  the  Prophet.^  Originally  a  Christian,  she  had  no  doubt
by  this  time  gone  over  to  Islam.

*  Ibn  Hisharri;  p.  121  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1591,  1686.

2  According  to  Beladhuii  (p.  18),  it  was  one  of  seven  properties
escheated  from  the  Beni  an- Nadir,  and  given  to  Mukheirik  the  Jew,  and
on  his  death  left  by  him  to  Mohammad.  Burton  (ii.  323  f.)  tells  us  it  is
shown  to  the  present  day.  It  lies  in  the  quarter  called  Ambarlya,  on  the
S.E.  side  of  the  city,  where  tiie  road  emerges  to  Yenbo'  and  Mecca  ;  it  is


426  MARY  THE  COPT  [chap.

Presents  A  Singular  fortune  elevated  Mary  to  a  dignity  which  her

Mohammad diarms  alone  could  not  have  secured. In  course  of  time  she

with  a  son.  ...  .  i o i

A.H.  viu.  gave  promise  of  becoming  a  mother;  and  the  aged  belma,
April,  A.D.  ^j^Q  j^^j  long  ago  attended  the  birth  of  Khadlja's  children,
was  now  engaged  to  perform  the  same  office  for  Mary.
Shortly  after  the  return  from  At-Ta'if,  a  son  was  born,  and
Um  Burda  was  selected  from  amongst  many  candidates  to
be  the  infant's  nurse.  His  name  was  called  Ibrahim.^  More
than  five-and-twenty  years  had  elapsed  since  the  birth  of
Mohammad's  last  child,  and  his  numerous  marriages  at
Medina  had  not  given  promise  of  any  progeny.  His  joy,
therefore,  at  the  birth  of  a  son  in  his  old  age  was  very  great.
On  the  seventh  day,  following  the  example  of  Khadija,  he
sacrificed  a  kid  ;  and,  having  shaved  his  head,  he  distributed
silver  among  the  poor  to  the  weight  of  the  hair,  which  then
was  buried.-  He  used  daily  to  visit  the  house  of  the  nurse
(where  according  to  custom  Ibrahim  was  brought  up),  and
calling  for  the  little  child  would  embrace  him  in  his  arms  and
kiss  him  fondly.
Jealousy  of  The  wives  of  Mohammad  were  envious  of  Mary,  who  as

mad's'wives  ^^^  mother  of  Ibrahim  was  now  advanced  beyond  the  posi-
tion of  a  slave,  and  enjoyed  peculiar  favour.  As  the  infant
grew  and  throve,  Mohammad  one  day  carried  him  to  'A'isha,
and  with  pride  exclaimed  :  '  Look,  what  a  likeness  it  is  to
me ! '  *  I  do  not  see  it,'  said  'A'isha,  who  would  gladly  have
put  Mohammad  out  of  conceit  with  the  little  Ibrahim.
*  What  1 '  rejoined  he  ;  '  canst  thou  not  see  the  likeness,  and
how  fair  and  fat  he  is  ? ' '  Yes,'  she  replied  ; '  and  so  would

separated  from  the  rest  of  the  town  by  the  stream  and  low  intervening
land.  A  Mosque  called  Masjid  Mashrabat  Um  Ibrahim,  'the  Mosque  of
the  summer  house  of  the  mother  of  Ibrahim,'  still  marks  the  spot.  At
what  period  Mohammad  provided  this  garden  for  her  is  not  certain  :
possibly  after  the  birth  of  Ibrahim,  or  on  her  becoming  enciente.  Certainly
it  was  an  honour  one  would  not  have  expected  to  be  conferred  on  a
slave-girl,  without  some  special  cause.  Sprenger  thinks  that  Mohammad
kept  her  in  a  neighbour's  house  at  first,  and  transferred  her  to  the  garden
only  after  the  affair  of  Hafsa.

^  The  name,  I  need  hardly  say,  is  the  Arabian  form  of  Abraha7ii.
Another  tradition  says  that  the  child  was  given  to  be  nursed  by  the  wife
of  a  blacksmith,  who  used  to  be  blowing  his  forge  when  Mohammad
came  to  see  the  child,  and  the  house  was  consequently  full  of  smoke.

"  The  weight  must  have  been  trifling,  as  he  had  only  shaved  his  head
a  month  or  six  weeks  before,  at  the  Lesser  Pilgrimage.


XXVI.]  BIRTH  OF  IBRAHIM  427

be  any  other  child  that  drank  as  much  milk  as  he.' A  flock
of  milch  goats  was  kept  for  the  especial  service  of  the  child.

But  the  jealousy  of  Mary's  'Sisters'  showed  itself  in  a
more  serious  way,  and  led  to  an  incident  in  the  Prophet's
life  which  the  biographers  pass  over  in  decent  silence ;  and
I  should  gladly  have  followed  their  example  if  the  Kor'an
itself  had  not  accredited  the  facts  and  stamped  them  with
unavoidable  notoriety.

It  once  happened  that  Hafsa  paid  a  visit  to  her  father Affair  with
on  the  day  which,  in  due  course,  Mohammad  was  passing  in Mary  cre:ites
her house.^ Returning unexpectedly, she surprised the Moham-
Prophet in her own private room with Mary. She was ^ ^  '-^^""^
indignant  at  the  wrong. The  affront  was  the  more  intoler-
able from  the  servile  position  of  her  rival. She  reproached
her  lord  bitterly,  and  threatened to  make  the occurrence
known  to  the  whole  sisterhood. Afraid  of  the  exposure,  and
anxious  to  appease  his  offended  wife,  Mohammad  begged  of
her  to  keep  the  matter  quiet,  and  promised  to  forego  the
company  of  Mary  altogether. Hafsa,  however,  did  not  care
to  hide  her  wrong. She  told  it  all  to  'A'isha,  who  boiled
with  indignation at  the  tale. The  scandal  throughout  the
harim spread  apace,  and Mohammad soon found himself
received  by  his  wives  with  coldness  and  reserve.

As  in  the  affair  of  Zeinab,  a  heavenly  message  interposed, Moham-
which disallov/ed the promise to refrain from Mary's '"^d  ^  dis-

^  _  -' pleasure  with

company,  chided  the  chief  offenders  for  their  insubordina-  his  wives
tion,  and  hinted  at  the  possibility  of  the  whole  harIm  being
divorced  in  favour  of  other  consorts  more  loyal  and  compla-
cent. Having  delivered  this  warning,  the  Prophet  withdrew
from  the  society  of  his  wives,  and  for  a  whole  month  lived
alone  with  Mary.  'Omar  and  Abu  Bekr  were  mortified  at
the  scandal  and  at  the  desertion  of  their  daughters  for  a
menial  concubine.  At  length  Mohammad,  unwilling  longer
to  continue  the  disgrace  of  his  wives,  or  impatient  at  his  self-
imposed  seclusion  from  them,  listened  to  their  prayer.
Gabriel,  he  said,  had  spoken  well  of  Hafsa,  the  chief  offender,
and desired that he should take her back again. So  he

^  As  before  explained,  Mohammad  divided  his  time  equally  among
his  wives.  He  would  say  :  '  J'/u's  {i.e.  living  in  rotation  with  each)  I  have
power  to  do  ;  but  Thou,  O  Lord,  art  the  master  over  that  in  respect  of
which  I  have  no  power'  (meaning  love  in  the  heart).


428  MARY  THE  COPT  [chap.

forgave them all and returned to their apartments as

before.
Notice  of  The passage in  the  Kor'an  relating  to  the  affair  is as

if^V''  follows:—

Kor  an

Sura  Ixvi.  i  f.  o  Prophet !  Why  hast  thou  forbidden  thyself  that  which  God  hath
made  lawful  unto  thee,  out  of  desire  to  please  thy  Wives  ;  for  God  is
forgiving  and  merciful  ?  Verily  God  hath  sanctioned  the  revocation  of
your  oaths  ;  and  God  is  your  Master. He  is  knowing  and  wise.

The  Prophet  had  entrusted  as  a  secret  to  one  of  his  wives  a  certain
affair  ;  and  when  she  disclosed  it  (to  another),  and  God  made  known  the
same  unto  him,  he  acquainted  (her)  with  a  part  thereof,  and  withheld  a
part.^  And  when  he  had  acquainted  her  (Hafsa)  therewith,  she  said,  IV/io
told  thee  this? He  replied,  He  told  it  to  jne,  the  Knowing  and  the  Wise.

If  ye  both  turn  with  repentance  unto  God  (for  verily  the  hearts  of  you
both  have  swerved) — Well.  But  if  ye  combine  with  each  other  against
him,  surely  God  is  his  Master  ;  and  Gabriel  and  (every)  good  man  of  the
Believers,  and  the  Angels,  will  thereafter  be  his  supporters.

Haply,  his  Lord,  if  he  divorce  you,^  will  give  him  in  your  stead  Wives
better  than  ye  are,  submissive  unto  God,  believers,  pious,  repentant,
devout,  fasting  ; — both  women  married  previously,  and  Virgins.^

There  is  surely  no  grotesquer  utterance  than  this  in  the
'Sacred  Books  of  the  East';  and  yet  it  has  been  gravely
read  all  these  ages,  and  is  still  read,  by  the  Muslim,  both  in
public  and  private,  as  part  of  the  '  eternal '  Kor'an.  It  is
equally  remarkable  that  the  affair  did  not  in  any  perceptible
degree  affect  either  the  reputation  and  influence  of  the
Prophet,  or  the  credit  of  his  revelation.

1  The  passage  is  enigmatical.  The  meaning  is  apparently  this  :
Mohammad  told  a  part, — that  is,  a  part  of  what  he  had  supernaturally
learned  that  Hafsa  had  said  to  'A'isha  :  and  withheld  a  part,  i.e.  refrained
from  upbraiding  her  with  a  part  of  what  he  had  thus  learned  : — the  one
part  perhaps  relating  to  Mohammad's  affair  in  Hafsa's  room  ;  the  other,
to  his  promise  that  he  would  not  consort  with  Mary  again.  According
to  another  tradition,  Mohammad,  with  the  view  of  appeasing  Hafsa,  told
her  that  Abu  Bekr,  and  after  him  her  father  'Omar,  were  to  succeed  him  ;
this  being  the  part  which,  from  fear  of  its  getting  abroad,  he  did  not
mention  ;  but  such  an  interpretation  is  altogether  unlikely.

2  'You'  in  the  plural,  not  as  before  in  the  dual  number, — implying
that  all  his  wives  were  involved  in  his  displeasure.

2  The  Sura,  a  short  one  of  only  thirteen  verses,  is  a  curiosity  from
beginning  to  end.  It  ends  with  a  warning  allusion  to  two  wicked  women,
who,  though  the  wives  of  Noah  and  Lot,  were  yet  condemned  to  hell, —
signifying  that  his  own  wives,  unless  they  repented,  might  possibly  find
themselves  in  the  same  category  ;  and  to  two  good  women  the  wife
of  Pharaoh,  and  the  Virgin  Mary,  examples  of  virtue  and  piety.


XXVI.]  DEATH  OF  IBRAHIM  429

I  turn  gladly  to  a  more  edifying  scene.  A  year  and  more  Sickness  of
had  passed  ;  and  the  child  Ibrahim  was  now  advanced  to  an  ^^''ahim
age  at  which  the  innocent  prattle  and  winning  ways  of
infancy  stole  away  the  heart  of  Mohammad.  His  hopes  and
affections  centred  for  awhile  in  his  little  son.  There  is,
indeed,  no  ground  for  supposing  that  Mohammad  ever
contemplated  the  succession  of  princely  office  in  his  own
family.  The  prophetical  dignity  was  personal,  and  his
political  authority  exercised  solely  in  virtue  of  it.  But  he
regarded  his  children  with  a  loving  and  partial  eye  ;  he  no
doubt  also  rejoiced  in  the  prospect,  dear  to  every  Arab,  of
having  his  name  and  memory  perpetuated  by  male  issue  ;
and  he  might  naturally  expect  that  his  son  would  be
cherished  and  honoured  by  all  followers  of  Islam.  But  his
expectations,  of  whatever  nature,  were  doomed  to  an  early
blight.  When  but  fifteen  or  sixteen  months  old,  Ibrahim
fell  sick,  and  it  was  soon  seen  that  he  would  not  survive.
He  was  laid  in  a  palm-grove  near  the  house  of  his  nurse.
There  Mary,  with  her  sister  Sirin,  tended  his  dying  His  death,
bed  ;  and  there  too  was  Mohammad  in  deep  and  bitter  "'rief '^•"•  ■^•

,  ■  10  June  or

Seeing  that  the  child  was  soon  to  breathe  his  last,  he  folded July,  a.d,

him in his arms and sobbed. The bystanders tried to ^^^

comfort him. They  reminded  him  that  he  had  counselled

others to moderate their grief. '  Nay,' said Mohammad,

calming  himself  as  he  hung  over  the  expiring  child  ; — '  It  is

not  this  that  I  forbade,  but  wailing  and  fulsome  laudation  of

the  dead. This  that  ye  see  in  me  is  but  the  working  of  love

and  pity  in  the  heart :  he  that  showeth  no  pity,  unto  him  no

pity shall be shown. We grieve for the  child : the eye

runneth  down  with  tears,  and  the  heart  swelleth  inwardly  ;

yet  we  say  not  aught  that  would  offend  our  Lord. Ibrahim  !

O  Ibrahim ! if  it  were  not  that  the  promise  is  faithful,  and

hope  of  Resurrection  sure,  if  it  were  not  that  this  is  the  way

to  be  trodden  by  all,  and  that  the  last  of  us  shall  rejoin  the

first,  I  would grieve  for  thee  with  a  grief  sorer  even  than

this  ! ' But  the  spirit  had  already  passed  away,  and  the  last

fond  words  of  Mohammad  fell  on  ears  that  could  no  longer

hear. So  he  laid  down  the  little  body,  saying :  '  The  remainder

of  the  days  of  his  nursing  shall  be  fulfilled  in  Paradise.'^

^  Mohammad  held  tivo  years  as  the  proper  period  for  the  suckhng  of  a
child.


43°


MARY  THE  COPT


[chap.  XXVI.


Burial  of
the  child


Eclipse


The  nurse
rewarded


General
history  an-
ticipated


Then  he  comforted  Mary  and  Sirln,  and  bade  them,  now  that
the  child  was  gone,  to  be  silent  and  resigned.

Mohammad,  with  his  uncle  A1-' Abbas,  sat  by  while  Al-
Fadl,  son  of  the  latter,  washed  and  laid  out  the  body.  It
was  then  carried  forth  upon  its  little  bier.  The  Prophet,  as
was  his  wont,  prayed  over  it,  and  then  followed  the  proces-
sion to  the  graveyard.  He  lingered  at  the  grave  after  it  was
filled  up  ;  and  calling  for  a  skin  of  water,  caused  it  to  be
sprinkled  over  the  spot.  Then,  observing  some  unevenhess,
he  smoothed  it  with  his  hand,  saying  to  the  bystanders  :
'  When  ye  do  this  thing,  do  it  carefully,  for  it  giveth  ease  to
the  afflicted  heart.  It  cannot  injure  the  dead,  neither  can  it
profit  him  ;  but  it  giveth  comfort  to  the  living.'

An  eclipse  of  the  sun  occurred  on  the  same  day,  and  the
people  spoke  of  it  as  a  tribute  to  the  death  of  the  Prophet's
son.  A  vulgar  impostor  would  have  accepted  and  confirmed
the  delusion ;  but  Mohammad  rejected  the  idea.  'The  sun
and  the  moon,'  he  taught  them,  'are  amongst  the  signs
appointed  by  the  Lord.  They  are  not  eclipsed  on  the  death
of  any  one.  Whensoever  ye  see  an  eclipse,  then  betake
yourselves  to  prayer  until  it  passeth  away.'

In  gratitude  for  her  services  he  gave  Um  Burda,  the
nurse,  a  parcel  of  ground  planted  as  an  orchard  with  palm-
trees.

In  this  chapter  I  have  anticipated  the  march  of  events  by
about  a  year,  in  order  to  bring  under  one  view  the  story  of
Mary,  the  Coptic  maid,  and  of  her  little  son.


CHAPTER XXVII

EMBASSIES TO MEDINA'
FIRST HALF OF THE NINTH YEAR OF THE HIJRA

April  20  to  September,  A.D.  630

The  conquest  of  Mecca  opened  a  new  era  in  Islam.  It  Political
practically  decided  the  struggle  for  supremacy  in  Arabia.  ^^^^^^^^
Followed  by  the  victory  of  Honein,  it  not  only  removed  conquest  of
apprehension  of  future  attack  upon  Medina,  but  elevated  ^^'^^
Mohammad  to  a  position  in  which  it  was  natural  for  him  to
assert  an  authority  paramount  over  the  whole  Peninsula.  It
is  true  that  no  such  authority  had  ever  vested  in  the  chiefs
of  Mecca.  Neither  had  the  Byzantine  empire  pretended  to
any  influence  beyond  the  confines  of  the  Syrian  desert.  The
suzerainty  of  Arabia,  enjoyed  in  remote  times  by  the  Kings
of  Himyar,  had,  it  is  true,  been  transferred  to  the  dynasty  of
Al-Hira  as  representing  the  court  of  Persia.  But  Al-Hira
had  fallen  to  the  rank  of  an  ordinary  Satrapy ;  and  the
Chosroes,  long  before  discomfited  in  a  decisive  battle  by  the
Arabs  themselves,  and  humbled  now  by  the  Roman  arms,
no  longer  commanded  respect.^  There  was  thus  at  the
moment  no  power  even  nominally  paramount  throughout  the
Peninsula.  Besides  Muhammad  himself,  no  one  could  lay
claim  to  the  dignity,  or  even  dream  of  aspiring  to  it.  The
possession  of  Mecca  now  imparted  a  colour  of  right;  for
Mecca  was  the  spiritual  centre  of  Arabia,  and  to  Mecca  the
tribes from every quarter yielded a reverential homage.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  933  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  17 10  ff.

'^  In  the  battle  of  Dhu  Kar,  fought  A.D.  611,  just  before  Mohammad
assumed  the  prophetic  office,  the  Persians  were  completely  routed  by  the
great  tribe  of  the  Beni  Bekr,  inhabiting  the  N.E.  of  the  Peninsula  ;  and
thereafter  Al-Hira  sank  in  importance. See  Introd.,  p.  xcvi.,  and  p.  370.


432


EMBASSIES  TO  MEDINA


[chap.


Possession
of  Mecca
increased
Moham-
mad's
spiritual
power ;


Which,  in

its  turn,

involved

absolute

secular

authority


Collectors
deputed  to
gather  tithes
A.H.  IX.
April  20,
A.D.  630


The  conduct  of  the  annual  pilgrimage,  the  custody  of  the
Holy  House,  the  intercalation  of  the  year,  and  the  commuta-
tion at  will  of  the  sacred  months — institutions  affecting  all
Arabia,  belonged  by  ancient  privilege  to  Koreish,  and  were
now  in  the  hands  of  Mohammad.  Throughout  Arabia,  who
could  advance  pretensions  to  the  supreme  authority  beside
the  Prophet  of  Medina  and  Conqueror  of  Mecca  ?

Moreover,  it  had  been  the  special  care  of  Mohammad  to
interweave  with  the  reformed  faith  all  essential  parts  of  the
ancient  ceremonial.  The  one  had  become  an  inseparable
portion  of  the  other.  It  was  not,  indeed,  till  the  expiry  of
another  year  that  full  advantage  was  taken  of  this,  by
admitting  none  but  adherents  of  Islam  to  the  Ka'ba  and  its
rites.  Yet  the  spiritual  power  which  the  Prophet  gained  by
combining  the  Pilgrimage  with  the  new  faith  was  felt
throughout  from  the  moment  that  Mecca  submitted  to  his
arms.  There  remained  but  one  religion  for  Arabia,  and  that
was  Islam.

Again,  the  new  creed  was  so  deftly  bound  up  with  the
civil  polity,  that  the  recognition  of  Mohammad's  spiritual
power  necessarily  involved  a  simultaneous  submission  to  his
secular  jurisdiction.  It  lay  at  the  root  of  Islam  that  the
convert  should  not  only  submit  to  its  teaching,  its  ritual  and
its  code  of  ethics,  but  also  that  he  should  render  an  implicit
obedience  in  all  things  'to  the  Lord  mid  to  his  Prop]iet'^  and
that  he  should  pay  Tithes  annually  (not  indeed  as  a  tribute,
but  as  a  religious  offering  that  sanctified  the  rest  of  his
wealth)  towards  the  charities  and  expenses  of  Mohammad
and  his  growing  empire.^  It  was  the  privilege  of  believing
tribes  alone,  to  pay  the  tithe :  from  Jews,  Christians,  and
heathen  tribes,  it  was  not  tithe  but  Tribute  that  was  taken,
and  that  in  token  of  their  servitude.

It  was  under  these  circumstances  that,  on  his  return
from  Al-Ji'rana,  at the  opening  of  the  Ninth  year of  the

1  Tithes  and  voluntary  almsgiving  are  called  by  two  names  of  Jewish
derivation,  Zakdt  and  Sadakdtj  the  former  signifying  '  purification '  (see
Luke  xi.  41),  the  latter  'righteousness,'  as  in  Matt.  vi.  i.  The  tribute
from  unbelievers  is  called  Kharaj  or  Jizya.

For  the  purposes  to  which  Mohammad  applied  the  tithes,  see  the
passage  quoted  at  p.  423.  Mohammad  assisted  debtors  from  the  fund.
A  debtor  once  applied  for  aid  :  '  Wait,'  said  Mohammad,  '  till  the  tithes
come  in,  and  then  I  will  help  thee.'


XXVII.]  BENI  TEMTM  433

Hijra,  the  Prophet  demanded  from  the  tribes  which  had
tendered  their  adhesion,  the  prescribed  offerings  or  Tithes.
Collectors  were  deputed  by  him  in  every  direction  to  assess
a  tenth  part  of  the  increase,  and  bring  it  in  as  tithe  to
Medina.^  They  were  well  received,  and  accomplished  their
mission  without  obstruction,  excepting  only  one  or  two  cases.

A  branch  of  the  Beni  Temim  chanced  to  be  encamped Beni
close at  hand  when  the  tax-gatherer  arrived  to  gather  the ^^^JJ^jj  f^^r
tithes  of  an  adjoining  tribe. While  the  herds  and  flocks  of  driving  away
their  neighbours  were  being  collected  for  the  tenth,  Temlm, '^^-g^^^'^''^'^
anticipating  a  like  demand,  came  forward  armed  with  bows
and  swords  and  drove  the  tax-gatherer  away. Mohammad
resolved on a prompt  example  of  the  offenders. 'Oyeina,
with  fifty  of  his  Arab  horsemen,  travelling  with  haste  and
secrecy,  fell  unexpectedly  upon  them,  and  making  above  fifty
captives — men, women,  and children — carried  them off  to
Medina,  where they  were kept  by  Mohammad  in  confine-
ment.^ The  Beni  Temlm,  some  of  whom  had  fought  by  the Beni
side  of  Mohammad  at  Mecca  and  Honein,  and  been  munifi- Jem'"!  send

•  '.  ,  _  deputation

cently  rewarded  at  Al-Ji'rana,  lost  no  time  in  sending  a  for  release
deputation,  of  eighty  or  ninety  chief  men,  to  beg  for  their  of  prisoners
brethren's  release.  As  they  passed  through  the  streets  of
Medina,  the  captive  women  and  children,  recognising  their
friends,  raised  a  loud  cry  of  distress.  Moved  by  the  sight,
the  party  hastened  onwards  to  the  Mosque.  After  waiting
impatiently  for  a  little  in  its  spacious  court,  they  at  last
called  out  (for  they  were  rude  children  of  the  desert)  in  a
loud  and  familiar  voice  to  Mohammad,  who  was  in  one  of
his  wives'  apartments  adjoining  the  hall  of  audience : — '  O
Mohammad,  come  forth  unto  us ! '  The  Prophet  was
displeased  at  their  roughness  and  importunity,  for  he  loved
to  be  addressed  in  low  and  submissive  accents.  But,  as  the
mid-day  prayer  was  at  hand,  he  came  forth  ;  and  while  Bilal
was  summoning  the  people,  entered  into  discourse  with  the
strangers  and  listened  to  their  application.

1  Nine  such  parties  are  mentioned  as  having  started  on  the  first  day
of  the  new  year  to  various  tribes.  They  were  instructed  to  take  only  the
best  and  unblemished  part  of  the  increase,  but  not  to  interfere  with  the
capital.

-  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  983;  At-Tabari,  i.  171 1  ;  Al-Wfikidi,  p.  385  ;  Ibn
Sa'd,  p.  116.

2  E


434


EMBASSIES  TO  MEDINA


[chap.


Their  poet
and  orator
worsted  by
Thabit  and
Hassan


The  prayers  ended,  Mohammad  seated  himself  in  the
court  of  the  Mosque,  when  a  scene  occurred  illustrative  at
once  of  Arab  manners  and  of  the  successful  readiness  with
which  Mohammad  adapted  himself  to  the  circumstances  of
the  day.  The  Chiefs  sought  leave  to  contend  for  the  palm
of  victory  in  rhetoric  and  poetry  with  the  orators  and  poets
of  Medina.^  It  v;as  hardly  the  proper  issue  for  Mohammad
on  which  to  place  his  cause  ;  but  to  have  refused  would  have
injured  him  in  the  eyes  of  these  wild  Bedawin  ;  and  the
Prophet  was  confident  in  the  superior  eloquence  of  his
followers.  So  he  gave  permission.  First  arose  'Otarid,  the
orator  of  his  tribe,  and,  in  an  harangue  of  the  ordinary
boastful  style,  lauded  his  own  people  for  their  prowess  and
nobility.  When  he  had  ended,  Mohammad  motioned  to
Thabit  ibn  Keis  that  he  should  reply,  Thabit  descanted  on
the  glory  of  Mohammad  as  a  messenger  from  Heaven,  on
the  devotion  of  the  Refugees,  and  on  the  faithful  and
generous  friendship  of  the  Citizens ;  and  wound  up  by
threatening  destruction  against  the  enemies  of  Islam.
Then  Zibrikan  the  Bedawi  bard  arose,  and  recited  poetry,
in  which  he  dilated  on  the  greatness  and  unequalled
hospitality  of  Temlm.  When  he  sat  down,  Hassan  the  son
of  Thabit,  by  Mohammad's  command,  followed  in  glowing
and  well-measured  verse.  After  the  more  ordinary  topics,
he  ended  thus  : —

Children  of  Darim  !  strive  not  with  us  ;  Your  boasting  will  turn  to
your  shame.

Ye  lie  when  ye  contend  with  us  for  Glory.  What  are  ye  but  our
Servants,  our  Nurses,  and  our  Attendants  ?

If  ye  be  come  to  save  your  lives,  and  your  property,  that  it  may  not  be
distributed  as  booty,

Then  make  not  unto  God  an  equal,  embrace  Islam,  and  abandon  the
wild  manners  of  the  Heathen.

The  strangers  were  astonished  at  the  beauty  of  Hassan's
poetry,  and  abashed  at  the  force  and  point  of  his  concluding
verses.  '  By  the  Lord  ! '  they  said,  '  how  rich  is  this  man's
fortune ! His  poet,  as  well  as  his  orator,  surpasseth  ours  in

1  Al-Akra'  said  :  '  Give  us  permission  to  speak  ;  for,  verily,  from  me
praise  is  an  ornament  and  reproach  a  disgrace.'  *  Nay,'  replied  the
Prophet,  'thou  speakest  falsely;  that  may  be  said  of  the  Great  and
Almighty  God  alone.'


XXVII.]


BENI'L-MUSTALIK


435


eloquence.  Mohammad  liberated  the  prisoners,  and,  having
entertained  his  visitors  hospitably,  dismissed  their  Chief
with  rich  presents  and  provisions  for  the  way.  All  the
branches  of  the  tribe  which  had  not  yet  given  in  their
adhesion  were  now  converted.^  But  the  Prophet  did  not
forget  the  first  rude  and  impatient  address  of  the  deputation.
To  guard  against  such  familiarity  for  the  future,  the  following
passage  was  revealed  : —

O  ye  that  believe  !  Go  not  in  advance  (in  any  matter)  before  the
Lord  and  his  Prophet  ;  and  fear  God,  for  God  heareth  and  knoweth.  O
ye  that  beheve  !  Raise  not  your  voices  above  the  voice  of  the  Prophet  ;
nor  speak  loudly  in  discourse  with  him  as  the  loud  speech  of  one  of  you
with  another,  lest  your  works  become  vain,  and  ye  perceive  it  not.
Truly,  they  that  lower  their  voices  in  the  presence  of  the  Apostle  of  God,
are  those  whose  hearts  God  hath  disposed  unto  piety  ;  these  shall  have
pardon  and  an  abundant  reward.  Verily  as  to  those  that  call  unto  thee
from  outside  of  the  private  apartments,  the  most  part  of  them  understand
not.  If  they  had  v\aited  patiently,  until  thou  wentest  forth  unto  them,  it
had  been  better  for  them. But  God  is  forgiving  and  merciful.

The  tax-gatherer  deputed  to  gather  the  tithes  of  the
Beni'l-Mustalik,  on  approaching  their  encampment,  was
encountered  by  an  assemblage  who  went  forth  on  camels  to
meet  him.  Apprehending  violence,  he  fled  back  to  Medina ;
and  Mohammad  was  preparing  a  party  to  avenge  the  affront,
when  a  deputation  appeared  to  explain  the  circumstance.
They  had  in  reality  held  steadily  to  the  profession  of  Islam,
and  what  had  been  mistaken  for  hostile  preparations,  were,
they  said,  marks  of  joy  and  welcome.  The  deputation  was
received  with  courtesy.  The  tax-gatherer  was  reprehended,
and  his  misconduct  deemed  not  unworthy  of  a  special
revelation.  Another  of  his  followers  was  then  deputed  by
Mohammad  to  levy  the  tithes  and  to  instruct  the  people  in
their  religious  duties.-

^  Sprenger  gives  an  anecdote  which,  though  of  doubtful  authority,
illustrates  the  spirit  of  the  times.  One  of  the  prisoners  was  a  beautiful
female,  to  whom  Mohammad  offered  terms  of  marriage,  which,  however,
she  declined.  When  her  husband  came  with  the  deputation,  he  turned
out  to  be  a  black  and  ill-favoured  person  ;  whereupon  the  Muslims  were  so
displeased  at  her  refusal  of  the  Prophet,  that  they  began  to  abuse  and
curse  her.  But  Mohammad  interfered  to  excuse  her,  and  bade  them
refrain.

^  The  passage  relating  to  this  incident  is  in  continuation  of  that  just
quoted,  and  runs  as  follows: 'O  ye  that  believe  I  if  an  evil  man  come


Mohammad
libeiates
their
prisoners


Notice  of
deputation
in  the
Kor'an

Sura  xlix.
I  ff.


Deputation
from  Beni'l-
Mustalik.
Ma)'',  A.b.
630


436


EMBASSIES  TO  MEDINA


[chap.


Expeditions
during
summer  of
A.H.  IX.
A.D.  630


Abyssinians
attacked  at
Jidda.  July


Campaign
against
Beni  Tai'


Conversion
of  son  of
Hatim  of
Tai'. July.


Conversion
of  the  poet
Ka'b  ibn
Zuheir


During  the  summer  several  lesser  expeditions  were
undertaken  for  the  chastisement  of  rebellious  or  recusant
tribes.  Marked  only  by  the  ordinary  features  of  surprise
and  capture  of  prisoners  and  plunder,  it  is  unnecessary  to
burden  the  page  with  their  details.  The  largest  was  directed
against  a  combination  of  the  Abyssinians  with  the  people  of
Jidda,  the  nature  of  which  is  not  clearly  explained.  It  was,
however,  regarded  by  the  Prophet  as  of  sufficient  importance
to  require  the  services  of  an  army  of  300  men.  The  force
reached  an  island  on  the  shore  of  the  Red  Sea  which  the
enemy  had  made  their  rendezvous,  and  forced  them  to  retire.^

About  the  same  time,  'All  was  sent,  in  command  of  two
hundred  horse,  to  destroy  the  temple  of  the  Beni  Tai',  a  tribe
divided  between  the  profession  of  Idolatry  and  the  Christian
faith.  He  performed  his  mission  effectually,  and  returned
laden  with  plunder  and  with  many  prisoners.  Amongst
these  prisoners  was  the  daughter  of  Hatim  of  Tai',  the  Arab
Chieftain  so  famous  for  his  generosity,  but  now  for  some  time
dead.  His  son  'AdI,  having  on  the  first  alarm  of  'All's  ap-
proach, fled  to  Syria,  his  sister  now  prostrated  herself  at  the
Prophet's  feet,  and  told  her  plaintive  tale.  She  was  at  once
released,  and  presented  with  a  change  of  raiment  and  a  camel,
on  which,  joining  the  first  Syrian  caravan,  she  went  in  quest
of  her  brother.  At  her  solicitation,  'AdI  made  his  way  to
the  Prophet's  presence,  and,  having  embraced  Islam,  and
been  confirmed  in  the  chiefship  of  his  tribe,  distinguished
himself  hereafter  in  the  Muslim  wars.^

The  submission  of  the  poet  Ka'b,  son  of  Zuheir,  took
place  about  the  same  time,^ His  father  was  one  of  the  most

unto  you  with  intelligence,  make  careful  inquiry,  lest  ye  injure  a  people
through  inadvertence,  and  afterwards  repent  of  what  ye  have  done.  And
know  that,  verily,  the  Apostle  of  God  is  amongst  you.  If  he  were  to
listen  to  you  in  many  matters,  ye  would  surely  fall  into  sin  (by  leading
him  into  a  misunderstanding).' — Sura  xlix.  6  f.

^  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  117  f.  The  circumstance  is  remarkable,  and  not  the
less  so  on  account  of  the  brevity  of  the  Secretary  and  the  silence  of  the
other  biographers.  Apparently,  a  body  of  Abyssinians  had  crossed  the
Red  Sea  to  join  the  Arabs  of  Jidda  in  opposing  Mohammad.  Was  the
Negus  now  disappointed  to  find  that  Mohammad  no  longer  supported
Christianity?

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  948  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1706  ff.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  118.

3  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  887  ft".


XXVII.]


KA'B  IBN  ZUHEIR


437


distinguished  poets  of  Arabia  ;  and  the  poetical  mantle  de-
scended on  several  members  of  his  family.  After  the  capture
of  Mecca  his  brother  wrote  from  thence  to  warn  Ka'b  of  the
fate  which  had  overtaken  certain  of  the  poets  there,  and  urged
him  either  to  sue  for  terms  at  Medina,  or  else  seek  for  him-
self secure  asylum  elsewhere.  Ka'b  was  imprudent  enough
to  reply  in  verses  significant  of  displeasure  at  his  brother's
conversion.  Mohammad,  highly  incensed,  gave  utterance  to
threats  ominous  for  the  safety  of  Ka'b.  Again  the  poet  was
warned,  and  urged  by  his  brother  to  delay  no  longer.  At
last,  in  despair,  he  resolved  to  present  himself  before
Mohammad  and  seek  for  pardon.  As  a  stranger  appearing
one  day  unexpectedly  in  the  Mosque,  he  thus  addressed  the
Prophet ; — '  Ka'b  son  of  Zuheir  cometh  unto  thee  repentant
and  believing ;  wilt  thou  give  him  quarter  if  I  bring  him  to
thee?'  The  promise  having  been  vouchsafed,  the  speaker
made  known  that  he  himself  was  Ka'b.  To  signalise  his  Poem  of  the
gratitude,  Ka'b  composed  the  famous  '  Poem  of  the  Mantle,'  ^^^^^^
in  which  he  lauded  the  generosity  and  glory  of  his  benefactor.
When  reciting  it  in  the  assembly,  he  came  to  this  verse, —

Verily,  the  Prophet  is  a  light  to  illuminate  the  world,
A  naked  sword  from  out  of  the  armoury  of  God, —

Mohammad,  unable  to  restrain  his  admiration  and  delight,
threw  his  mantle  from  off  his  shoulders  upon  the  poet.  The
precious  gift  (from  which  the  poem  derived  its  name)  was
treasured  up  with  care.  It  passed  into  the  hands  of  the
Caliphs,  and  was  by  them  preserved,  as  one  of  the  regalia
of  the  empire,  until  Baghdad  was  sacked  by  the  Tartars  ;
and,  under  the  name  of  the  Kliirka  Sharifa}  a  relic  is  even
now  exhibited  at  Constantinople  as  from  the  self-same
mantle.  To  gain  over  such  a  poet  was  no  empty  triumph,
for  Ka'b  wielded  a  real  power  which  was  now  thrown  as  a
fresh  weight  into  the  scale  of  Islam.

The  Mosque  of  Mohammad  was  now  the  scene  of  frequent  Deputations
embassies  from  all  quarters  of  Arabia. His  supremacy  was ^°^g_  '^
everywhere  recognised;  and  from  the  most  distant  parts  of  a.h.  ix.,  x.
the  Peninsula,  from  the  Yemen  and  Hadramaut,  from  Mahra, ^'  ' ^°' ^

1  The  Noble  Remnant.  The  poem  was  published  by  Freytag  with
Latin  translation  {Halcz,  1823).  The  mantle  was  bought  by  one  of  the
Caliphs  from  Ka'b's  heirs  for  40,000  pieces.


438  EMBASSIES  TO  MEDINA  [chap,  xxvii.

'Oman,  and  Al-Bahrein,  from  the  borders  of  Syria  and  the
outskirts  of  Persia,  the  tribes  hastened  to  prostrate  themselves
before  the  rising  potentate,  and  by  an  early  submission
secure  his  favour.  They  were  uniformly  treated  with  con-
sideration and  courtesy.  Their  representations  were  heard
publicly  in  the  court  of  the  Mosque,  which  formed  the  hall  of
audience  ;  and  there  whatever  matters  required  the  commands
of  Mohammad,  such  as  the  collection  and  transmission  of
tithes  and  tribute,  grant  of  lands,  recognition  or  conferment
of  authority  and  office,  or  adjustment  of  international
disputes,  were  discussed  and  settled.  Simple  though  its
exterior,  and  unpretending  its  forms  and  usages,  more
absolute  power  was  exercised,  and  affairs  of  greater  import-
ance transacted,  in  the  courtyard  of  the  Mosque  of  Moham-
mad than  in  many  an  Imperial  palace.
Mode  in  The messengers and embassies were quartered by

which  they Mohammad  in  the  houses  of  the  chief  Citizens,  by  whom  they

were  treated  •  ,  _  .

were  hospitably  entertained. On  departure  they  received  an

ample  sum  for  the  expenses  of  the  road,  and  generally  some

further  present  corresponding  with  their  rank. A  written

treaty  often  guaranteed  certain privileges  to  the  tribe,  and

not  unfrequently  a  '  Reader '  was  sent  back  with  the  embassy

to  instruct  the  people  in  the  duties  of  Islam,  and  to  see  that

every  remnant  of  idolatry  was  obliterated. A  large  amount

of  independence  was  left  to  the  rulers  of  powerful  tribes,  and

to  such  distant provinces  as  Al-Bahrein  and  'Oman  ; but,

though  allowed  themselves  to  collect  the  tithes,  the  amount

must nevertheless,  as a  rule,  be remitted to Medina. In

some  cases  this  demand  created  discontent ;  but  before  the

Prophet's  death  the  irresistible  combination  of  temporal  with

spiritual  power  had  overcome  all  opposition.

The  Ninth  These  embassies  having  commenced  in  the  Ninth  year  of

year  of  the t^g  Hijra,  it  is  styled  in  tradition  '  the  Year  of  Deputations ' ;

Hijra,  called ,  ,  •• '  /  ,,  . , ^ ,

year  of  but  they  Were  almost  equally  numerous  m  the lenth  year,

Deputations under  which  they  will  be  further  mentioned.


CHAPTER  XXVIIl


CAMPAIGN OF TEBUK;i AND OTHER EVENTS IN THE
SECOND  HALF  OF  THE  NINTH  YEAR  OF  THE  HIJRA

October^  a.d.  630,  to  April,  A.D.  631

During  the  summer  of  the  j-ear  AD.  630,  an  expedition  was
despatched  towards  the  Syrian  frontier,  directed,  apparently,
against  certain  disaffected  clans  of  the  Beni  'Odhra  and  Ball,
who  since  the  operations  of  Khalid  in  that  quarter  were  now,
at  least  nominally,  adherents  of  Mohammad.  Whether  to
guard  against  the  recurrence  of  such  marauding  inroads,  or  in
consequence  of  Mohammad's  growing  power  and  pretensions,
the  Emperor,  said  to  have  been  then  at  Hims,  directed  the
feudatory  tribes  of  the  border  to  assemble  for  its  protection.
Rumours  of  this  movement  were  magnified  by  travellers  and
traders  from  Syria  into  the  assemblage  of  a  great  and  threat-
ening army ;  a  year's  pay  (they  said)  had  been  advanced  by
the  Kaiser,  for  the  necessities  of  a  long  campaign  ;  the  Syrian
tribes,  Lakhm,  Judham,  and  Ghassan,  were  flocking  around
the  Roman  eagles,  and  the  vanguard  was  already  at  the
Belka.  Mohammad  resolved  to  meet  the  danger  with  the
largest  force  he  could  collect.  His  custom  at  other  times  had
been  to  conceal  to  the  very  last  the  object  of  an  intended
march,  or  by  seeming  preparations  for  a  campaign  in  some
other  direction,  to  lull  the  suspicions  of  his  enemy.  But  the
journey  now  in  contemplation  was  so  distant,  and  the  heat  of
the  season  so  excessive,  that  timely  warning  was  deemed
necessary  in  order  that  the  necessities  of  the  way  might  be
foreseen  and  provided  for.

All  his  adherents  and  allies,  the  inhabitants  of  Mecca  as
well as the Bedawi tribes,  received from Mohammad an

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  893  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1692  ff.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  390  ff. ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  118  ff.

439


Gathering
of  Roman
feudatories
on  Syrian
border


Mohammad
projects
counter-
expedition.
Autumn,
A.H.  IX.
A.D.  630


Backward-
ness of
Bedawin
and  some
Citizens


440


CAMPAIGN  OF  TEBUK


[chap.


Exemplary
zeal  of  true
Believers


Arrange-
ments at
Medina  on
Moham-
mad's
departure


March  for
Tebuk.
September,
October,
A.D.  630


urgent  call  to  join  the  army.  But  the  Arabs  of  the  desert,
ever  loose  and  fickle  in  their  loyalty,  and  even  Citizens  of
Medina,  showed  little  alacrity  in  obeying  the  command.
Anticipated  hardships  of  the  journey,  long-continued  drought
and  overpowering  heat,  and  perhaps  memory  of  the  Roman
phalanx  at  Muta,  made  them  loth  to  quit  the  ease  and  shelter
of  their  homes.  Multitudes  pleaded  inability  and  other
frivolous  excuses.  The  plea  was  generally  accepted  when
tendered  with  colourable  ground  by  the  men  of  Medina  ;  for
Mohammad,  conscious  of  the  debt  he  owed  their  city,  always
treated  them  with  tenderness.  But  coming  from  the  Bedawin
it  was  altogether  disallowed.

On  the  other  hand,  extraordinary  eagerness  pervaded  the
ranks  of  loyal  and  earnest  Muslims.  Tithes  and  free-will
offerings  poured  in  from  every  quarter,  while  the  leading
Companions  vied  with  one  another  in  the  costliness  of  their
gifts.  The  contribution  of  'Othman  surpassed  all  others,  and
amounted  to  a  thousand  golden  pieces.  From  these  sources
carriage  and  supplies  were  provided  for  the  poorer  soldiers ;
but  they  did  not  suffice  for  all  who  longed  to  share  in  the.
merit,  haply  also  in  the  spoils,  of  the  campaign.  A  party  for
whom,  after  every  effort,  Mohammad  could  make  no  provision,
retired  in  tears,  and  their  names  are  embalmed  in  tradition
under  the  title  of  TJie  Weepers}

At  last  the  army  was  marshalled  in  the  outskirts  of  the
city,  and  Abu  Bekr  appointed  to  conduct  prayers  in  the  en-
campment until  the  Prophet  himself  should  assume  command.
Mohammad,  son  of  Maslama,  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  city  ;
'All  also  was  left  behind  to  take  care  of  the  Prophet's  family,
as  well  as  to  check  any  rising  of  disaffection.  'Abdallah
ibn  Obei  pitched  a  separate  camp  for  his  numerous  adherents
hard  by  the  main  army ;  but  eventually,  as  it  would
appear  with  the  consent  of  Mohammad,^  he  remained
behind.

The  army,  with  all  these  drawbacks,  was  probably  the
largest force ever before put in motion in Arabia. Its

1  Bakkcffm.  See  Judges  ii.  i,  5,  where  a  place  is  named  Bochim,  or
'Weepers,'  because  the  children  of  Israel  wept  there  ;  also  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  6,
'  the  valley  of  ^^(T^,' or  weeping.  The  Weepers  are  specially  noticed  in
Siira  ix.  93,  in  allusion  to  the  present  occasion,

*  Weil  doubts  this. Eiiileitimgy  p.  32.


XXVIII.


VALLEY  OF  AL-HIJR


441


numbers  are  given,  though  probably  with  some  exaggeration,
at  30,000,  of  whom  no  less  than  10,000  were  cavalry.  After
a  hot  and  thirsty  march,  the  force  reached  the  valley  of
Al-Hijr,  whose  rocky  sides  were  hewn  out  (according  to
local  tradition)  into  dwellings,  by  the  rebellious  and  impious
Thamudites.  Having  alighted  there,  drawn  supplies  from
the  refreshing  fountains,  and  already  begun  to  prepare  their
food,  suddenly  proclamation  ran  through  the  ranks  that
none  should  drink  of  the  water  or  use  it  for  their  ablutions,
that  the  dough  which  had  been  kneaded  should  be  given
to  the  camels,  and  that  no  one  should  go  forth  alone  by
night.  And  the  reason  assigned  was  because  of  the  ominous
surroundings  of  the  fateful  valley ; — '  Enter  not  the  houses  of
the  Transgressors,  except  with  lamentation,  less  that  overtake
you  which  happened  unto  them.'  On  the  morrow,  a  plentiful
shower  of  rain,  ascribed  to  the  miraculous  intervention  of  the
Prophet,  compensated  for  the  loss  of  the  wells  of  Al-Hijr.^

Having  reached  Tebuk,  where  was  plenty  of  shade  and
water,  the  army  halted.  The  rumours  of  invasion  had  by
this  time  melted  away.  There  was  nothing  at  the  moment
to  threaten  the  border.  So  Mohammad  contented  himself
with  sending  a  strong  detachment  under  Khalid  to  Duma,  and
with  receiving  the  adhesion  of  the  Jewish  and  Christian  tribes
on  the  shores  of  the  y^lanitic  Gulf,  towards  the  east  of  which
he  was  now  encamped.  To  the  chief  of  these,  John,  Prince
of  Ayla,-  Mohammad  addressed  a  letter,  summoning  him  to

'  The  story,  however,  is  not  confirmed  by  Al-Wakidi,  and  Ibn
Hisham  deals  greatly  in  the  marvellous.  Two  men,  neglecting
Mohammad's  caution,  went  out  by  night  alone,  and  were  maltreated  by
the  evil  spirits, — one  having  his  neck  wrenched,  and  the  other  being
carried  away  by  the  wind  to  the  hills  of  the  Beni  Tai'.  Again  :  By  the
way,  they  came  to  a  trickling  fountain,  at  which  hardly  two  or  three
men  could  have  slaked  their  thirst.  Mohammad  bade  none  to  touch  it
before  himself.  But  the  prohibition  was  not  attended  to.  Coming  up,
he  found  it  empty,  and  cursed  the  men  who  had  disobeyed  him.  Then
he  took  up  a  little  of  the  water,  and,  sprinkling  the  rock,  wiped  it  with
his  hand  and  prayed  over  it.  Floods  immediately  gushed  forth,  with  a
noise  as  it  had  been  thunder,  and  all  drank  thereof.  Mohammad  said  :
'  Whosoever  of  you  shall  survive  the  longest,  will  hear  of  this  valley
being  greener  with  trees  and  verdure  than  any  other  round  about;'—
meaning  that  the  great  stream  now  created  would  be  permanent.  Ibn
Hisham,  898  f.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  902  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1702  ;  Al-\Vakidi,  p.  405.


Valley  of
Al-Hijr


?Ialt  at
Tebiik :
communica-
tions with
surrounding
tribes


Treaty  w  ith
John,
Christian
Prince  of
Ayla


442  CAMPAIGN  OF  TEBUK  [chap.

submit  on  pain  of  being  attacked.^  The  Prince,  with  a  cross
of  gold  upon  his  forehead,  hastened  to  the  camp,  and,
offering  the  present  of  a  mule  and  a  shawl,  bowed  him-
self reverentially  in  the  Prophet's  presence.  He  was  re-
ceived with  kindness,  and  Bilal  commanded  to  entertain
him  hospitably.  The  following  treaty  was  concluded  with
him  : —

'  In  the  name  of  God  the  Gracious  and  Merciful :  A
compact  of  Peace  from  God,  and  from  Mohammad  the
Prophet  and  Apostle  of  God,  granted  unto  Yuhanna,  son  of
Ru'ba,  and  unto  the  people  of  Ayla,  For  them  who  remain
at  home,  and  for  those  that  travel  by  sea  or  by  land,  there  is
the  guarantee  of  God  and  Mohammad  the  Apostle  of  God,
and  for  all  that  are  with  them,  whether  of  Syria  or  of  the
Yemen  or  of  the  seacoast.  Whoso  contraveneth  this  treaty,
his  wealth  shall  not  save  him  ;  it  shall  be  the  fair  prize  of  him
that  taketh  it.  Now  it  shall  not  be  lawful  to  hinder  the  men
of  Ayla  from  any  springs  which  they  have  been  in  the  habit
of  frequenting,  nor  from  any  journey  they  desire to  make,

^  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  genuineness  of  this  letter  ;  its  purport
is  as  follows  :  To  John  ibn  Ru'ba  a7id  the  Chiefs  of  Ayla  (or  Al-Akaba).
Peace  be  on  you  !  I  praise  God  for  you,  beside  whom  there  is  no  Lord.
I  will  not  fight  against  you  until  I  have  written  thus  unto  you.  Believe,
or  else  pay  tribute.  And  be  obedient  unto  the  Lord  and  his  Prophet,
and  unto  the  messengers  of  his  Prophet.  Honour  them  and  clothe  them,
specially  Zeid,  with  excellent  vestments,  not  with  inferior  raiment.  As
long  as  my  messengers  are  pleased,  so  likewise  am  L  Ye  know  the
tribute.  If  ye  desire  to  have  security  by  sea  and  by  land,  obey  the  Lord
and  His  Apostle,  and  he  will  defend  you  from  every  demand,  whether
by  Ai-ab  or  foreigner,  saving  the  demand  of  the  Lord  and  his  Apostle.
But  if  ye  oppose  and  displease  them,  I  will  accept  nothing  from  you,
until  I  have  fought  against  you  and  taken  captive  your  little  ones  and
slain  the  elder ;  for  I  am  the  Apostle  of  the  Lord  in  truth.  Believe  in
the  Lord  and  in  his  Prophets.  And  believe  in  the  Messiah,  son  of  Mary  ;
verily  he  is  the  Word  of  God  :  I  believe  in  him  that  he  was  a  Messenger
of  God.  Come  then,  before  trouble  reach  you.  I  commend  my
messengers  to  you.  Give  to  Harmala  three  measures  of  barley  ;  and
indeed  Harmala  hath  interceded  for  you.  As  for  me,  if  it  were  not  for
the  Lord  and  for  this  (intercession  of  Harmala),  I  would  not  have  sent
any  message  at  all  unto  you,  until  ye  had  seen  the  army.  But  now,  if
ye  obey  my  messengers  God  will  be  your  protector,  and  Mohammad,
and  whosoever  belongeth  unto  him.  Now  my  messengers  are  Shurahbll,
&c.  Unto  you  is  the  guarantee  of  God  and  of  Mohammad  his  Apostle,
and  peace  be  unto  you  if  ye  submit.  And  convey  the  people  of  Makna
back  to  their  land.


XXVIII.]


TREATY  WITH  PRINCE  OF  AYLA


443


whether  by  sea  or  by  land.  The  writing  of  Juheim  and
Shurahbll,  by  command  of  the  Apostle  of  God.^  In  token  of
approbation,  Mohammad  presented  the  Christian  Prince  with
a  mantle  of  striped  Yemen  stuff,  and  dismissed  him  honour-
ably. The  tribute  was  fixed  at  the  yearly  sum  of  a  golden
piece  for  every  family,  or  three  hundred  for  the  whole  town
of  Ayla.

At  the  same  time  deputations  from  the  Jewish  settle-
ments of  Makna,  x^dhruh  and  Jarba  presented  themselves  with
a  tender  of  submission  to  the  Prophet.  To  each  was  given
a  rescript,  specifying  the  amount  of  their  tribute,  and  binding
them  to  afford  refuge  and  aid  to  any  Muslim  travellers
or  merchants  who  might  stand  in  need  of  their  good
offices.^

Having  concluded  these  matters,  Mohammad  quitted
Tebuk  after  having  halted  there  for  twenty  days,  and  re-
turned to  Medina.  He  reached  home,  after  a  prolonged
absence,  in  the  beginning  of  Ramadan,  or  December,  A.D.  630.

Meanwhile  Khalid  had  been  travelling  across  the  desert
from  Tebuk  to  Duma,  with  420  horse,  the  flower  of  the  army.^
So  rapidly  did  he  march,  and  so  unexpectedly  appear  before
Duma, that Okeidir, the Christian chief, was surprised

^  The  treaty  is  evidently  genuine.  The  original  was,  no  doubt,
retained  as  a  precious  charter  of  right  by  the  chiefs  of  Ayla.  We  are
told  that  'Omar  II.  refrained  from  raising  the  tribute,  which  was  below
the  proper  amount,  in  deference  to  the  guarantee  given  in  this  treaty.

2  Wellh.  p.  405.  These  treaties  are  genuine  and  interesting.  The
following  was  copied  by  Al-Wakidi,  apparently  from  the  original:  'In
the  name  of  God,  &c.  This  writing  is  from  Mohammad  the  Prophet  to
the  people  of  Adhruh.  They  are  included  in  the  truce  of  God  and  in  the
truce  of  Mohammad.  They  are  to  pay  one  hundred  dinars  every  year,
in  Rajab,  full  weight  and  good  money.  And  God  is  their  guarantee  that
they  shall  behave  towards  the  Muslims  with  probity  and  kindness.
Whoever  of  the  Muslims  taketh  refuge  with  them  from  danger  and  in
quest  of  assistance,  in  case  there  should  be  ground  of  fear  for  such
Muslims,  and  they  are  themselves  in  security,  they  are  to  protect  them
until  they  hear  that  Mohammad  is  preparing  to  set  out  for  their  aid.'
A  proof  of  the  authenticity  of  this  document  is  that  Mohammad  is
mentioned  throughout  by  his  simple  name  Mohammad  without  either  the
affix  PropJiet  or  Apostle^  or  the  reverential  addition,  '  Prayers  and  bless-
ings be  on  him.'  Such  affixes  are,  in  general,  later  additions  by  the
pious  transcriber.

3  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  903  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1702  f.  ;  Al-Wfdiidi,  p.  403  fif.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  119  f.


He  is  dis-
missed
honourably


Terms  made
with  Jews  of
Makna,
Adhruh  and
Jarba


Mohammad
returns  to
Medina.
A.H.  IX.
December,
A.D.  630.

Khalid
conquers
Duma,  and
takes  Chief
prisoner  to
Medina


444


CAMPAIGN  OF  TEBUK  [chap.


embraces
Islam


by  him  while  hunting  the  wild  cow.  Khalid  pursued  the
party,  and  after  a  short  struggle,  in  which  the  chief's  brother
was  killed,  took  Okeidir  captive.  His  life  was  spared  on
condition  that  the  gates  of  Duma  should  at  once  be  thrown
open.  The  city  was  ransomed  at  2,000  camels,  800  sheep,
400  suits  of  mail,  and  as  many  stand  of  arms.  With
this  booty,  and  carrying  with  him  Okeidir  and  a  brother.
The  Chief  Khalid  returned  to  Medina.  The  Christian  chief,  wearing  a
golden  cross,  and  clad  in  brocade,  inwrought  with  gold,  to
the  admiration  of  the  simple  Citizens,  was  brought  to  the
Prophet,  who  pressed  him  to  embrace  Islam.  The  induce-
ments of  the  new  religion  proved  too  strong  for  his  faith.
He  surrendered  the  Gospel  for  the  Kor'an  and  was  admitted
to  the  terms  of  a  favoured  ally.^
Malingerers  When  Mohammad returned to  Medina,  many  who  had

Kor'an'"  remained  behind  without  permission  came  forward  to  excul-
pate themselves  from  the  heavy  charge  of  malingering.
Mohammad  reserved  his  reproaches  for  a  special  revelation.
He  thus  avoided  the  odium  attaching  to  a  personal  rebuke,
while  the  admonition  came  with  all  the  force  of  a  message
from  Heaven.  In  the  9th  Sura,  the  latest  of  all  in  chron-
ological order,  the  vials  of  wrath  are  discharged  against
the  Disaffected  generally  still  lingering  in  Medina,  and
against  those  in  particular  who  had  neglected  to  join  in  the

*  Al-Wakidi  says  he  took  the  following  copy /r^w  the  orioinal  at
Diltna:  '  In  the  name  of  God,  &c. — from  Mohammad  the  Prophet  of
God  to  Keidar  (when  he  accepted  Islam  and  put  away  from  him  the
images  and  idols,  by  the  hand  of  Khalid,  the  Sword  of  God),  regarding
Duma  of  the  waters  of  Al-Jandal  and  its  environs  :  to  Mohammad
belongeth  the  unoccupied  land  with  its  streams  and  fountains,  its  unen-
closed and  fallow  ground,  and  the  armour,  weapons,  camels,  and  forts  ;
and  to  you  belongeth  the  occupied  land  with  the  fruit-bearing  date-trees,
and  springs  of  water,  after  payment  of  the  fifth.  Your  cattle  shall  not  be
molested  in  grazing  on  the  waste  lands  ;  that  which  is  ordinarily  exempt
from  tithe  shall  not  be  taxed  ;  the  old  date-trees  shall  not  be  taxed, —
excepting  the  tenth  thereof ;  so  as  they  observe  prayer  regularly,  and
pay  the  tithes  faithfully.  A  true  and  faithful  treaty.  God  is  witness
thereto,  and  all  that  are  present  of  the  Muslims.'  This  may  be  taken  as
a  type  of  the  treaties  made  with  converted  tribes.  Okeidir  revolted  after
Mohammad's  death.  The  '  images  and  idols '  may  have  been  either
those  in  use  amongst  the  heathen  part  of  the  community,  or  such  as
belonged  to  the  worship  of  Jesus  and  the  Virgin  The  title  '  Sword  of
God'  was  no  doubt  added  later  on.


XXVIII.]  MALINGERERS  CHIDED  445

late expedition. The following passage will suffice as
examples  : —

O  ye  that  believe  !  What  ailed  you  that  when  it  was  said  unto  you,  SCira  ix.  38!.
Go  forth  to  war  in  the  ways  of  God,  ye  inclined  heavily  towards  the
earth  ?  What  !  do  ye  prefer  the  present  life  before  that  which  is  to
come?  Ifyegonot  forth  to  war,  He  will  punish  you  with  a  grievous
punishment,  and  He  will  substitute  another  people  for  you  :  and  ye  shall
not  hurt  Him  at  all  ;  for  God  is  over  all  things  powerful.  *  *  *

If  it  had  been  plunder  near  at  hand,  and  an  easy  journey,  they  had  v.  41
surely  followed  thee.  But  the  way  seemed  long  unto  them.  They  will
swear  unto  thee  by  God,  Jf  we  had  been  able  we  had  surely  gone  forth
with  you.  They  destroy  their  own  souls,  for  God  knoweth  they  are  liars.
The  Lord  pardon  thee  !  Wherefore  didst  thou  give  them  leave,  until
thou  hadst  distinguished  those  that  speak  the  truth,  and  known  the
liars  ?  1  *  *  *

If  they  had  gone  forth  with  thee,  they  had  only  added  weakness  to  v.  47
you,  and  had  run  to  and  fro  amongst  you,  stirring  up  sedition.  And
amongst  you,  some  had  listened  to  them  ;  for  God  knoweth  the  unjust.
Verily  they  thought  to  stir  up  sedition  aforetime  ;  and  they  disturbed
thine  affairs  until  the  Truth  came,  and  the  command  of  God  was  made
manifest,  although  they  were  averse  therefrom.^  Among  them  there  is
that  saith,  Give  me  leave  to  remain,  and  throw  me  not  into  temptation.
What  !  have  they  not  fallen  into  temptation  already  ?  Verily,  Hell  shall
compass  the  unbelievers  round  about.^

The  hypocrites  who  privately  scoffed  and jested  at  the The  hypo-
Faith  and  at  those  who  spent  their  money  in  its  propagation, chided
are reprobated  bitterly. Mohammad  might  pray  for  them
seventy  times  ; it  would avail nothing with  God  for  their
pardon  : —

They  said.  Go  not  forth  to  war  in  the  heat. Say,  the  fire  of  Hell  is  a v.  82
fiercer  heat,  if  they  understood. Wherefore  they  shall  laugh  little  and
weep  much,  for  that  which  they  have  wrought.

Nevermore  shall  these  unfaithful  and  stiffnecked  followers Mohammed
be  allowed  the  opportunity  of  going  forth  to  fight. '  Neither for  them  mi

their  death
'  From  this  it  would  appear  that  Mohammad  repented  (or  appeared y.  85

to  repent)  afterwards  that  he  had  so  easily  and  indiscriminately  accepted

the  excuses  of  those  to  whom  he  did  give  permission  to  remain  behind.

-  Alluding  to  the  conduct  of  the  '  Disaffected'  at  the  battle  of  Ohod,
or  perhaps  to  the  affair  at  the  Beni'l-Mustalik  expedition.

^  Tradition  assigns  this  last  verse  to  the  case  of  a  man  who  begged
Mohammad  to  excuse  him  from  the  campaign,  as  he  feared  the  attractions
of  the  Greek  women.  But  a  great  number  of  the  stories  belonging  to
this  campaign  may  be  suspected  (on  the  analogy  of  similar  traditions
regarding  other  texts)  to  have  been  fabricated  for  the  purpose  of
illustrating  the  text  of  the  Kor'an.


446


CAMPAIGN  OF  TEBUK


[chap.


Bedawin
specially
reprobated


V.  96


Such  as  con-
fessed, more
leniently
treated

Sura  ix.
103  f.


Ka'b  and
his  two
companions  ;
ban  put
upon  them


Sura  ix
118  1.


do  thou  ever  (so  runs  the  heavenly  Oracle)  pray  over
any  of  them  that  shall  die,  nor  stand  over  his  grave ;  for
they  do  reject  God  and  his  Prophet,  and  they  shall  die
transgressors.'

The  Arabs  of  the  desert,  who  were  the  chief  offenders,
because  they  had  stayed  away  notwithstanding  the  distinct
refusal  of  leave,  are  censured  unsparingly  for  their  disobe-
dience; —  ignorant,  stubborn,  unbelieving,  fickle,  —  'they
watched  but  the  changes  of  fortune.'  '  Turn  from  them.
They  are  an  abomination.  Their  resting-place  shall  be
Hell-fire,  the  reward  of  that  which  they  have  wrought.'

Those  Believers  who  had  not  dissembled  their  fault,
but  honestly  confessed  it,  were  the  most  leniently  dealt
with : —

And  others  have  acknowledged  their  offences  ;  they  have  mingled  a
good  action  with  another  that  is  evil.  Haply  God  will  be  turned  unto
them,  for  God  is  forgiving  and  merciful.  Take  offerings  of  their  sub-
stance, that  thou  mayst  cleanse  them  and  purify  them  thereby  ;  and
pray  for  them,  for  thy  prayers  will  restore  tranquillity  unto  them.  And
there  are  others  waiting  the  command  of  God,  whether  He  will  punish
them,  or  whether  He  will  be  turned  unto  them,  for  God  is  knowing  and
wise.

The  last  verse  refers  to  Ka'b  ibn  Malik,  the  poet,  who
had  done  good  service  to  Mohammad,  and  to  two  other
Believers  who  had  incurred  his  special  displeasure.  They
had  no  pretext  to  offer  for  their  absence,  and  their  bad
example  had  encouraged  the  hesitating  and  disaffected  in
their  neglect  of  the  Prophet's  summons  ;  the  latter  could  not
with  any  show  of  justice  be  reprimanded  or  punished,  if  the
far  more  serious  offence  of  these  his  professed  followers  were
passed  over.  A  ban  was  therefore  placed  upon  them.  They
were  cut  off  from  all  intercourse  with  the  people,  and  even
with  their  own  wives  and  families.  Fifty  days  passed  thus
miserably,  and  the  lives  of  the  three  men  became  a  burden
to  them.  At  length  Mohammad  relented ;  and,  by  the
delivery  of  the  following  revelation,  received  them  back  into
his  favour  : —

Verily,  God  is  reconciled  unto  the  Prophet,  and  unto  the  Refugees
and  Citizens  who  followed  him  in  the  hour  of  difficulty,  after  that  the
hearts  of  a  part  of  them  had  nearly  swerved.  Thereafter  He  turned  to
them,  for  He  is  compassionate  unto  them  and  merciful.  And  He  is
likewise  reconciled  unto  the  Three  ; — they  that  stayed  behind,  until  that


ceived  back
into  favour


xxviii]  RIVAL  MOSQUES  AT  MEDINA  447

the  earth  with  all  its  spaciousness  became  straitened  unto  them,  and
their  souls  became  straitened  within  them,  and  they  saw  no  refuge  from
God  otherwise  than  by  fleeing  unto  Him  ; — then  He  turned  unto  them,
for  God  is  easy  to  be  reconciled,  and  merciful.

After the promulgation of  this passage,  Ka'b was  again Ka'b  re-
treated by Mohammad as before with  kindness  and  con-
sideration.

The  displeasure  of  the Prophet  was  also  at  this  time Mohammad
kindled  against  a  party  at  Koba,  who  had  built  a  mosque Mosq°Jea1t
there, and desired Mohammad that he would come and Koba
consecrate  it by praying  in  it  himself. As  he  was  at  the
moment  about  to  start  for  Tebuk,  he  deferred  their  request
until his  return. Meanwhile  he received  information  that
the  new  Mosque  was  built  with  a  sectarian  bias,  to  draw  off
men  from  the  original  Mosque at Koba,  and  even  afford
shelter  to  certain  of  the  Disaffected. On  his  return,  there-
fore, he  not  only  sent  a  party  to  destroy  the  new  edifice,  but
promulgated  this  severe  denunciation  : —

There  are  men  who  have  builded  a  Mosque  with  evil  purpose,  out  of  Suraix.  Tc8f.
unbelief,  to  make  divisions  among  the  Unbelievers,  and  as  a  lurking-
place  for  him  that  hath  fought  against  God  and  his  Apostle  aforetime.'
Yet  they  will  swear.  Verily  we  intended  nothing  but  good.  God  beareth
witness  that  they  are  Liars.  Stand  not  up  (for  prayer)  therein  for  ever.
There  is  a  Mosque  which  from  the  first  day  hath  been  founded  upon
Piety.-  It  is  more  just  that  thou  shouldest  stand  up  therein; — Therein
are  men  that  love  to  be  purified  :  and  God  loveth  the  Pure.  What,
therefore  ?  Whether  is  he  better  that  hath  builded  his  foundations  upon
the  fear  of  God  and  His  good  pleasure,  or  he  that  hath  built  his  founda-
tions upon  the  brink  of  a  crumbling  bank,  to  be  swept  away  with  him
into  the  fire  of  Hell :  for  God  doth  not  guide  the  race  of  transgressors.
The  building  which  they  have  built  shall  not  cease  to  be  a  cause  of
doubting  in  their  hearts,  until  their  hearts  be  cut  in  pieces.  And  God  is
knowing  and  wise.

About two months after the return of  the  army  from De;ith  of
Tebuk,  'Abdallah  ibn Obei,  the leader of  the disaffected ^-^I^qIII"
party,  died. Mohammad  had  throughout  followed  the  advice
given  him  on  his  first  arrival,  to  deal  tenderly  with  this  chief.
Excepting the  rupture  which  occurred  in  the  affair  of  the
Beni'l-Mustalik,  and  one  or  two  other  occasions  when  'Abd-

'  The  biographers  do  not  mention  who  is  here  alluded  to.  The  Com-
mentators specify  Abu  'Amir  the  hermit,  who,  after  the  battle  of  Honein,
is  said  to  have  fled  to  Syria  ;  but  this  is  doubtful.

2  The  'Mosque  of  Godly  fear,'  vide  p.  169.


448


CAMPAIGN  OF  TEBUK


[chap.  XXVIII.


Faction  of
the  disaf-
fected dies
with  him


War  to  be
carried  on
by  Islam  till
Antichrist
appear


Provision
made  for
study  of
theology


allah  openly  took  part  with  his  Jewish  confederates,  the
Prophet  was  careful  to  avoid  any  harsh  or  humiliating  treat-
ment which  might  have  driven  him,  with  his  numerous
adherents,  into  open  and  active  opposition.  This  forbear-
ance he  observed  to  the  last.  He  even  followed  the  bier,
and  prayed  over  the  grave,  thus  recognising  his  once
powerful  antagonist  as  having  been  a  true  believer.  After
'Abdallah's  death  there  was  no  one  left  in  the  ranks  of  the
Disaffected  possessing  power  or  influence.  There  was  none
whom  Mohammad  needed  longer  to  treat  with  delicacy  or
caution.  The  faction  had  died  out.  Those  who  had  hither-
to been  lukewarm  or  disloyal  soon  embraced,  heart  and  soul,
the  cause  of  Islam,  and  the  power  of  Mohammad  became
fully  and  finally  consolidated  in  Medina.

The  campaign  to  Tebuk  was  the  last  undertaken  during
the  Prophet's  lifetime.  His  authority  was  now  unquestioned
northwards  to  the  Syrian  confine,  equally  as  it  was  to  the
south  as  far  as  the  still  recusant  At-Ta'if.  It  seemed  almost
as  if  the  need  of  fighting  had  gone  by.  The  following
tradition  shows  how  little  the  real  spirit  of  Islam,  aggressive
and  tending  necessarily  to  universal  conquest,  had  yet
dawned  upon  the  people  ; — although  indeed  the  principles
from  which  such  a  conclusion  was  legitimately  to  be  deduced
had  long  been  inculcated  by  Mohammad.  Looking  around
them,  and  seeing  no  enemy  remain, — the  Greeks  even  having
retired  and  left  them  alone  in  their  deserts, — the  followers
of  the  Prophet,  we  are  told,  began  to  sell  their  arms,  saying :
'  The  wars  for  religion  now  are  ended.'  But  Mohammad  saw
better  into  the  future.  When  it  was  told  him,  he  forbade
the  sale,  saying :  '  There  shall  not  cease  from  the  midst  of
my  people  a  party  engaged  in  fighting  for  the  truth,  until
Antichrist  appear.'  At  the  same  time  it  is  interesting  to
note  that,  though  warfare  was  recognised  as  the  normal
state,  provision  was  yet  made  for  the  maintenance  of
students  and  teachers  of  religion,  as  we  learn  from  the
following  verse  : —


Sura  ix.  123  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  whole  body  of  Believers  should  go  forth

to  war.  If  a  certain  number  from  every  party  go  not  forth  to  war,  it  is
that  they  may  give  themselves  to  study  in  religion,  and  may  admonish
their  people  when  they  return  unto  them  (from  the  wars),  so  that  they
may  take  heed  unto  their  ways.


CHAPTER XXIX

EMBASSY FROM AT~TA'IF  ; AND  PILGRIMAGE OF ABU BEKR

A.H.  IX. — Decctnber,  A.D.  630,  to  March,  A.D.  631

It  was  now  ten  months  since  Mohammad  had  raised the At-Ta'if  still
siege of  At-Ta'if. The citizens,  still wedded to idolatry,  ^°^^^^^
maintained  a  sullen  isolation.

'Orwa  ibn  Mas'ud,  the  chief  already  noticed  as  one  of  Martyrdom
those  sent  by  Koreish  to  the  Muslim  camp  at  Al-Hodeibiya,  °  h  ix^'
was  absent  during  the  siege  of  his  native  city,  having  gone  a.d.  630
to  the  Yemen  to  learn  the  use  of  warlike  engines  for  its
defence.^  On  his  return,  finding  that  all  Mecca  and  the
surrounding  tribes,  excepting  At-Ta'if,  had  submitted  to
Mohammad,  and  being  himself  favourably  impressed  with
what  he  had  seen  at  the  truce  of  Al-Hodeibiya,  'Orwa  went
in  quest  of  the  Prophet  to  Medina,  and  there  embraced
Islam.  His  first  generous  impulse  was  to  return  to  At-Ta'if,
and  invite  his  fellow  citizens  to  share  in  the  blessings  of  the
new  faith.  Mohammad,  well  knowing  their  bigotry  and
ignorance,  warned  him  of  the  danger  he  would  incur ;  but,
presuming  on  his  popularity  at  At-Ta'if,  he  persisted  in  the
design.  Arriving  in  the  evening,  he  made  public  his
conversion,  and  called  upon  the  people  to  join  him.  They
retired  to  consult  upon  the  matter.  In  the  morning,  ascend-
ing his  roof,  he  cried  out  at  the  pitch  of  his  voice  the  call  to
prayer,  on  which  the  rabble  surrounded  the  house,  and  shot
arrows  at  him,  by  which  he  was  mortally  wounded.  His
family  and  friends  rallied  around  him,  but  it  was  too  late.
He  had  offered  up,  he  said,  his  blood  to  its  Master  for  the  sake
of  his  people  ;  he  blessed  God,  with  his  dying  breath,  for  the
honour  of  martyrdom,  and  prayed  his  people  to  bury  him  by

1  (Ibn  Hisham,  p.  869) ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1687  f. ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  381.


45°


EMBASSY  FROM  AT-TA'IF


[chap.


At-Ta'if
sends
embassy  to
Mohammad.
A.H.  IX.
December,
A.D.  630


the  side  of  the  Muslims  who  had  fallen  at  Honein.  When
the  tidings  reached  Mohammad,  he  lauded  the  memory  of
the  martyr: — 'He  may  be  compared,'  was  his  exclamation,
'to  the  prophet  Al-YasTn,  who  summoned  his  people  to
believe  in  the  Lord,  and  they  slew  him.'

The  martyrdom  of  *Orwa  compromised  the  inhabitants
of  At-Ta'if,  and  forced  them  to  continue  the  hostile  course
they  had  been  pursuing.  But  they  began  to  suffer  severely
from  the  marauding  attacks  of  the  Hawazin  under  Malik,
who,  according  to  his  promise,  had  maintained  an  unceasing
warfare  against  them.  The  cattle  were  cut  off  in  their
pasture  lands,  and  at  their  watering-places ;  and  at  last  no
man's  life  was  safe  beyond  the  walls  of  the  city.  '  We  have
not  strength,'  they  said  among  themselves, '  to  fight  against
the  Arab  tribes  all  round  who  have  plighted  their  faith  to
Mohammad,  and  bound  themselves  to  fight  in  his  cause.'
So  they  sent  a  deputation  of  six  chiefs  with  some  twenty
followers,  who  reached  their  destination  a  fortnight  after  the
return  of  the  army  from  Tebuk.  Al-Moghira  (nephew  of  the
martyr  'Orwa),  meeting  the  embassy  in  the  outskirts  of  the
city,  hastened  to  announce  their  approach  to  the  Prophet,
who  received  them  gladly,  and  pitched  a  tent  for  their
accommodation  close  by  the  Mosque.  Every  evening  after
supper  he  visited  and  instructed  them  in  the  faith,  till  it  was
dark.  They  freely  communicated  their  apprehensions  to
him.  As  for  themselves,  they  were  quite  ready  at  once  to
destroy  their  great  idol  (taghiya)  Al-Lat ;  but  the  ignorant
amongst  them,  and  especially  the  women,  were  devoted  to
the  worship,  and  would  be  alarmed  at  its  demolition.  If  the
fane  were  left  but  for  three  years,  and  the  people  meanwhile
familiarised  with  the  requirements  of  Islam,  the  wishes  of
the  Prophet  might  then  without  difficulty  be  carried  into
effect.  But  Mohammad  would  not  consent.  Two  years, —
one  year, — six  months, — were  asked  successively,  and  suc-
cessively refused.  *  The  grace  of  one  month  might  surely  be
conceded ; '  but  Mohammad  was  firm.  Islam  and  the  idol
could  not  co-exist.  The  idol  must  fall  without  a  single  day's
delay.  They  then  begged  to  be  excused  performance  of
the  daily  prayers,  and  that  some  one  else  might  be  deputed
to  destroy  the  image.  '  As  for  the  demolition  of  the  idol
with  your  own  hands,'  replied  Mohammad,  '  I  will  dispense


XXIX.]  THEIR  IDOL  DESTROYED  451

with  that ;  but  prayer  is  indispensable.  Without  prayer
religion  were  naught'  '  In  that  case,'  said  they,  '  we  shall
perform  it,  though  it  be  a  degradation.'  They  also  pleaded
hard  that  the  forest  of  Wajj,  a  famous  preserve  for  the  chase
in  the  vicinity  of  At-Ta'if,  should  be  declared  inviolate.  To
this  Mohammad  acceded ;  and  the  embassy,  having  finally
tendered  their  allegiance,  were  dismissed  with  a  rescript  to
the  effect  '  that  neither  the  trees  nor  the  wild  animals  of
Wajj  should  be  meddled  with.  Whoever  was  found  trans-
gressing should  be  scourged,  and  his  garments  seized.  If  he
transgressed  again,  he  should  be  sent  to  the  Prophet.  This
was  the  command  of  Mohammad  the  Apostle  of  God.'^

Abu  Sufyan  and  Al-Moghira,  both  friends  of  the  tribe, Their  idol
were deputed  by  Mohammad  to  accompany  the  strangers, j^^ '^^^j'j'°y^'^
and  destroy  their  idol. Al-Moghira,  wielding  a  pickaxe,  and Moghira
surrounded  by  a  guard  of  his  relatives,  attacked  the  great
image,  and,  amid  the  cries  and  wailing  of  the  women,  with
his  own  hand  hewed it  to  the  ground. The  debts  of  the
martyr were defrayed from the jewels and spoil of the
temple. At-Ta'if was the last stronghold that held out
against  the  authority  of  Mohammad. It  is  remarkable  also  as
the  only  place  where  the  fate  of  an  idol  excited  the  sympathy
of  the  people. Everywhere  else  the  images  seem  to  have
been  destroyed  by  the  people  themselves  without  a  pang.

The closing  month  of  the  Arabian  year,  the  month  of  Mohammad
Pilgrimage, again drew near. Mohammad had hitherto fromyel?^
abstained  from  being  present  at  its  ceremonies  because  the pilgrimage.
great  mass  of  the  pilgrims  still  were  heathens,  and  idolatrous March^'
practices  mingled  with  the  holy  rites. The  same  cause  kept ^.d.  631
him  away  in  the present year. But he resolved that it
should  be  the  last  in  which  the  Pilgrimage  was  desecrated
by  unworthy  customs,  and  the  Holy  places  by  the  presence
of  unbelievers. He was now strong enough to banish
heathenism  for  ever  from  the  Sanctuary. When  thus  purged,
but  not  till  then,  without  compromising  his  prophetic  office,
the  sacred  ceremonies  might  be  presided  over  by  himself

The caravan of pilgrims from Medina was therefore Abu  Bekr's
limited  to  300  men,  with  Abu  Bekr  as  their  chief  2 Shortly ^-'Jj"^.  R^'e^.^*

iAi-wakidi,p.385.  ;:ir-

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  919  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i. 1722  f. ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  416  ; 'All  for
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  121.  publication


452


ABU  BEKR  LEADS  PILGRIMAGE


[chap.


The
Release.
loth  Dhu'l-
Hijja,  A.H.
IX.  March
20,  A.D.  631

Sura  ix.  I  £f


V.  28


'All  an-
nounces
Prophet's
commands


after  its  departure  the  Oracle  spoke,  and  a  passage  was  pro-
mulgated to  carry  out  the  object  which  Mohammad  had  in
view.  It  is  called  the  Discharge  or  Release,  because  the
Prophet  is  therein  discharged,  after  the  lapse  of  four  months,
from  his  obligations  towards  the  heathen  Arabs.  This
important  declaration  was  committed  to  'All,  who  was
despatched  after  the  caravan.  On  coming  up  with  it,  and
communicating  the  nature  of  his  errand,  Abu  Bekr  inquired
whether  the  Prophet  had  put  him  in  command  over  the
pilgrimage.  '  No,'  replied  'All ;  '  but  he  hath  directed  me  to
recite  the  divine  behest  in  the  hearing  of  all  the  people.'

Towards  the  close  of  the  pilgrimage,  therefore,  on  the
great  day  of  sacrifice,  at  the  place  of  casting  stones  near
Mina,^  'All  read  aloud,  to  the  multitudes  that  crowded  in  the
narrow  pass  around  him,  the  heavenly  command,  as  follows: —

A  DISCHARGE  \^Barctd\  by  God  and  his  Apostle,  in  respect  of  the
Heathen  with  whom  ye  have  entered  into  treaty.  Go  to  and  fro  in  the
earth  securely  in  the  four  months  to  come.  And  know  that  ye  cannot
hinder  God,  and  that  verily  God  will  bring  disgrace  upon  the
Unbelievers  ; —

And  an  announcement  ]^AdM7i\  from  God  and  his  Apostle  unto  the
People,  on  the  day  of  Pilgrimage,  that  God  is  discharged  from  (liability
to)  the  Heathen, — and  his  Prophet  likewise.  Now,  if  ye  repent,  that  will
be  better  for  you  ;  but  if  ye  turn  your  backs,  know  that  ye  cannot
hinder  God  ;  and  acquaint  those  who  disbelieve  with  the  tidings  of  a
grievous  punishment ; — Excepting  those  of  the  Heathen  with  whom  ye
have  entered  into  treaty,  and  who  thereafter  have  not  failed  you  in  any
thing,  and  have  not  helped  any  one  against  you.  Fulfil  unto  these  their
engagements,  until  the  expiration  of  their  term  ;  for  God  loveth  the  pious.

And  when  the  forbidden  months  are  over,  then  fight  against  the
Heathen,  wheresoever  ye  find  them  ;  take  them  captive,  besiege  them,
and  lie  in  wait  for  them  in  every  ambush  ;  but  if  they  repent,  and
establish  Prayer,  and  give  the  Tithes,  leave  them  alone,  for  God  is
gracious  and  merciful.  And  if  any  of  the  Heathen  ask  a  guarantee  of
thee,  give  it  unto  him,  until  he  shall  have  heard  the  Word  of  God  ;  then
convey  him  back  unto  his  place  of  security.  This  because  they  are  a
people  that  do  not  understand.  *  *  *

O  ye  that  believe  !  Verily  the  Unbelievers  are  unclean.  Wherefore,
let  them  not  approach  the  Holy  Temple  after  this  year.  And  if  ye  fear
poverty,  God  will  enrich  you  of  His  abundance,  if  He  pleaseth,  for  God  is
knowing  and  wise.

Having finished the recitation of this passage, 'All
expounded  the  edict  thus : — '  I  am  ordered  to  declare  unto

^  See  the  picture  of  the  spot  facing  page  470.


XXIX.]


THE  MISSION  OF  ISLAM


453


you  that  no  Unbeliever  shall  enter  Paradise.  No  Idolater
shall  after  this  year  perform  the  pilgrimage  ;  nor  shall  any
make  the  circuit  of  the  Holy  House  unclothed.  Whosoever
hath  a  treaty  with  the  Prophet,  it  shall  be  respected  till  its
term  expire.  Four  months  are  given  to  the  tribes  that  they
may  return  to  their  homes  in  security.  After  that  the  ob-
ligations  of  the  Prophet  cease.'

The  vast  concourse  listened  peaceably.  Then  they  broke
up  and  departed  every  man  to  his  home,  publishing  through-
out the  Peninsula  the  inexorable  ordinance  which  they  had
heard  from  the  lips  of  'All.  Thus  was  completed  the  system
of  Mohammad  so  far  as  concerned  its  relations  with
idolatrous  tribes  and  races.  The  few  cases  of  truce
excepted,  uncompromising  warfare  was  declared  against
them  all.  To  the  utmost  bounds  of  Arabia,  and  wheresoever
prevailed  the  worship  of  the  Ka'ba,  idolatry  was  doomed,
and  Islam  was  to  be  henceforth  the  nation's  faith.

Side  by  side  with  this  deliverance  (though  revealed  on
a  different  occasion)  is  another  affecting  Jews  and  Christians.
For  some  years,  the  Oracle  which  used  to  teem  with  testi-
monies to  the  faith  of  both,  had  ceased  to  mention  either,
or  make  quotations,  as  had  so  constantly  been  done  before,
from  their  Sacred  Books.  After  long  neglect  and  silence,
the  Jewish  and  Christian  tribes  of  the  Peninsula  are  noticed
now,  only  to  be  condemned  to  a  perpetual  vassalage : —


Concourse
breaks  up
quietly


Annihilation
of  idolatry
now  the  de-
clared mis-
sion of
Islam  ;


And  reduc-
tion of
Judaism
and  Chris-
tianity to
dependent
position


Fight  against  those  who  do  not  believe  in  God  nor  in  the  last  day,  Sura  ix.
and  who  forbid  not  that  which  God  hath  forbidden,  and  profess  not  the  29  £f.
true  religion, — those,  namely,  who  have  received  the  Scriptures  (that  is
both  Jews  and  Christians)  until  they  pay  tribute  with  the  hand,  and  are
humbled.  The  Jews  say  that  Ezra  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  Christians
that  the  IVIessiah  is  the  Son  of  God.  This  is  their  saying,  with  their
mouths.  They  imitate  the  saying  of  the  Unbelievers  before  them.  God
destroy  them  !  How  have  they  devised  lying  vanities  !  They  take  their
Priests  and  their  Monks  for  lords  besides  God, — and  also  the  Messiah,
son  of  Mary.  Yet  they  were  not  bidden  but  to  worship  the  one  God
alone  ; — There  is  no  God  but  He,  far  exalted  above  that  with  which  they
associate  Him  !  They  seek  to  extinguish  the  light  of  God  with  their
mouths.  But  God  refuseth  to  do  otherwise  than  make  His  light  perfect,
even  though  the  Unbelievers  be  averse  therefrom.  He  it  is  that  hath
sent  His  Apostle  with  the  true  guidance,  and  the  religion  of  truth,  that
He  may  make  it  superior  to  all  other  religions,  even  though  the
Idolaters  be  averse  therefrom.  O  ye  Faithful !  Verily  many  of  the
Priests  and  Monks  devour  the  substance  of  men  in  vanity,  and  obstruct


454


JEWS  AND  CHRISTIANS


[chap.  XXIX.


Judaism
and  Chris-
tianity cast
contemptu-
ously aside


the  way  of  God.  They  that  treasure  up  gold  and  silver,  and  spend  it  not
in  the  way  of  God,  announce  unto  them  a  grievous  punishment ; — On  the
day  on  which  it  (their  gold  and  silver)  shall  be  heated  in  the  fire  of  Hell,
and  their  foreheads  and  their  sides  and  their  backs  shall  be  seared
therewith  (while  it  is  said  unto  them), — This  is  that  which  ye  have
treasured  up  for  yourselves,  wherefore  taste  ye  of  the  same  !

Thus,  with  threats  of  abasement  and  cruel  words,
Mohammad  parted  finally  from  both  Jews  and  Christians,
whom  he  had  so  long  entertained  with  professions  of
attachment  to  their  Scriptures,  and  from  whose  teaching
he  had  borrowed  that  which  was  most  valuable  in  his  own.
Having  reached  the  pinnacle  of  his  ambition,  he  now  cast
contemptuously  aside  the  means  by  which  he  reached  it.
Yet  even  here  a  broad  distinction  is  drawn  between  their
treatment  and  that  of  the  Heathen.  These  are  not  tolerated
even  on  submission.  Failing  to  embrace  Islam,  Idolaters
must  be  fought  with  to  the  death.  But  Jews  and  Christians
are  permitted  to  continue  such.  They  are,  indeed,  to  be
warred  against ;  but,  on  submission  and  '  payment  of  tribute
with  their  hand,'  they  are  to  be  left,  though  humbled,  in  the
undisturbed  profession  of  their  faith.^

^  It  is  important,  however,  to  note  that  the  passage  quoted,  as  com-
bined with  the  '  Discharge,'  is  like  it,  applicable,  in  its  original  intention,
only  to  the  peoples  of  Arabia.  But  after  Islam  had  burst  the  borders  of
the  Peninsula,  it  was  held  to  be  of  universal  application.  Consequently
all  over  the  world  the  followers  of  the  Prophet,  adopting  the  precedent
set  in  Arabia,  while  holding  themselves  bound,  by  his  example  and  pre-
cept, utterly  to  destroy  idolatry  root  and  branch,  hold  themselves  equally
bound  to  tolerate  the  Jewish  and  Christian  religions,  even  when  they  fall
before  their  arms,  on  condition  that  their  professors  submit  and  become
tributary.

[The  toleration  extended  to  the  Jews  and  Christians  embraced  a  third
faith,  that  of  the  Sabians  (Siiras  ii.  59  ;  v.  73).  This  name  is  derived
from  an  Aramaic  root  meaning  to  'baptise,'  and  the  Sabian  religion  was
characterised  largely  by  lustration.  In  fact,  the  first  Muslims  were
called  Sabians  because  of  their  frequent  ablutions.  The  Sabians  of  the
Kor'an  are  the  Mandasans,  the  so-called  '  Christians  of  St  John.'  The
name  Sabian  is  not  to  be  confused  with  Sabsean,  which  denotes  the
people  of  Saba  or  the  Yemen  (Chwolson,  Die  Ssabier  und  der  Ssabismus).
It  should  be  added  that  the  two  passages  cited  above  are  said  to  have
been  abrogated  by  later  revelations.]


CHAPTER XXX

EMBASSIES OF SUBMISSION RECEIVED AT MEDINA

A.H. IX. AND X. — A.D. 630, 63 1

/ETAT. 62, 63

The  life  of  Mohammad  was  drawing  to a  close  ; but  his  Numerous

work  was  also  near  completion. The  proof  is  amply  seen  in  dm-incr^Tenth

the  stream  of  submissive  embassies  which  from  all  quarters  year  of
of  Arabia  now  flowed  uninterruptedly  towards  Medina.  ^^^^

The  adhesion  of  At-Ta'if  and  destruction  of  its  famous  Embassies

idol  enhanced  the  Prophet's  fame  throughout  the  south  and  ^''°™  ^°"^^

^  *  _  and  east.

east  of  the  Peninsula. Before  the  close  of  the  Ninth  year a.h.  ix.
of  the Hiira,  many  chiefs  and princes  of  the  Yemen  and ?^ "^v

J '  y  r  ^  December,

Mahra,  of  'Oman,  Al-Bahrein,  and  Yemama,  had  signified  by  a.d.  630,
letter  or  by  embassy  their  conversion  to  Islam  and  sub-  ^d  6u'
mission  to  the  Prophet.

Some  of  them  had  been  converted  even  earlier. On  his Conversion
return  from  At-Ta'if,  towards  the  close  of  the  Eighth  year °  h  viii" '
of  the Hijra,  Mohammad sent 'Amr with a  despatch to February,
Jeifar,  King  of  'Oman,  summoning  him  to  make  profession ^'^' ^°
of  the faith. At first the king and his advisers gave
answer  '  that  they  would  be  the  weakest  among  the  Arabs,
if  by  paying tithe they  made another man possessor of
their  property.' But  as  'Amr was about to depart,  they
repented, and, calling him back, embraced Islam. The
people  followed their  lead,  and without  demur  paid  tithe
to  'Amr,  who  continued  till  the  Prophet's  death  to  be  his
representative  in  'Oman. He  was  supported  by  a  '  Reader,'
who  instructed  the  people  in  the  Kor'an  and  superintended
the assessment of  the tithes. This province,  which had
hitherto  been  under  the  suzerainty  of  Persia,  was  so  distant
^  Ibn  Hishfim,  p.  971  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1686.


the  Yemen


456  EMBASSIES  OF  SUBMISSION  [chap.

that  Mohammad  allowed  the  Prince  to  distribute  the  tithes

among his own poor — a concession which, no doubt,

faciHtated  the  introduction  of  the  new  faith.

Conversion  At  the  same  time,  another  legate  was  deputed  to  the

of  Himyarite  Himvarite princes professing the Christian faith in the

princes  ot  • •'  '^  ^  °

Mahra  and  Yemen.  He  carried  with  him  a  letter  m  which  Mohammad
expressed  his  belief  in  Moses  and  Jesus,  but  denied  the
Trinity  and  the  divinity  of  Christ.  Their  reply,  accepting
the  new  religion  with  all  its  conditions,  reached  the  Prophet
after  his  return  from  Tebuk  ;  and  he  acknowledged  it  in
a  despatch,  praising  the  alacrity  of  their  faith,  setting  forth
the  legal  demands  of  Islam,  and  commending  his  tithe
collectors  to  their  favour.^

1  The  instructions  given  to  the  envoy  are  curious.  He  was  to  be
specially  careful  in  his  purification  and  prayers  on  reaching  the  country.
He  was  to  take  the  Prophet's  despatch  in  his  right  hand  and  place  it  in
the  right  hand  of  the  princes.  He  was  to  recite  Sura  xcviii.  and  then
call  upon  them  to  submit,  saying  that  he  was  able  to  refute  every  argu-
ment and  book  they  could  adduce  against  Islam.  Then  he  was  to  repeat
the  passage  in  Sura  xlii.,  in  which  it  is  asserted  that  there  is  no  real
controversy  between  Mohammad  and  Christians.  A  strange  part  of
the  instructions  was,  to  call  upon  the  people,  after  they  believed,  to
produce  three  sticks, — two  gilded  white  and  yellow,  and  one  a  black
knotted  cane, — which  they  used  to  worship.  These  he  was  to  burn
publicly  in  the  market-place.  The  people,  who  spoke  the  Himyar
tongue,  were  to  translate  their  creed,  &c.,  into  Arabic.  Mohammad's
despatch  is  as  follows :  '  Fi-om  Mohammad  the  Apostle  of  God  to
Al-Harith,  &'c.  I  praise  God  on  your  behalf,— that  God  beside  whom
there  is  no  other.  Now,  your  messenger  hath  reached  me  at  Medina,  on
my  return  from  the  land  of  Greece  ;  and  he  hath  conveyed  to  me  your
letter,  and  given  me  intelligence  regarding  your  conversion  and  your
fighting  against  the  Idolaters.  Now,  verily  hath  the  Lord  guided  you
with  the  right  direction,  that  ye  should  amend  your  lives,  obey  God  and
his  Apostles,  set  up  prayer,  pay  the  tithes,  and  from  your  booty  set  aside
a  Fifth  as  the  share  of  God  and  his  Apostle.'  Then  follows  a  detail  of
the  tithes.  'This  is  what  is  obligatory,  and  whoever  exceedeth  it  will  be
for  his  merit.  Every  one  that  shall  fulfil  this,  and  believe  in  Islam,  and
assist  the  Believers  against  the  Idolaters,  verily  he  is  one  of  the  Faithful :
he  shall  share  in  what  they  share,  and  be  responsible  for  that  for  which
they  are  responsible.  Thus  it  shall  be  with  all  Jews  and  Christians  who
embrace  Islam.  But  such  as  will  not  abandon  Judaism  and  Christianity
shall  pay  tribute,  every  adult  male  and  female,  whether  bond  or  free,  a
full  golden  dinar,  or  its  equivalent  in  cloth.  Whosoever  payeth  this,
shall  be  embraced  in  the  guarantee  of  God  and  his  Apostle  :  whoever
refuseth  shall  be  their  enemy.'

Then  he  commends  his  messengers,  readers,  and  tithe  collectors  to


XXX.]  SOUTH  ARABIA  457

Simultaneously  with  the  mission  of  'Amr,  or  a  little  And  of
later,  Mohammad  sent  A1-' Ala,  son  of  the  Hadramite,  towards  ^^aHe]eT
the  Persian  Gulf  with  a  letter  to  Al-Mundhir,  chief  of
Al-Bahrein.^  Al-Mundhir  at  once  embraced  Islam,  and
forwarded  a  reply  to  Mohammad,  saying,  'that  of  the  people
of  Hejer  to  whom  he  had  read  the  Prophet's  letter,  some
were  delighted  with  the  new  religion,  others  displeased  with
it;  and  that  among  his  subjects  there  were  Jews  and
Magians,  regarding  whom  he  solicited  instructions.'  A
rescript  was  granted  by  Mohammad  securing  Al-Mundhir
in  the  government  of  his  province  so  long  as  he  administered
it  well,  and  directing  that  tribute  should  be  levied  from  the
Jews  and  Magians.  To  the  Magians  he  dictated  a  separate
despatch,  inviting  them  to  believe  in  the  Kor'an :  '  If  they
declined,  toleration  would  be  extended  to  them  on  the
payment  of  tribute ;  but  in  such  case,  their  women  would
not  be  taken  in  marriage  by  Believers,  nor  would  that  which
they  killed  be  lawful  as  food  to  any  Muslim.' 2  Al-'Ala
remained  in  Al-Bahrein  as  the  representative  of  Mohammad
at  the  court  of  Al-Mundhir.

Amons: the peoples of  the same region which sent Embassies

.  T,,r V- 1 ,-  1  1  r 1 TVT- 1  e ^'■om  Bern

embassies  to  Medma  before  the  close  of  the  Nmth  year  ot Hanifa
the Hiira, were the Beni Bekr,  who had so gloriously  ^I^'^P^]^^^

•^  ^  . '  , -  Christian

overthrown  the  forces  of  Persia  about  twenty  years  before ; tribes.  End
and the Beni Hanifa, a Christian branch of the same, oiA.n.ix.

Beginning

inhabiting Al-Yemama.^ One of  the Beni Hanifa party ofA.D.  631

the  Princes'  good  offices, — specifying  Mo'adh  as  their  chief,  and  desiring
that  the  tithe  and  tribute  should  be  made  over  to  him.  He  forbids
oppression,  'for  Mohammad  is  the  protector  of  the  poor  as  well  as  of  the
rich  amongst  you.'  The  tithe  is  not  for  Mohammad  or  his  family  :  it  is  a
means  of  purifying  the  rest  of  the  giver's  property,  and  is  to  be  devoted
to  the  poor  and  the  wayfarer.

The  deputation  of  Hamdan  sang  as  they  approached  Mohammad  :
*  We  have  come  to  thee  from  the  plains  of  Ar-Rif ;  in  the  hot  whirlwinds
of  summer  and  Kharlf '  (i.e.  '  autumnal  harvest,'  a  word,  R'/iurec/,  familiar
to  the  Indian  administrator).  Mohammad's  reply  secured  to  them  theii
hills  and  dales,  &c. Ibn  Hisham,  p.  963.

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  945  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1561,  1600,  1737.

2  This  passage  refers  to  the  distinction  made  by  Mohammad  in  favour
of  the  Jews  and  Christians,  whose  women  may  be  taken  in  marriage,  and
also  what  is  killed  and  cooked  by  them  eaten,  by  the  Muslims.  These
privileges  are  refused  to  the  Magians.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  945  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1737  f.


458  EMBASSIES  OF  SUBMISSION  [chap.

was Museilima, who, from what he then saw,  conceived
the  idea  that  he  too  might  successfully  set  up  pretensions  to
be  a  Prophet. When  the  customary  presents  were  distributed
amongst  them,  the  deputies  solicited  a  share  for  him,  saying
that  he  had been left behind in charge  of  the baggage.
Mohammad  commanded  that  he  should  have  the  same  as
the rest, — '  for  his position,' he said, '  is none the worse
among you because of  his present duty.' These words
were  afterwards  converted  by  Museilima  to  his  own ends.
On the departure  of  the Beni Hanlfa,  the Prophet gave
them  a  vessel  with  some  water  in it  remaining  over  from
Christian his ablutions, and said to them : '  When ye reach your
to  d^emoTislf  country,  break  down  your  church,  sprinkle  its  site  with  this
its  church water,  and  in  place  of  it  build  up  a  Mosque.' These  com-
mands they  carried  into  effect,  and  abandoned  Christianity
without  compunction.
Beni  Taghlib Another  embassy,  partly  Christian,  came  from  the  Beni
bamise  Taghlib. It  was  composed  of  sixteen  men,  some  Muslims

and  some  Christians.  The  latter  wore  crosses  of  gold.
The  Prophet  made  terms  with  them,  stipulating  that  they
might  themselves  continue  in  the  profession  of  their  religion,
but  that  they  should  not  baptise  their  children  into  the
Christian  faith.^
Rescript  to  The  ancient  Church  of  Nejran,^  in  the  centre  of  Arabia,

Church  of  ^a^g  granted  more  favourable  terms.  Among  the  despatches
of  the  year  we  find  one  addressed  to  the  Bishop,  Priests,  and
Monks  of  Nejran  guaranteeing  that  everything  small  and
great  should  continue  as  it  then  stood  in  their  Churches,
their  Services,  and  their  Monasteries.  '  The  pledge  of  God
and  of  his  Prophet '  (such  are  the  terms  of  another  Rescript)
'  is  given  that  no  Bishop  shall  be  removed  from  his  bishopric,
nor  any  Monk  from  his  Monastery,  nor  any  priest  from  his
priesthood  ;  their  authority  and  rights  shall  not  be  interfered
with,  nor  anything  that  is  customary  amongst  them  ; — so  long
as  they  conduct  themselves  peaceably  and  uprightly.  They
shall  not  be  oppressed,  neither  shall  they  themselves  oppress.^

^  We  find  the  Caliph  'Omar,  A.H.  xvii.,  making  a  similar  stipulation
with  another  branch  of  the  same  tribe. — Caliphate,  p.  151.

^  See  reference  to  them  in  the  hitrodtiction,  p.  Ixxxi.

^  The  Rescript  is  signed  by  Al-Moghira.  Al-Wakidi  gives  still
another  treaty,  probably  the  final  one. Their  tribute  of  fruit  and  captives


XXX.]


CHRISTIAN  TRIBES


459


The  embassy  of  this  people  to  Medina  is  in  itself  curious, Embassy
and  has  an  additional  interest  from  being  referred  to  in  the ^™"^  Nejian.

A.H,  X

Kor'an.^  A  deputation  of  fourteen  chief  men  from  Nejran
repaired  to  Mohammad  in  the  Tenth  year  of  the  Hijra.
Among  them  was  'Abd  al-MasIh  of  the  Beni  Kinda,  their
chief,  and  'Abd  al-Harith,  Bishop  of  the  Beni'l-Harith.  On
reaching  Medina,  they  entered  the  Mosque,  and  prayed
turning  towards  the  east.  Then  Mohammad  called  them ;
but  when  they  came,  the  Prophet  turned  away  and  would
not  speak  with  them,  because  of  the  silken  lining  of  their
garments.  So  they  departed,  and  in  the  morning  appeared
in  their  monastic  dress.  The  Prophet  now  returned  their
salutation,  and  invited  them  to  accept  Islam,  but  they
refused  ;  on  which  words  and  disputation  increased  between
them.  Then  Mohammad  recited  to  them  passages  from
the  Kor'an,  and  said  :  '  If  ye  deny  that  which  I  say  unto
you,  Coine  let  us  curse  each  the  other ;'  so  they  went  away  to  Mohammad
consider  the  matter.  On  the  morrow  'Abd  al-Masih,  with  challenges
two  of  the  chief  men,  came  to  Mohammad  and  said :  '  We  curse
have  determined  that  we  shall  not  curse  with  thee ;  where-
fore command  regarding  us  whatsoever  thou  wilt,  and  we
shall  give  it,  and  enter  into  treaty^with  thee.'  So  he  made
a  treaty  with  them  and  they  returned  to  Nejran.^ Such  is

was  generously  commuted  to  a  half-yearly  contribution  of  i,ooo  suits  of
raiment  worth  each  an  ounce  of  silver,  in  lieu  of  all  claims  ;  the  collectors
to  be  entertained  for  three  weeks.  When  there  was  war  in  the  Yemen,
30  suits  of  armour,  30  horses,  and  30  camels  were  to  be  lent  by  them,
— any  of  which  lost  in  the  war  to  be  made  good.  It  ends  with
this  curious  condition:  'Whosoever  taketh  interest  shall  be  excluded
from  the  guarantee  of  Mohammad.'  Signed  by  Abu  Sufyan  and  five
others.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  401  f.

2  Their  subsequent  history  is  thus  traced  by  Al-Wakidi.  They  con-
tinued in  possession  of  their  lands  and  rights  under  the  above  treaty,
during  the  rest  of  Mohammad's  life  and  the  whole  of  Abu  Bekr's
Caliphate.  Then  they  were  accused  of  taking  usury,  and  'Omar  expelled
them  from  the  land,  and  wrote  as  follows  :—

'The  despatch  of  'Omar,  the  Commander  of  the  Faithful,  to  the
people  of  Nejran.  Whosoever  of  them  emigrates  is  under  the  guarantee
of  God.  No  Muslim  shall  injure  them  ; — to  fulfil  that  which  Mohammad
and  Abu  Bekr  wrote  unto  them.  Now  to  whomsoever  of  the  chiefs  of
Syria  and  Al-'Irak  they  may  repair,  let  such  chiefs  allot  them  lands,  and
whatever  they  cultivate  therefrom  shall  be  theirs  ;  it  is  an  exchange  for
their  own  lands. None  shall  injure  or  maltreat  them  ;  Muslims  shall


46o


EMBASSIES  OF  SUBMISSION


[chap.


Affair  de-
scribed in
the  Kor'an.
Siira  iii.  52  ff.


Proof  of

Moham-
mad's
earnestness


Christianity
allowed  to
exist  on
sufferance


the  tradition  regarding  the  interview,  the  purport  of  which
is  thus  alluded  to  in  the  Kor'an  : —

Verily,  the  analogy  of  Jesus  is,  with  God,  like  unto  the  analogy  of
Adam.  He  created  him  out  of  the  dust  ;  then  He  said  unto  him  BE,
and  he  was.  This  is  the  truth  from  thy  Lord  :  wherefore  be  not  thou
amongst  the  Doubters.  And  whosoever  shall  dispute  with  thee  therein,
after  that  the  true  knowledge  hath  come  unto  thee  ;  say — Cojne  let  us  call
out  (the  names)  of  our  sons  and  your  sons,  of  our  wives  and  your  wives,
of  ourselves  and  yourselves  ;  then  let  us  curse  07ie  the  other,  a?td  lay  the
curse  of  God  upon  those  that  lie  !  Verily  this  is  a  true  exposition.  There
is  no  God  but  the  Lord,  and  verily  God  is  mighty  and  wise.  And  if  they
turn  back,  verily  God  is  acquainted  with  the  evil  doers.  SAY : — Oh  ye
people  of  the  Book  !  come  unto  a  just  judgment  between  us  and  your-
selves, That  we  shall  not  worship  aught  but  God,  and  that  we  shall  not
associate  atty  with  Him,  nor  shall  we  take  any  of  us  the  other  for  lords
besides  God.  And  if  they  turn  back,  then  bear  witness,  saying  ; — Verily,
we  are  the  true  Believers.

It  was  surely  a  strange  manner  of  settling  the  question
between  Islam  and  the  Christian  faith,  which  the  Arabian
Prophet  here  proposed,  and  we  have  no  reason  to  be
ashamed  of  the  Christian  embassy  for  declining  it.  Still  we
cannot  but  see  throughout  the  earnestness  of  Mohammad's
belief,  and  his  conviction  that  a  spiritual  illumination  had
been  vouchsafed  to  him,  bringing  with  it  knowledge  and
certainty  where  to  the  Christian,  as  he  conceived,  all  was
speculation  and  conjecture.

These  narratives  confirm  the  conclusion  of  the  preceding
chapter,  that  the  conditions  upon  which  Mohammad
permitted  Christianity  to  exist  were  those  of  sufferance.
Christianity,  indeed,  was  less  obnoxious  to  him  than  Judaism
because  he  did  not  experience  from  it  such  persevering  and
active  hostility.  The  clergy  and  monks  are  even  spoken  of
in  expressions  of  comparative  praise.^ But,  not  the  less,  the

assist  them  against  oppressors.  Their  tribute  is  remitted  for  two  years.
They  will  not  be  troubled  except  for  evil  deeds.'

Some  of  them  alighted  in  Al-'Irak,  and  settled  at  Nejraniya  (so  called
after  them)  near  to  Al-Kufa.  As  they  decreased  in  number,  their  tribute
of  raiment  was  correspondingly  lightened. — See  Caliphate,  p.  155.

1  '  And  We  caused  Jesus,  son  of  Mary,  to  succeed  them,  and  We  put
into  the  hearts  of  those  that  followed  him  compassion  and  mercy  ;  and
the  monastic  state, — they  framed  it  for  themselves  (We  did  not  command
it  unto  them)  simply  out  of  a  desire  to  please  God.' — Sura  Ivii.  27.

So  also  Sura  v.  85  f.  :  'And  thou  wilt  find  the  most  inclined  amongst
them  to  the  Believers,  those  who  profess  Christianity  ; — This  because


XXX.]


CHRISTIANITY  TOLERATED


461


object  of  Mohammad  was  entirely  to  supersede  Christianity
as  well  as  Judaism.

It  is  no  wonder  that  Christianity,  which  never  had
obtained  in  Arabia  a  firm  and  satisfactory  footing,  now
threatened,  and,  where  her  adherents  remained  faithful,
reduced  to  tribute,  her  distinctive  rite  prohibited  wherever
the  professors  were  passive  and  careless,  her  churches
demolished  and  their  sites  purified  before  they  could  be
used  again  for  worship  by  the  Muslim  converts ; — it  is  no
wonder  that  Christianity,  thus,  at  the  closing  stage  of  the
Prophet's  mission,  insulted  and  trampled  under  foot,  should
have  languished,  and  soon  altogether  disappeared.^

The  Tenth  year  opened  with  fresh  deputations  from  the
south.  Among  the  earliest  were  embassies  from  the  sea-
coast  of  the  Yemen,  from  the  Beni  Khaulan  who  lived  in  the
hilly  country  of  that  name,  from  the  Beni  Bajlla,  and  many
others.  The  Bajlla  at  Mohammad's  command,  and  with
the  aid  of  an  armed  party  deputed  by  Mohammad,  destroyed
the  famous  image  of  Dhu'l-Kholasa,  of  which  the  Temple,
from  the  popularity  of  its  worship,  was  called  the  '  Ka'ba  of
the  Yemen.' ^  About  the  same  time,  some  twenty  men  of
the  Beni  Azd  from  the  Yemen  presented  themselves,  with
their  chief  Surad,^  to  whom,  as  ruler  of  his  clan,  Mohammad
gave  a  commission  to  war  against  the  heathen  of  his  neigh-
bourhood. After  besieging  Jorash,  the  chief  city  of  the
idolaters,  for  more  than  a  month  without  success,  Surad
made  the  feint  of  retiring  to  a  hill.  The  enemy  falling  into
the  snare  pursued  him,  and  in  a  pitched  battle  sustained  a

there  are  amongst  them  Clergy  and  Monks,  and  they  are  not  proud  ;  and
when  they  hear  that  which  hath  been  revealed  unto  the  Prophet,  thou
shalt  see  their  eyes  flow  with  tears,  because  of  what  they  recognise
therein  of  the  truth,'  &c.

'  The  following  tradition  is  illustrative  of  Mohammad's  relations  with
our  faith  at  this  period.  Among  the  Beni  'Abd  al-Keis  was  a  Christian
named  Al-Jarud.  He  said  :  O  Prophet,  I  have  hitherto  followed  the
Christian  faith,  and  I  am  now  called  on  to  change  it.  Wilt  thou  be
Surety  for  me  in  the  matter  of  my  religion  1 '  '  Yea,'  replied  Mohammad,
'  I  am  thy  surety  that  God  hath  guided  thee  to  a  better  faith  than  it.'  On
this  Al-Jarud  and  his  comrades  embraced  Islam.  Ibn  Hishfim,  p.  944  f  ;
At-Tabari,  i.  1736  f.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  55.

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  954  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1729  f


Deputations
from  south.
A.H.  X.
April  and
May,  A.D.
632


Submission
of  Beni  Azd
and  people
of  Jorash


462  EMBASSIES  OF  SUBMISSION  [chap.

signal  defeat. The  people  of  Jorash  immediately sent an

embassy  of  submission  to  Medina.
Chiefs  of  From  Hadramaut,  two  princes  of  the  Beni  Kinda,  Wa'il,

Beni  Kinda j  jf  ^^  ^.j^g  coast,  and  Al-Ash'ath,  chief  of  the  interior,  visited

from  Had-  '  . .  i i  i •

ramaut  visit the  Prophet  at  the  head  of  a  brilliant  cavalcade,  arrayed  in
Medina  garments  of  Yemen  stuff  lined  with  silk.^ '  Will  ye  embrace

Islam  ? '  said  Mohammad  to  them,  after  he  had  received
their  salutations  in  the  Mosque.  '  Yea ;  it  is  for  that  end
that  we  have  come.'  '  Then  why  all  this  silk  about  your
necks?'  The  silken  lining  was  forthwith  torn  off  and  cast
aside.2  To  mark  his  delight  at  the  arrival  of  the  embassy,
Mohammad  desired  Bilal  to  call  aloud  the  summons  for
general  prayer.^  When  all  were  assembled,  the  Prophet
introduced  the  strangers  to  the  congregation  :  *  O  People  ! '
he  said;  'this  is  Wa'il  ibn  Hojr,  who  hath  come  unto  you
from  the  region  of  Hadramaut,  out  of  desire  to  embrace
Wail  Islam.' He  then  presented  Wa'il  with  a  patent  securing  him

in  his  rights,  in  terms  as  follows  :  '  Since  thou  hast  believed,
I  confirm  thee  in  possession  of  all  thy  lands  and  fortresses.
One  part  in  every  ten  shall  be  taken  from  thee :  a  just
collector  shall  see  to  it.  I  guarantee  that  thou  shalt  not  be
injured  in  this  respect  so  long  as  the  faith  endureth.  The
Prophet,  and  all  Believers,  shall  be  thine  allies.'  Mu'awiya,
son  of  Abu  Sufyan,  was  desired  to  escort  Wa'il  to  his  house
and  entertain  him  there.  On  his  way,  the  haughty  Prince
displayed  what  Mohammad  styled  'a  remnant  of  heathenism.'
He  would  not  allow  Mu'awiya  to  mount  behind  him  :  the
ground  was  scorching  from  the  mid-day  sun,  yet  he  refused
to  let  him  have  the  use  even  of  his  sandals,  so  that  he  was
obliged  to  walk  barefooted  by  the  camel :  '  What  would  my
subjects  in  the  Yemen  say,'  he  exclaimed  in  disdain,  'if  they
heard  that  a  common  man  had  worn  the  sandals  of  the
king !  Nay,  but  I  will  drive  the  camel  gently,  and  thou
shalt  walk  in  my  shade.'  Such  insolent  demeanour  was
altogether  foreign  to  the  brotherhood  of  Islam  ;  and  was  only
tolerated  by  Mohammad  since  the  accession  of  such  a  chief
was  too  valuable  to  be  imperilled.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  953  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1739  f.

2  Mohammad  disapproved  of  silk  and  velvet  for  men's  attire.

^  I.e.  the  same  as  for  the  Friday  service,  at  which  all  attended,  joined
in  the  '  common '  prayer,  and  heard  the  address.


and  teachers
to  southern


XXX.]  MISSIONARIES  SENT  OUT  463

The  other  visitor,  Al-Ash'ath,  sealed  his  adhesion  to  the Al-Ash'ath
cause  of  Mohammad  by  enterincf  into  a  contract  of  marriaee ^^'"'1'^^  ^^^

IjCKI  s

with Um Farwa, Abu Bekr's sister. The marriage was  sister
not  at  the  time  consummated,  her  parents  declining  that  the
bride should leave them for so distant a home as
Hadramaut.^

The supremacy of Islam  being  thus  widely  recognised Mo'adh  sent
in  the  south of  Arabia,  Mohammad  sent  forth  a  band of  [°'^^  ^'^^

_ •  _  Dana  01

officers  charged  with  the  instruction  of  the  people,  and  the  collectors
collection  of  the  public  dues.  Over  them  he  placed  Mo'adh,
who  had  by  this  time  fulfilled  his  mission  at  Mecca.  '  Deal  Arabia
gently  with  the  people,'  said  the  Prophet  to  Mo'adh,  as  he
dismissed  him  to  his  new  scene  of  labour,  '  and  be  not  harsh.
Scare  them  not,  but  rather  cheer.  Thou  wilt  meet  with
Jews  and  Christians  who  will  ask  thee :  What  is  the  key  of
Paradise  ?  Reply  :  Verily  the  key  of  Paradise  is  to  testify
tJiat  there  is  no  God  but  the  Lord  alone.  With  Him  there  is  no
partner!  ^  These  Envoys  were  invested  to  some  extent  with
a  judicial  authority.  Acceptance  of  the  new  faith  implied
of  necessity  the  simultaneous  recognition  of  its  civil  institu-

1  Al-Ash'ath  joined  the  rebellion  which  broke  out  upon  the  death  of
Mohammad,  but  subsequently  returned  to  his  allegiance,  was  pardoned,
and  then  received  Um  Farwa,  the  Caliph's  sister,  for  his  wife. — See
Caliphate^  p.  40.

A  member  of  the  royal  family  in  the  deputation  besought  Mohammad
to  pray  that  his  stammer  might  be  removed.  This  the  Prophet  did,  and
appointed  him  a  portion  from  the  tithes  of  Hadramaut.  Another  tradi-
tion relates  that  this  man  was  seized  with  a  paralytic  affection  on  his  way
home.  His  followers  came  and  told  Mohammad,  who  desired  them  to
heat  a  needle  and  pierce  his  eyelid  with  it  ;  and  this  remedy  healed  him.
Mohammad  attributed  the  illness  to  something  wrong  which  the  chief
must  have  said  after  leaving  Medina.

2  Mo'adh  was  inextricably  involved  in  debt,  and  his  creditors  had
been  clamorous  before  Mohammad  for  payment.  Mo'adh  surrendered
all  his  property,  but  it  fell  far  short  of  the  claims.  When  Mohammad
therefore  sent  him  away,  he  said  :  '  Go,  and  perchance  the  Lord  will
relieve  thy  wants.'  Mo'adh  would  appear  to  have  made  good  use  of  his
position,  for  'Omar,  when  shortly  after  he  met  him  at  Mecca  performing
the  pilgrimage,  reprimanded  him  for  the  state  in  which  he  appeared,
followed  by  a  retinue  of  slaves,  &c.  He  is  said  to  have  been  very
particular  in  following  the  practice  of  Mohammad,  and  never  spat  on  his
right  side.  He  was  lame,  and  obliged  to  stretch  out  his  legs  at  prayer.
The  people  (as  they  always  imitated  the  Imam  in  all  his  postures)  did  the
same,  till  he  forbade  them.


464


EMBASSIES  OF  SUBMISSION


[chap.


Ntjran
submits  to
Khalid.

A.H.  X.
June,  A.D.

631


Campaign
of  'All  in
the  Yemen
against  Beni
an-Nakha',
&c.  A.H.  X.
December,
A.D.  631


tions.  Every  dispute  must  be  brought  to  the  test  of  the
Kor'an  or  of  the  instructions  given  by  Mohammad  ;  and  the
exponents  of  these  became,  therefore,  the  judges  of  the  land.^

Towards  the  close  of  the  Prophet's  life,  the  sound  of  war
had  almost  died  away.  During  this  Tenth  year,  only  two
expeditions  of  a  hostile  character  were  undertaken.  The
first,  under  command  of  Khalid,  was  directed  against  the
Beni'l-Harith  of  Nejran,  during  summer.^  A  section  of
these,  as  we  have  seen,  had  already  obtained  terms  of
security  on  payment  of  tribute.  Khalid  was  now  instructed
to  call  on  the  rest  to  embrace  Islam  ;  if  they  declined  he
was,  after  three  days,  to  attack  and  force  them  to  submit.
Having  reached  his  destination,  he  sent  mounted  parties  in
all  directions,  with  this  proclamation :  *  Ye  people  !  embrace
Islam,  and  ye  shall  be  safe.'  They  all  submitted,  and
professed  their  belief  in  the  new  faith,^  Mohammad,
delighted  with  Khalid's  report,  summoned  him  to  return
along  with  a  deputation  from  the  tribe,  which  accordingly
visited  Medina,  and  were  received  with  courtesy.

As  the  Beni  an-Nakha*  and  some  other  tribes  in  the
Yemen  still  held  out,  'All  was  sent  in  the  winter  at  the  head
of  300  horse,  to  reduce  them  to  submission.*  Yemen  had
repeatedly  sent  forth  armies  to  subdue  the  Hijaz  ;  this  was
the  first  army  the  Hijaz  had  ever  sent  forth  to  conquer  the
Yemen.  'All  met  with  but  feeble  opposition.  His  detach-
ments ravaged  the  country  all  around,  and  returned  with
spoil  of  every  kind — women,  children,  camels,  and  flocks.
Driven  to  despair,  the  people  drew  together,  and  attacked
'All  with a general  discharge of  stones  and  arrows. The

1  Mohammad  asked  Mo'adh,  before  he  left,  how  he  would  adjudicate
causes  :  '  By  the  book,'  he  replied.  But  if  not  in  the  Book  ?  '  Then  by
thy  precedent.'  But  if  there  be  no  precedent  ?  '  Then  I  will  diligently
frame  my  own  judgment  ;  and  I  shall  not  fail  therein.'  Thereupon
Mohammad  clapped  him  on  the  breast  and  said  :  '  Praise  be  to  God,  who
hath  fulfilled  in  the  messenger  sent  forth  by  his  Apostle,  that  which  is
well  pleasing  to  the  Apostle  of  the  Lord  ! '

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  958  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1724  f.

^  Ibn  Hisham  tells  this  naively  :  '  So  they,  being  worsted,  believed,  and
embraced  the  invitation  to  profess  the  new  faith.  Thereupon  Khalid
began  to  teach  them  the  nature  of  Islam,  and  the  word  of  God,  and  the
regulations  of  the  Prophet.'

■*  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  999;  At-Tabari,  i.  1731  f.,  1868;  Al-Wakidi,
p.  417  ff. ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  122.


XXX.]


RECALCITRANTS  COERCED


465


Muslim  line  put  them  to  flight  with  slaughter.  'All  held
back  his  troop  from  pursuit,  and  again  summoned  the
fugitives  to  accept  his  terms.  This  they  now  hastened  to  do.
The  chiefs  did  homage,  and  pledged  that  the  people  would
follow  their  example.  'All  accepted  their  promise;  he  then
retraced  his  steps  with  the  booty,  and,  reaching  Mecca  in  the
spring,  joined  Mohammad  in  the  Farewell  pilgrimage.  The
Beni  an-Nakha'  fulfilled  their  pledge,  and  submitted  them-
selves to  Mo'adh,  the  Prophet's  envoy  in  the  Yemen.  Two
hundred  of  them  set  out  to  tender  a  personal  allegiance  to
Mohammad.  It  was  the  last  deputation  received  by  him.
They  reached  Medina  at  the  beginning  of  the  Eleventh  year
of  the  Hijra.

Numerous  other  embassies  are  described  by  Ibn  Sa'd,
who  has  devoted  a  long  chapter  to  the  subject,  as  well  as  a
chapter  to  the  despatches  and  rescripts  of  the  Prophet.
Those  which  I  have  already  described  will  afford  a  sufficient
idea  of  the  whole ;  further  detail  would  be  tedious  and
unprofitable.  But  one  or  two  incidents  of  interest  connected
with  them  may  be  mentioned.

The  part  played  by  the  Beni 'Amir  at  the  massacre  of  Bi'r
Ma'una  will  be  in  the  memory  of  the  reader.^  This  tribe
had  taken  little  share  with  the  rest  of  the  Hawazin  (of  which
they  formed  a  branch)  in  the  battle  of  Honein,  It  maintained,
under  its  haughty  chieftain  'Amir,  an  independent  neutrality.
The  aged  chief  of  the  tribe,  Abu  Bera,  still  exhibited  friendly
feelings  towards  Mohammad,  but  with  advancing  years  his
influence  had  passed  away.  Labouring  under  an  internal
ailment,  he  sent  his  nephew  Labid,  the  poet  of  the  tribe,  to
the  Prophet,  with  the  present  of  a  beautiful  horse,  and  an
urgent  request  that  he  would  point  out  a  cure  for  his  disease.
Mohammad  declined  the  gift,  saying  courteously :  '  If  I
could  ever  accept  the  offering  of  an  idolater,  it  would  be  that
of  Abu  Bera.'  Then  taking  up  a  clod  of  earth,  he  spat  upon
it,  and  directed  that  Abu  Bera  should  dissolve  it  in  water,
and  drink  the  mixture.  When  he  had  done  this,  we  are
told,  he  recovered  from  his  sickness.^


Numerous
embassies
and  des-
patches


Beni  'Amir


Abu  Bera
applies  to
Mohammad
for  a  cure


*  Ante^  p.  279.

2  LabId  is  famous  for  his  Mo'allaka,  or  '  Suspended '  poem.  Accord-
ing to  another  tradition,  Mohammad  gave  Lablda  leather  bottle  of  honey,
of  which  Abu  Bera  ate,  and  so  recovered.

2  G


466


EMBASSIES  OF  SUBMISSION


[chap.


Interview  of
'Amir  ibn
At-Tofail
with  Mo-
hammad.
Conversion
of  the  Beni
'Amir.
A.H.  X.
A.D.  631,
632


Prejudices
of  Ben  Jo'fi


Two  of  their
chiefs  cursed


The  following  year  'Amir,  at  the  solicitation  of  his  tribe,
presented  himself  before  Mohammad  and  sought  to  obtain
from  him  advantageous  terms.^  '  What  shall  I  have,'  he
asked,  '  if  I  believe  ? '  '  That  which  other  Believers  have,'
replied  Mohammad,  'with  the  same  responsibilities.'  'Wilt
thou  not  give  me  the  rule  after  thee  ? '  '  Nay,  that  is  not  for
thee  nor  for  thy  tribe.'  '  Then  assign  unto  me  the  Bedawi
tribes  ;  and  do  thou  retain  the  rest.'  '  This,'  said  Mohammad,
*I  cannot  do;  but  I  will  give  thee  the  command  over  the
cavalry,  for  thou  excellest  as  a  horseman.'  'Amir  turned
away  in  disdain  :  '  Doth  this  man  not  know,'  he  cried,  '  that  I
can  fill  his  land  from  one  end  to  the  other  with  troops,  both
footmen  and  horse?'  Mohammad,  alarmed  at  the  threat,
for  the  Beni  'Amir  were  a  formidable  tribe,  prayed  thus  for
deliverance :  'O  Lord  !  defend  me  against  'Amir,  son  of  At-
Tofail.  O  Lord !  guide  his  people  unto  the  truth  ;  and  save
Islam  from  his  stratagems ! '  The  haughty  chieftain  never
reached  his  home  ;  he  sickened  by  the  way,  and  died  miser-
ably in  a  deserted  hut.  The  Beni  'Amir  shortly  after  gave
in  their  adhesion  to  the  Prophet.

The  Beni  Jo'fi,  a  tribe  inhabiting  the  Yemen,  had  a
deeply-rooted  prejudice  against  eating  the  heart  of  any
animal.  Keis,  one  of  their  chief  men,  came  to  Mohammad
with  his  brother,  and  professed  belief  in  the  Kor'an.  They
were  told  that  their  faith  was  imperfect  until  they  broke
through  their  heathenish  scruples,  and  a  roasted  heart  was
placed  before  them.  Keis  took  it  up  and  ate  it,  trembling
violently.  Mohammad,  satisfied  with  the  test  of  his  sincerity,
presented  him  with  a  patent,  which  secured  him  in  the  rule
over  his  people.  But  before  Keis  and  his  brother  left  the
presence  of  Mohammad,  the  conversation  turned  upon  the
guilt  of  infanticide :  'Our  mother  Muleika,'  said  they,  'was
full  of  good  deeds  and  charity ;  but  she  buried  a  little
daughter  alive.  What  is  her  condition  now  ?'  'The  burier
and  the  buried  both  in  hell,'  replied  the  Prophet.  The
brothers  turned  away  in  wrath.  '  Come  back,'  Mohammad
cried  ;  '  mine  own  mother,  too,  is  there  with  yours.'  They
would  not  listen.  '  This  man,'  they  said,  as  they  departed,
'  hath  not  only  made  us  to  eat  the  heart  of  animals,  but  saith
that  our  mother  is  in  hell :  who  would  follow  him  ? '  On
^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  939  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1745  f.


XXX.]  BENi  'Amir  467

their  way  home,  they  met  one  of  Mohammad's  followers
returning  to  Medina  with  a  herd  of  camels  which  had  been
collected  as  tithe.  They  seized  the  man,  left  him  bound,  and
carried  off  the  camels.  Mohammad  was  greatly  offended ;
and  he  entered  the  names  of  the  robbers  in  the  commination
already  mentioned  (the  repetition  of  which  seems  still  to
have  been  kept  up)  against  the  perpetrators  of  the  massacre
at  Bi'r  Ma'una.  A  second  deputation  from  the  same  tribe
visited  Mohammad,  and  was  well  received.  We  do  not  hear
more  of  Keis.^

^  Mohammad  is  said  to  have  healed  the  hand  of  the  leader  from  a
protuberance  which  had  prevented  him  holding  his  camel's  rein,  by
striking  an  arrow  on  it  and  then  stroking  it,  when  it  disappeared.  He
changed  the  name  of  this  chiefs  son  from  ''Aziz  (glorious)  to  'Abd  ar-
Rahman  ; — saying  :  '  There  is  none  glorious  but  the  Lord.'


Farewell
pilgrimage,
A.H.  X.
March,
A.D.  630


Moham-
mad's

journey  from
Medina  to
Mecca


CHAPTER XXXI

THE  FAREWELL  PILGRIMAGE  ^
Dhu'l-Hijja,  A.H.  x. — March,  A.D.  630

^TAT.  63

The  month  of  Pilgrimage  was  again  at  hand,  and  nought
remained  to  hinder  Mohammad  from  going  up  to  it.
Nothing  would  now  offend  the  eye,  nor  any  pagan  by  his
presence  pollute  the  sacred  precincts.  Every  vestige  of  an
image  or  heathen  rite  had  been  swept  away ;  and  after  the
warning  of  the  previous  year,  Believers  alone  might  venture
near.  With  nothing  left  to  offend  him,  the  Prophet,  therefore,
announced  his  intention  of  going  up  to  the  coming  festival.
It  is  called  the  Farewell  Pilgrimage,  because  it  was  the  last
He  had  not  performed  the  Greater  pilgrimage  since  his
Flight  from  Mecca,  and  now  he  was  about  to  bid  a  last  fare-
well to  the  city  of  his  birth,  and  to  the  Holy  House,  over
which  and  its  surroundings  a  halo  of  blessedness  rested  in  his
soul.

Five  days  before  Dhu'l-Hijja,  the  month  of  pilgrimage,  the
Prophet  assumed  the  pilgrim's  garb ;  and,  followed  by  vast
multitudes,^  set  out  on  the  journey  to  Mecca.  All  his  wives
accompanied  him.  One  hundred  camels,  marked  by  his  own
hands  for  sacrifice,  were  led  in  solemn  order.  Mosques  had
already  sprung  up  at  the  various  halting-places,  and  there  the
people  daily  prayed,  Mohammad  leading  the  devotions.  On
the  tenth  day,  he  reached  Sarif,  an  easy  stage  from  Mecca ;
there  he  rested  for  the  night,  and  on  the  morning,  having
bathed,  and  mounted  Al-Kaswa,  proceeded  towards  Mecca.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  966  ff.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1751  fif.  ;  Al-Wakidi,  p.  421  ff.  ;
Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  124  ff.

2  Weil  says  not  less  than  40,000. — Einleitung,  p.  34.


[To  Jace  p.  46S.


CHAP.  XXXI.] MOHAMMAD'S  LAST  PILGRIMAGE  469

He  entered  the  upper  suburbs  by  the  same  route  which  he
had  taken  two  years  before ;  and,  passing  down  the  main
street,  approached  the  Ka'ba.  As  he  passed  through  the
Beni  Sheiba  gate,  with  the  Holy  Temple  full  in  view,  he
raised  his  hands  to  heaven,  and  invoked  a  blessing  on  it :
^  O  Lord!  add  unto  this  House  in  the  dignity  and  glory,  the
honour  and  the  reverence,  which  already  thou  hast  bestozved
upon  it.  And  they  that  for  the  Greater  pilgrimage,  and  the
Lesser,  frequent  the  same,  increase  them  -much  in  honour  and
dignity,  in  piety,  goodness,  and  renown.  Then,  mounted  as
he  was  on  his  camel,  he  performed  the  prescribed  circuits
with  other  preliminary  rites,  and  afterwards  retired  to  a  tent
pitched  for  him  in  the  valley.

The  greater  part  of  the  pilgrims  had  brought  no  victims Most  of  his
with  them. These  were  directed  by  Mohammad,  after  com- followers

1 •  c  tit'  .1 •  perform

pletmg  the  customary  forms  of  the Lesser  pilgrimage,  to Lesser  pil-

divest  themselves  of  the  pilgrim  garb. They  accompanied g"mageonly

the  Prophet  and  the  others  who  had  brought  victims  in  the

farther  procession  to  Mina  and  'Arafat,  but  only  as  spectators.

'All,  meanwhile,  having  returned  from  the  Yemen,  received

the  same  directions  as  those  who  had  no  victims  :  '  Go,'  said

Mohammad,  '  encircle  the  Holy  House  ;  then  divest  thyself

of  the  pilgrim's  garb  as  thy  fellows  have done.' But  'All

was  anxious  to  fulfil  the  full  rites  of  the  yearly  festival;  'for,'

said  he,  '  I  have  taken  upon  me  vows  to  perform  the  same

pilgrimage as the Prophet shall perform, whatever that

might  be.' Mohammad  yielded,  and  allowed  him  to  fulfil

the  Greater pilgrimage,  and for  this  end  to  share  in  the

victims  he  had  brought  for  himself.^

^  The  sacrifice  of  victims  is  an  essential  part  of  the  Greater  pilgrimage,
but  not  of  the  Lesser.  The  pilgrim  must  resolve,  before  he  assumes  the
pilgrim's  garb,  which  pilgrimage  he  will  perform.  In  connection  with
this  custom,  there  is  a  great  mass  of  varying  tradition  as  to  whether
Mohammad  set  out  from  Medina  with  the  vows  upon  him  of  the  Lesser
pilgrimage,  or  the  Greater,  or  of  both  together  ,  and  the  question  is  very
warmly  discussed.

When  Mohammad  desired  those  who  had  no  victims  to  conclude
their  pilgrimage  with  the  'Omra,  or  Lesser  festival,  they  objected,  saying  :
'  How  then  can  we  go  on  with  thee  to  Mina,  after  quitting  the  holy
state  of  a  pilgrim  and  returning  to  the  impurities  of  the  world?'
Mohammad  told  them  that  there  was  no  harm  in  doing  so,  for  that,  if
similarly  circumstanced,  he  would  have  done  it  himself ;  and  that  if  he


470


THE  FAREWELL  PILGRIMAGE


[chap.


Moham-
mad's pil-
grimage to
'Arafat.
8th  Dhu'l-
Hijja


On  the  7th  of  Dhu'l-Hijja,  the  day  preceding  the  opening
rites  of  the  Greater  pilgrimage,  Mohammad,  after  the  mid-
day prayer,  preached  to  the  concourse  assembled  around  the
Ka'ba.  Next  day,  followed  by  myriads  of  devotees,  and
shaded  from  the  sun's  glare  by  Bilal,  who  walked  at  his  side
with  a  screen  (a  staff  with  a  piece  of  cloth  attached),  he  set
out  for  Mina,  where  he  performed  the  ordinary  prayers,  and
slept  in  a  tent.  The  following  morning  at  sunrise,  he  moved
onwards  and,  passing  Al-Muzdelifa,  reached  'Arafat,  an  abrupt
conical  hill,  a  couple  of  hundred  feet  in  height,  in  the  middle
of  the  valley,  which,  though  elsewhere  narrow,  and  on  the
farther  side  pent  in  by  lofty  granite  peaks,  here  spreads  out
bare  and  stony  to  the  breadth  of  nearly  a  mile.^  On  its
summit,  the  Prophet,  standing  erect  upon  his  camel,  said :
'  The  entire  valley  of 'Arafat  is  the  holy  station  for  pilgrimage,
excepting  only  the  vale  of  'Orana.'  Then  bowing  low  in
prayer,  he  recited  certain  passages,  regarding  the  ceremonies

had  foreseen  these  objections,  he  would  not  have  brought  any  victims.
Perhaps  it  was  Mohammad's  wish  to  show  that  visiting  Mecca  at  the
time  of  the  Greater  pilgrimage  did  not  necessarily  involve  participation
in  the  pilgrimage,  the  observance  of  which  was  reserved  for  special
occasions.

1  Pictures  of  the  hill  are  given  by  Ali  Bey,  Burton,  and  Dozy.  The
latter  describes  it  thus  :  '  A  mass  of  coarse  granite  split  into  large  blocks,
with  a  thin  coat  of  withered  thorns,  about  one  mile  in  circumference,  and
rising  abruptly  from  the  low  gravelly  plain  (a  dwarf  wall  at  the  southern
base  forming  the  line  of  demarcation)  to  the  height  of  one  hundred  and
eighty  or  two  hundred  feet.  It  is  separated  by  Batn  Arna,  a  sandy  vale,
from  the  spurs  of  the  Tayif  hills.  Nothing  can  be  more  picturesque  than
the  view  it  affords  of  the  blue  peaks  behind,  and  the  vast  encampment
scattered  over  the  barren  yellow  plain  below.'  So  also  Ali  Bey : —
'Arafat  is  a  small  mountain  of  granite  rock,  the  same  as  those  that
surround  it ;  it  is  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  high,  and  is  situated
at  the  foot  of  a  higher  mountain  to  the  E.S.E.,  in  a  plain  about  three
quarters  of  a  mile  in  diameter,  surrounded  by  barren  mountains.'  The
'  Hadjy,'  who  has  recently  published  an  account  of  his  pilgrimage  in  the
Bombay  Times,  says  :  '  Round  the  foot  of  'Arafat,  which  is  completely
detached  from  the  adjoining  mountains,  are  a  number  of  trees,  a  thick
growth  of  underwood,  and  a  little  grass,  which  are  nourished  by  the
water  that  escapes  from  the  canal  of  Mecca  which  passes  behind  the  hill.'
But  before  the  canal  was  made,  the  place  must  have  been  wild  and  bare
of  any  growth  but  thorny  bushes.

The  popular  tradition  for  the  exclusion  of  the  vale  of 'Orana  (or  Arna)
is  given  thus  by  Burton  :  '  This  vale  is  not  considered  "  standing  ground,"
because  Satan  once  appeared  to  the  Prophet  as  he  was  traversing  it'


[7'o  /ace  jj.  470.


XXXI.]


THE  PILGRIM  RITES


471


of  pilgrimage,  and  concluded  with  the  verse  :  '  This  day  have
I  perfected  your  Religion  unto  you^  fulfilled  my  mercy  upon  you,
and  appointed  for  you  Islam  to  be  your  faith!

As  the  sun  was  going  down,  Mohammad  quitted  the  sacred
mount  on  his  way  back  ;  and  with  Osama,  son  of  Zeid,  seated
on  the  camel  behind  him,  travelled  hastily  by  the  bright
moonlight  along  the  narrow  valley  to  Al-Muzdelifa,  where  he
said  the  sunset  and  evening  prayers  both  at  once ;  in  this,
and  every  other  point,  his  example  has  been  closely  imitated
by  pilgrims  to  the  present  day.  He  passed  the  night  at
Al-Muzdelifa,  and  very  early  in  the  morning  sent  forward  the
women  and  the  little  children,  lest  the  crowds  that  followed
should  impede  their  journey  :  ^  but,  touching  one  and  another
on  the  shoulder  as  they  went,  he  said  :  '  My  children,  have  a
care  that  ye  throw  not  the  stones  at  the  corner  pass  of  Al-
'Akaba  until  the  sun  arise.'

At  the  dawn  he  arose  to  perform  the  matin  prayer ;  after
which,  mounted  on  his  camel,  he  took  his  stand  on  a  certain
spot,  saying :  '  This,  and  the  whole  of  Al-Muzdelifa,  is  the
station  of  pilgrimage,  excepting  only  the  vale  of  Muhassir.'-
Then,  with  Al-Fadl,  son  of  A1-' Abbas,  seated  behind  him,  he
proceeded  onwards  amid  a  heavy  fall  of  rain  to  Mina,  shouting
as  he  went  the  pilgrim's  cry  : —

Labbeik  !  O  Lord  ! Labbeik  !  Labbeik  !

There  is  none  other  God  but  Thee. Labbeik  !

Praise,  blessing,  and  dominion  be  to  Thee. Labbeik  !

No  one  therein  may  share  with  Thee. Labbeik  ! Labbeik  !  ^

He  ceased  not  to  utter  these  ejaculations  till  he  entered  the

The  last  pilgrimage  is  regarded  as  the  type  of  all  succeeding  ones  :  there
is  accordingly  a  tendency  to  make  Mohammad  foresee  that  it  was  the
last,  and  provide  anticipatory  instructions  on  all  possible  points.  Such
traditions  must  be  received  with  caution  :  take,  e.g.^  the  following :
Mohammad,  as  he  went  through  the  various  rites,  said  :  '  Observe,  and
learn  of  me  the  ceremonies  which  ye  should  practise,  for  I  know  not
whether  after  this  I  shall  ever  perform  another  pilgrimage.'

*  The  '  Hadjy  gives  a  vivid  description  of  the  utter  confusion  which
prevails  on  the  hurried  return  of  the  multitude  from  'Arafat  to  Al-
Muzdelifa  ;  and  it  would  seem  that  the  same  prevailed  even  in  the  time
of  Mohammad.

2  I  do  not  know  the  origin  of  the  allusion  here  to  this  valley  ;  it  is
according  to  Burton  on  the  road  to  Mina.  A  picture  of  Al-Muzdelifa
will  be  found  in  Ali  Bey.

^  For  this  expression,  see  ante,  p.  354.


Sura  V.  5


Mohammad
returns  to
Al-Muz-
delifa.
9th  Dhu'l-
Hajja


Mohammad
completes
the  pilgrim-
age at  Mina.
loth  Dhu'l-
Hijja


472  THE  FAREWELL  PILGRIMAGE  [chap.

valley  of  Mina,  and  here  cast  stones  at  the  *  Devil's  corner,'  a
projecting  rock  at  the  entrance  of  the  station.^  Then  he  slew
the  victims  brought  for  sacrifice,  and  ended  the  pilgrimage
by  shaving  the  hair  of  his  head,  partly  also  of  his  face,  and
paring  his  nails.  The  hair  and  parings  he  ordered  to  be
burned,^  The  Ihram,  or  scanty  pilgrim  garb,  was  now  ex-
changed for  his  ordinary  dress,  perfumes  were  burned,  the
flesh  of  the  victims  and  other  cattle  distributed  for  food  ;  and
'All,  riding  the  Prophet's  white  mule,  made  proclamation  that,
the  restrictions  of  the  pilgrim  state  being  over,  it  was  now  a
day  for  eating  and  enjoyment,  and  for  the  remembrance  of  God.
Mohammad  remained  at  Mina  from  the  loth  to  the  12th  of  the
month,  and  every  evening  repairing  as  the  sun  declined  to  the
prescribed  spots  at  * Akaba,  repeated  the  rite  of  casting  stones.
Parting  ex-  On  the  second of  these  days,  the  Prophet  mounted  his

a°ivnna"^  camcl,  and  from  the  widening  centre  of  the  Mina  valley,^
iithDhu'l-  addressed  a  vast  crowd  of  pilgrims  in  a  memorable  speech,
•  '^^^  which  was  looked  upon  by  the  people,  and  perhaps  was  felt

by  himself,  to  be  his  last  farewell. He  enjoined  the  sacred-
ness  of  life  and  property  and  of  domestic  obligations  thus  : —

Ye  People  !  Hearken  to  my  words  ;  for  I  know  not  whether,  after
this  year,  I  shall  ever  be  amongst  you  here  again.*

^  See  pp.  ci  and  452.  There  are  two  or  three  spots  at  which  stones
are  thus  cast,  called  the  greater  and  lesser  Shaitan,  or  devils.  The
tradition  is  that  Abraham  here  met  the  Devil  and  repulsed  him  by
similar  means.  There  are  minute  traditions  as  to  the  kind  of  stone  to  be
used  on  this  occasion.  'Abdallah,  son  of  Al-'Abbas,  picked  up  some
gravel  for  Mohammad  to  throw  ;  and  the  Prophet  said  :  '  Yes  :  just  such
as  this  is  the  kind  to  throw.  Take  care  that  ye  increase  not  the  size.
Verily  they  that  have  gone  before  you  have  come  to  naught,  because  of
thus  adding  to  the  rites  of  their  religion.'

^  According  to  another  tradition  the  hair  was  all  caught  by  his  followers.
This  idea  must  have  grown  up  in  after  days,  when  a  single  hair  of  the
Prophet  was  treasured  up  as  a  relic  and  talisman.

^  '  He  stood  between  the  two  places  for  casting  stones.'  Burton
mentions  two  such  spots.  Ali  Bey's  plan  gives  the  chief  one,  or  'the
Devil's  house,'  on  the  Mecca  side  of  Mina,  and  'two  small  columns
raised  by  the  Devil,'  in  the  middle  of  the  narrow  street  of  the  village  of
Mina.  The  position  of  Mohammad  while  delivering  this  famous  dis-
course was  thus  within  Mina  itself,  but  somewhat  on  the  side  of  Mecca.

*  So  Ibn  Hisham.  The  words,  however,  may  be  an  afterthought  of
tradition.  There  is  no  other  intimation  that  Mohammad  felt  his  strength
to  be  decaying  at  this  time,  or  that  either  he  or  his  followers  anticipated
the  nearness  of  his  end.


XXXI.]  THE  PROPHET'S  SERMON,  473

Your  Lives  and  Property  are  sacred  and  inviolable  amongst  one
another  until  the  end  of  time.

The  Lord  hath  ordained  to  every  man  the  share  of  his  inheritance  :  a
Testament  is  not  lawful  to  the  prejudice  of  heirs.

The  child  belongeth  to  the  Parent :  and  the  violator  of  Wedlock  shall
be  stoned.  Whoever  claimeth  falsely  another  for  his  father,  or  another
for  his  master,  the  curse  of  God  and  the  Angels,  and  of  all  Mankind,
shall  rest  upon  him.

Ye  People  !  Ye  have  rights  demandable  of  your  Wives,  and  they
have  rights  demandable  of  you.  Upon  them  it  is  incumbent  not  to
violate  their  conjugal  faith,  neither  to  commit  any  act  of  open  impro-
priety ; — which  things  if  they  do,  ye  have  authority  to  shut  them  up  in
separate  apartments  and  to  beat  them  with  stripes,  yet  not  severely.
But  if  they  refrain  therefrom,  clothe  them  and  feed  them  suitably.  And
treat  your  Women  well :  for  they  are  with  you  as  captives  and  prisoners  ;
they  have  not  power  over  anything  as  regards  themselves.  And  ye  have
verily  taken  them  on  the  security  of  God  :  and  have  made  their  persons
lawful  unto  you  by  the  words  of  God.

And  your  Slaves  !  See  that  ye  feed  them  with  such  food  as  ye  eat
yourselves  ;  and  clothe  them  with  the  stuff  ye  wear.  And  if  they  commit
a  fault  which  ye  are  not  inclined  to  forgive,  then  sell  them,  for  they  are
the  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  are  not  to  be  tormented.

Ye  people  !  hearken  to  my  speech  and  comprehend  the  same.  Know
that  every  Muslim  is  the  brother  of  every  other  Muslim.  All  of  you  are
on  the  same  equality  ;  (as  he  pronounced  these  words,  he  raised  his  arms
aloft  and  placed  the  forefinger  of  one  hand,  as  an  emblem  of  equality,  on
the  forefinger  of  the  other*) ;  ye  are  one  Brotherhood.

Know  ye  what  month  this  is  ? —  What  territory  this  is  ? —  What  day  f
To  which  the  People  answered, — 'The  Sacred  month, — the  Sacred
territory, — the  Great  day  of  pilgrimage.'  At  each  reply,  Mohammad
added  :  '  Even  thus  sacred  and  iftviolable  hath  God  made  the  life  a7id  the
property  of  each  of  you  unto  the  other ^  tmtil  ye  meet  your  Lord.^

Let  him  that  is  present  tell  it  unto  him  that  is  absent.  Haply,
he  that  shall  be  told  may  remember  it  better  than  he  who  hath
heard  it.

Next  he  recited  the  passage  which  abolishes  the  triennial Abolition
intercalation  of  the  year,  declaring  it  to  be  an  unhallowed °^^^^  ^"^^''

/  _ '  °  calary  year

innovation  on  the  Divine  arrangement  of  the  months  : —

Verily^  the  number  of  the  months  with  God  is  twelve  mottths,  accord- Sura  ix.  36,
tng  to  the  Book  of  God,  oti  the  day  in  which  He  created  the  Heavens  aftd 37
the  Earth. Of  these,  four  are  sacred : — tJiis  is  the  true  Relioiojt.

Verily,  the  changing  of  the  months  is  an  excess  of  infidelity,  which
cause th  the  Unbelievers  to  err.  They  make  a  month  co7nino?t  in  one  year,
and  they  make  it  sacred  in  another  year,  that  they  may  equalise the

^  Intending  thereby  to  teach  that  all  were  absolutely  upon  the  same
level.


474


THE  FAREWELL  PILGRIMAGE


[chap.


Mohammad
takes  God
to  witness
that  he  has
fulfilled  his
mission


Returns  to

Mecca.

Further

ceremonies

there


mwiber  which  God  hath  made  sacred.  Thus  do  they  make  common  that
which  God  hath  hallozved.

'And  now,'  continued  Mohammad,  'on  this  very  day  hath  time
performed  its  cycle,  and  returned  to  the  disposition  thereof  existing  at
the  moment  when  God  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth.  Ye  People  !
Truly  Satan  despaireth  of  being  worshipped  in  your  land  for  ever.  But
if  in  some  indifferent  matter,  which  ye  might  be  disposed  to  slight,  he
could  secure  obedience,  verily  he  would  be  well  pleased.  Wherefore
beware  of  him  !

Verily,  I  have  fulfilled  my  mission.  I  have  left  that  amongst  you, — a
plain  command,  the  Book  of  God,  and  manifest  Ordinances — which,  if
ye  hold  fast,  ye  shall  never  go  astray.'

Then,  looking  up  to  heaven,  he  said  :  *  O  Lord  !  I  have
delivered  my  message  and  discharged  iny  Ministry^  '  Yea,'
cried  all  the  people  crowding  round  him,  'yea,  verily  thou
hast'  '  O  Lord !  I  beseech  Thee  bear  Thou  witness  unto  it!
And  with  these  words,  the  Prophet,  having  concluded  his
address,  dismissed  the  great  assembly.

After  three  days  thus  spent  at  Mina,  the  concourse  broke
up  and  returned  to  Mecca.  Mohammad  desired  the  mass  of
the  pilgrims  to  travel  thither  by  day.  He  himself  accom-
panied his  wives  on  the  journey  by  night.  On  reaching
Mecca,  he  went  straightway  to  the  Ka'ba,  and  performed  the
seven  circuits  of  it  on  his  camel.  He  next  visited  the  well
Zemzem  close  by,  and  calling  for  a  pitcher  of  its  water,  drank
part  of  its  contents  ;  then  rinsing  his  mouth  with  the  rest,  he
desired  that  what  remained  in  the  pitcher  should  be  thrown
back  into  the  well.  After  this,  taking  off  his  shoes,  he
ascended  the  doorway  of  the  Holy  temple,  and  prayed  within
its  walls.^  Having  now  ended  all  the  ceremonies,  and  being
fatigued  with  the  journey,  he  stopped  at  the  house  of  one  who
kept  date-water  for  the  pilgrims  to  drink,  and  desired  the
beverage  to  be  furnished  to  him. The  son  of  Al-'Abbas,  who


1  Mohammad  regretted  that  he  had  entered  the  Ka'ba  on  this
occasion,  and  when  asked  the  reason  said  :  '  I  have  this  day  done  a  thing
which  I  wish  I  had  left  undone.  I  have  entered  the  Holy  House.  And
haply  some  of  the  people,  when  on  pilgrimage,  may  not  be  able  to  enter
therein,  and  may  turn  back  grieved  in  heart  {i.e.  at  not  having  completed
the  pilgrimage  fully  after  their  Prophet's  example).  And,  in  truth,  the
command  given  unto  me  was  only  to  encircle  the  Ka'ba  :  it  is  not
incumbent  on  any  one  to  enter  it.'  This  appears  to  be  founded  upon  the
notion  before  explained,  that  Mohammad  intended  this  pilgrimage  to  be
the  final  type  and  exemplar  for  all  future  pilgrims.


XXXI.]  MOHAMMAD'S  WORK  DONE  475

accompanied  him,  interposed  :  '  The  hands  of  the  passers-by,'
he  said, '  have  been  in  this  all  day,  and  fouled  it :  come  unto
my  father's  house,  where  we  have  some  that  is  clean  and  pure
for  thee,'  But  the  Prophet,  refusing  to  drink  of  any  other,
quenched  his  thirst  upon  the  spot.^

Three  days more  were  spent at  Mecca,  and  then Mo- Returns  to
hammad  with  his  followers  returned  to  Medina.

1  Water  in  which  dates  or  raisins  have  been  steeped  or  washed  is
called  Nabldh.  So  accurately  do  the  pilgrims  follow  their  Prophet,  that
some  regard  the  rites  of  the  pilgrimage  as  not  properly  completed  until
Nabldh  be  drunk  as  it  was  by  Mohammad.


Medina


CHAPTER XXXII


THE THREE PRETENDERS


Opening  of  A.H.  XL — April  and  May,  A.D.  632


The  year
A.H.  XI.
opens  peace-
fully. March
29,  A.D.  632


Death  of
Badhan  and
division  of
his  terri-
tories


Three  im-
postors arise,
claiming
prophetic
office


The  Eleventh  year  of  Mohammad"'s  residence  at  Medina
opened  peacefully.  Already  the  greater  part  of  the  Peninsula
acknowledged  his  authority.  The  loose  autonomy  of  the
Arab  tribes  made  it  easy  for  Mohammad  to  assert  his
suzerainty  without  interfering  in  their  internal  affairs.  In
the  more  distant  provinces,  also,  the  prerogative  was  vague,
and  as  yet  put  to  no  sufficient  test.  Still,  there  was,  almost
everywhere,  the  outward  form  of  submission  to  all  that  had
been  demanded.  The  days  of  the  Prophet  were  now  chiefly
occupied  in  the  reception  of  embassies,  the  issue  of  rescripts
to  his  various  delegates  scattered  over  the  land,  and  the
consolidation  of  his  power,  secular  as  well  as  spiritual.

Badhan,  the  Persian  governor  who  (as  we  have  seen)  had
early  submitted  himself  to  Mohammad,  died  about  this  time.^
His  son  Shehr  was  continued  in  the  government  of  San'a  and
the  surrounding  district.  But  the  other  provinces  hitherto
combined  under  his  authority,  as  Ma'reb,  Nejran,  and  Ham-
dan,  were  divided  by  Mohammad  among  different  governors,
of  whom  some  were  natives  of  the  several  districts,  while
others  were  officers  specially  deputed  from  Medina.

But  a  new  cause  of  danger  began  suddenly  to  darken  the
horizon.  Three  claimants  of  the  prophetic  office  arose,  in
different  quarters  of  Arabia,  to  dispute  with  Mohammad  the
supreme  authority.^  Their  assumptions  were  not,  however,
developed  till  near  the  close  of  his  life,  and  the  tidings  which
he  received  were  hardly  perhaps  of  so  grave  a  nature  as  to
raise  serious  uneasiness. Their  history  belongs  to  the  Cali-


476


1  At-Tabari,  i.  1852  f.


Op.  cit.  i.  1795.


CHAP.  XXXII.] TOLEIHA  AND  MUSEILIMA


477


phate  of  Abu  Bekr,  and  I  shall  not,  therefore,  do  more  in  this
place  than  very  briefly  notice  these  remarkable  impostors.

Besides  the  temptation  to  follow  in  the  steps  of
Mohammad  arising  from  his  marvellous  success,  the  present
moment  was  especially  propitious  for  the  assertion  of  such  a
claim.  The  Bedawi  tribes,  and  distant  peoples  who  had  but
lately  succumbed  to  the  new  religion,  began  to  find  its  rites
irksome  and  its  restraints  unpalatable.  How  deep  and
general  was  the  discontent,  is  evident  from  the  rebellion
which  throughout  Arabia  followed  immediately  on  the
Prophet's  death,  and  which  probably  never  would  have  been
effectually  subdued  had  not  the  energies  and  passions  of  the
Arabs  been  roused  by  foreign  conquest.  Mohammad  was
now  well  stricken  in  years,  and  strangers  might  perceive  in
him  the  marks  of  advancing  infirmity.  His  death  could  not
be  far  distant.  No  provision  had  been  made  for  a  successor
nor  for  the  permanent  maintenance  at  Medina  of  a  supreme
control  over  the  Peninsula.  If  one  were  bold  enough  to
assert  that  he  had  received  a  divine  commission  like  that  of
Mohammad,  why  should  the  claim  not  be  crowned  with
similar  success  ?

The  least  important  of  the  three  impostors  who  now
started  with  such  notions  was  Toleiha,  chief  of  the  Beni  Asad,
and  a  warrior  of  note  and  influence  in  Nejd.^  His  tribe  once
journeying  through  the  desert  were  overpowered  by  thirst,
when  Toleiha  announced  to  them  that  water  would  be  found
at  a  certain  spot.  The  discovery  confirmed  the  claims  to  in-
spiration, or  at  least  to  divination,  which  he  had  already  made.
When  the  news  of  this  reached  Mohammad,  he  sought,  by  aid
of  faithful  converts  in  the  tribe,  to  crush  the  Pretender.
Subsequently,  however,  to  the  Prophet's  death  he  broke  out
into  open  rebellion,  and  was  defeated,  after  a  severe  engage-
ment, by  Khalid.  On  'Omar's  summoning  the  conquered
tribe  to  join  his  standard,  Toleiha  submitted,  and  afterwards
with  them  fought  bravely  on  the  side  of  Islam.

Museilima  has  already  been  noticed  as  having  accom-
panied the  deputation  of  the  Beni  Hanifa  to  Medina.-  He
was  a  man  of  small  stature,  in  presence  insignificant,  but
ready  and  powerful  in  speech.  Following  the  example  of
Mohammad,  he  gave  forth  verses  professed  to  have  been
1 Vide  p.  276.  ^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  945,  964-


Moment
propitious
for  such
pretentions


Toleiha.
His  re-
bellion
crushed  by
Khalid


Museilima.
His  advances
indignantly
rejected  by
Mohammad


478  THE  THREE  PRETENDERS  [chap.

received  from  heaven,  and  he  pretended  also  to  work
miracles.!  He  claimed  an  authority  and  mission  concurrent
with  that  of  the  Prophet  of  Medina ;  and  he  deceived  the
people  of  Al-Yemama  by  alleging  that  the  claim  had  been
admitted.^  Mohammad,  hearing  the  rumour  of  his  insolent
pretensions,  sent  him  a  summons  to  submit  to  Islam.
Museilima  returned  reply  that  he,  too,  was  a  Prophet  like
Mohammad  himself:  'I  demand  therefore  that  thou  divide
the  earth  with  me  ;  as  for  Koreish,  they  are  a  people  that
have  no  respect  for  justice.'  When  this  letter  was  read  before
him,  Mohammad  turned  with  indignation  to  the  two  envoys
who  ventured  to  urge  their  master's  claim.  ^ By  the  Lord!'
he  exclaimed,  *  if  ii  were  not  that  Ambassadors  are  secure^
and  their  lives  inviolate,  I  would  have  beheaded  both  of  you  V
Then  he  indited  the  following  answer  :  '  Thine  epistle,  with  its
lies  and  its  fabrications  against  the  Lord,  hath  been  read  to
me.  Verily  the  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  He  causeth  such  of
His  servants  as  He  pleaseth  to  inherit  the  same.  Peace  be
to  him  that  followeth  the  true  Direction ! '  The  battle  of
Al-Yemama,  with  its  '  Garden  of  death,'  in  which  Museilima
lost  his  life,  was  a  perilous  day  for  Islam,  but  the  story
belongs  to  the  Caliphate  of  Abu  Bekr.
Rebellion  of  Al- Aswad,  the  '  Veiled  Prophet '  of  the  Yemen,  differed
Ai-Aswad  fj-Qj^  the  other  impostors  in  not  only  advancing  his  preten-
sions, but  in  casting  off  the  Muslim  yoke,  while  Mohammad
was  yet  alive.^  A  prince  of  wealth  and  influence  in  the
South,  he  assumed  the  garb  of  a  magician,  and  gave  out  that
he  was  in  communication  with  the  unseen  world.  He  pro-
secuted his  claims  at  the  first  secretly,  and  gained  over  the
chieftains  in  the  neighbourhood  dissatisfied  with  the  distribu-
tion of  power  upon  the  death  of  Badhan.  About  the  close  of
the  Tenth  year  of  the  Hijra,  he  openly  raised  the  standard
of  rebellion,  and  drove  out  the  officers  of  Mohammad,  who
fled  for  refuge  to  the  nearest  friendly  country. Advancing

1  He  had  learned  the  art  of  sleight  of  hand,  &c.,  from  conjurers.
One  of  his  miracles  was  to  slip  an  fgg  into  a  narrow-mouthed  phial.
None  of  the  verses  attributed  to  him  are  worth  quoting.  Sprenger
says  that  the  name,  signifying  'the  little  Muslim,'  was  given  him  in
contempt.

2  See  the  words  of  Mohammad  which  he  is  said  to  have  drawn  into
this  construction, — ante,  p.  458.

3  At-Tabari,  i.  1795-8.


xxxil]  AL-ASWAD  479

on  Nejran,  which  rose  in  his  favour,  he  suddenly  fell  upon

San'a,  where,  having  killed  Shehr,  the  son  of  Badhan,  he  put  his

army  to  flight,  married  his  widow,  and  established  himself  in

undisputed authority. The insurrection, fanned by this

sudden  success,  spread  like  wildfire,  and  the  greater  part  of

the  Peninsula  lying  between  the  provinces  of  Al-Bahrein,  At-

Ta'if,  and  the  coast,  was  soon  subject  to  the  Usurper.

At what period intimation of  this rebellion reached Crushed

Mohammad,  and  what  the  nature  of  the  intelligence  received. ^.^°"^  !^^

_,  111,  t'"ie  of  Mo-

is not  apparent. Ihe accounts  could not  have  been  very hammad's

alarming,  for  the  Prophet  contented  himself  with  despatching ^^^^^

letters  to  his  officers  on  the  spot,  in  which  he  desired  them,

according  to  their  means,  either  to  compass  the  death  of  the

Pretender,  or to  attack him  in the  field. Fortunately  for

Islam, Al-Aswad, in  the pride of conquest, had already

begun to  slight  the  commanders  to  whose  bravery  he  was

indebted  for  success. The  agents  of  Mohammad  opened  up

secret  negotiations  with  them  ;  and,  favoured  by  the  tyrant's

wife, who detested him,  and burned to avenge her late

husband's  death,  plotted  his  assassination. The  Usurper  was

slain,  according  to  tradition,  on  the  very  night  preceding  the

death  of  Mohammad. The  insurrection  ceased  ;  and  peace

would immediately have been restored had not the

tidings  that  the  Prophet  had  passed  away  again  thrown  the

province  into  confusion. The  campaign  that  followed  belongs

to  the  reign  of  Abu  Bekr.


CHAPTER XXXIII


SICKNESS AND DEATH OF MOHAMMAD


Expedition
to  Syrian
frontier


Osama  ap-
pointed to
command.
A.H.  XI,
May  25,
A.D,  632


Banner
presented  to
him,  and
camp  formed
at  Al-Jurf
May  27


Moharram,  A.H.  l^l.—June,  A.D.  632

MTAT. 63

About  two  months  after  his  return  from  the  Farewell
pilgrimage,  Mohammad,  now  sixty-three  years  of  age,  and
to  all  appearance  in  his  ordinary  health,  gave  orders  for  an
expedition  to  the  Syrian  frontier.  The  inroad  upon  Tebuk
was  the  last  occasion  on  which  a  general  levy  had  been
called.  But  the  reverse  at  Muta  had  not  yet  been  suffi-
ciently avenged.  The  present  campaign  was  accordingly
intended  to  strike  terror  into  the  tribes  of  the  border,  and
wipe  out  the  memory  of  the  disaster,  which  still  rankled  in
the  Prophet's  heart.  On  the  day  following  the  command
just  mentioned,  it  was  announced  that  Osama,  son  of  Zeid,
the  beloved  friend  of  Mohammad  slain  at  Muta,  was,  notwith-
standing his  extreme  youth  (hardly  yet  twenty  years  of  age)
but  the  more  clearly  to  mark  the  object  of  the  expedition,
appointed  to  lead  the  army.  Having  called  him  to  the
Mosque,  the  Prophet  thus  addressed  him :  *  March  unto  the
place  where  thy  father  was  killed,  and  let  them  destroy  it
utterly.  Lo  !  I  have  made  thee  commander  over  this  army.
Fall  suddenly  at  early  dawn  upon  the  men  of  Obna,^  and
devour  them  with  fire.  Hasten  thy  march  so  that  thine  onset
may  precede  the  tidings  of  thee.  If  the  Lord  grant  thee
victory,  then  shorten  thy  stay  amongst  them.  Take  with
thee  guides,  and  send  before  thee  scouts  and  spies.'

On  the  following  day,  being  Wednesday,  Mohammad  was
seized  with  a  violent  headache  and  fever ;  but  it  passed  off.
The  next  morning  he  found  himself  sufficiently  recovered  to
^  [Or  Yubna,  a  village  near  Miita.]


CHAP,  xxxiii.]  BEGINNING  OF  ILLNESS


481


bind  with  his  own  hand  the  banner  for  the  army  ;  and  thus
he  presented  it  to  Osama  ; — '  Fight  thou  beneath  this  banner
in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  for  His  cause.  Thus  shalt  thou
discomfit  and  slay  the  people  that  disbelieveth  in  the  Lord  ! '
The  camp  was  then  formed  at  the  Jurf;  and  the  whole  body
of  the  fighting  men,  not  excepting  Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar,
were  summoned  to  join  it.^  But  the  attention  of  the  city
was  soon  occupied  by  a  more  engrossing  subject,  which
suspended  for  a  time  the  preparations  of  Osfima's  force.

Mohammad  had  not  hitherto  suffered  from  any  serious
illness.  About  the  close  of  the  Sixth  year  of  the  Hijra  (as
has  been  already  told),  he  ailed  temporarily  from  loss  of
appetite  and  a  pining  depression  of  health  and  spirits,
ascribed  to  the  incantations  of  the  Jews.  Again,  in  the
middle  of  the  Seventh  year,  his  system  sustained  a  shock
from  partaking  of  poisoned  meat  at  Kheibar,  for  which  he
was  cupped,  and  the  effects  of  which  he  complained  of
periodically  ever  after.  Indeed,  the  present  attack  was
attributed  by  Mohammad  himself  to  this  cause.  When  he
had  been  now  for  several  days  sick,  the  mother  of  Bishr  (who
had  died  from  the  effects  of  the  same  poison)  came  to  inquire
after  his  health;  she  condoled  with  him  on  the  violence  of
the  fever,  and  remarked  that  the  people  said  it  was  an  attack
of  pleurisy.  'Nay,'  answered  Mohammad, 'the  Lord  would
never  permit  that  sickness  to  seize  his  Apostle,  for  it  cometh
of  Satan.  This,  verily,  is  the  effect  of  that  which  I  ate  at
Kheibar,  I  and  thy  son.  The  artery  of  my  back  feeleth  as
though  it  would  just  now  burst  asunder.'

Whether  his  constitution  was  really  impaired  by  the
poison,  or  whether  it  was  merely  the  Prophet's  fancy,  the
frailties  of  age  were  now  imperceptibly  stealing  upon  him.
His  vigorous,  well-knit  frame  had  begun  to  stoop.  Though
frugal,  if  not  abstemious  in  his  habits,  and  in  all  things  (the
harim  excepted)  temperate,  yet  during  the  last  twenty  years
of  his  life  there  had  been  much  to  tax  both  mind  and  body.
At  Mecca,  hardship,  rejection,  persecution,  confinement,
exile ;  at  Medina,  the  anxieties  of  a  cause  for  some  years
doubtful,  and  now  the  cares  of  a  daily  extending  empire,  all
pressed  heavily  upon  him. Nor  must  we  forget  the  excite-

1 Ibn Hisham,  p. 970 and 999, 1006  ff.  ; At-Tabari, i. 1704,  &c.  •
Al-\Vakidi,  p.  433  f.  ;  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  136  f.

2  H


Mohiimmnd

attributes
illness  to
poisoned
meat  eaten
at  Kheibar


Circum-
stances
affecting
strength  of
his  consti-
tution


482


SICKNESS  AND  DEATH


[chap.


Fncreasing
intjrinity


Conviction
that  his  end
was  near


ment  and  agitation  (possibly  of  an  epileptic  character)  which
occasionally  overpowered  him  in  the  moments  of  supposed
inspiration  and  intercourse  with  his  unseen  visitants.  '  Ah !
thou  that  art  dearer  to  me  than  father  or  mother ! '  exclaimed
Abu  Bekr  to  Mohammad  as  he  entered  one  day  from  his
wives'  apartments  into  the  Mosque;  'alas!  grey  hairs  are
hastening  upon  thee ' ;  and  his  eyes  filled  with  tears  as  the
Prophet  raised  his  beard  with  his  hand,  and  gazed  upon  it.
'Yes,' said  Mohammad,  '  it  is  the  travail  of  inspiration  that
hath  done  this.  The  Suras  Hiid,  and  the  Inevitable^  and  the
Striking,  with  their  fellows,  these  have  made  white  my  hair.'
But  Mohammad  did  not  yield  to  the  infirmities  of  old  age.
To  the  very  last  he  maintained  the  severe  simplicity  of
robuster  years.  '  The  people  throng  about  thee  in  the
Mosque,'  said  his  uncle  A1-' Abbas  to  him  ; — '  what  if  we  make
for  thee  an  elevated  seat,  that  they  may  not  trouble  thee?'
But  Mohammad  forbade  it :  '  Surely,'  he  said,  '  I  will  not
cease  from  being  in  the  midst  of  them,  dragging  my  mantle
behind  me  thus,^  and  covered  with  their  dust,  until  that  the
Lord  give  me  rest  from  amongst  them.'

Mohammad  himself  was  latterly  not  unconscious  (so  we
learn  from  'A'isha)  of  the  premonitions  of  decay.  He  used
frequently  to  repeat  the  i  loth  Sura,  as  follows  :—

When  the  help  of  God  shall  come,  and  the  Victory,
And  thou  shalt  see  men  entering  the  religion  of  God  in  troops  ;
Then  celebrate  the  praises  of  thy  Lord,  and  ask  pardon  of  Him,  for  He
is  merciful.

These  expressions  he  would  refer  to  the  multitudes  now
flocking  to  the  faith  from  the  Yemen  and  the  farther  coasts
of  Arabia.  He  would  furthermore  declare  that  the  sign
received  from  the  Lord  of  the  completion  of  his  work  was
thus  fulfilled,  and  that  it  remained  for  him  now  only  '  to  busy
himself  in  the  praises  of  his  Lord  and  to  seek  for  pardon.' ^

*  I.e.  hurrying  along  and  being  jostled  by  the  crowd.

2  The  traditions  of  this  period  abound  in  anticipations  of  Mohammad's
decease.  But  few  of  these  seem  founded  on  fact.  Take  the  following
as  a  specimen.  When  the  i  loth  Sura  was  revealed,  Mohammad  called
Fatima,  and  said  :  '  My  daughter !  I  have  received  intimation  of  my
approaching  end.'  Fatima  burst  into  tears.  'Why  weepest  thou,  my
child?'  continued  the  prophet;  'be  comforted,  for  verily  thou  art  the
first  of  my  people  that  shall  rejoin  me.'  Whereupon  Fatima  dried  her
tears  and  smiled  pleasantly. As  Fatima  died  within  six  months  after


XXXIII.]  VISITS  THE  BURIAL-GROUND  483

When attacked  by  his  last  illness,  Mohammad,  though  Attacked
probably  feeling  it  to  be  serious,  did  not  at  the  first  succumb  • 'j  ',"""'•

r  1  i  1  .Ml  . • 1 ,  . .  ' Mohammad

tor  a  day  or  two  he  still  maintamed  the  custom  he  had  pre-  visits  the
scribed  to  himself  of  visiting  his  wives'  apartments  in  rota-  ^"'y^j
tion.  One  night  lying  restless  on  his  bed,  he  arose  softly,
cast  his  clothes  about  him,  and,  followed  only  by  a  servant,
walked  to  the  burial-ground,  in  the  outskirts  of  the  city.
There  he  rested  long  absorbed  in  meditation.  At  last  wind-
ing up  his  thoughts,  he  prayed  aloud  for  those  who  were
buried  there,  apostrophising  thus  :  '  Verify,  both  ye  and  I  have
received  fulfiluieni  of  that  tvliich  our  Lord  did  promise  tis.
Blessed  are  ye  !  for  your  lot  is  better  than  the  lot  of  those  that
are  left  behind.  Temptation  and  trial  approach  like  portions  of
a  dark  tiight  that  foil ozv  one  upon  another,  each  darker  than  that
precedifig  it.  O  Lord  I  have  mercy  upon  them  that  lie  buried
liere  ! '  With  these  words,  he  turned  and  departed  to  his  house.
By  the  way,  he  told  his  attendant  that  he  too  was  himself
hastening  to  the  grave  :  '  The  choice  hath  verily  been  offered
me  of  continuance  in  this  life,  with  Paradise  thereafter,  or  to
meet  my  Lord  at  once  ;  and  I  have  chosen  to  meet  my  Lord.'  ^

In  the  morning,  passing  by  the  chamber  of  'A'isha,  who 'A'isha's
was  suffering  from  a  headache,  he  heard  her  moaning  :  '  My he  seek ^
head! — oh, my head!'^ He entered and said: 'Nay, commisera-

her  father,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  this  tale  grew  up.  Similar  are  the
traditions  in  glorification  of  Fatima  :  e.£:  where  Mohammad  calls  her
'the  Queen  of  the  women  of  Paradise  after  Mary,  Mother  of  Jesus' ;  also
the  prediction  of  coming  divisions,  sects,  intestine  war,  &c.  A  shade  of
the  same  tendency  will  be  observed  in  the  prayer  (in  the  text  above)  at
the  burial-ground,  which,  notwithstanding,  I  have  given  entire.

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  999  f.  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1799  f.

^  It  may  be  necessary  here  to  warn  the  reader  that  we  have  now
reached  a  point  in  Mohammad's  biography  which  has  become  specially
the  arena  for  contending  traditions  of  party  and  faction.  First,  'A'isha,
who  had  the  closest  opportunities  by  far  of  all  others  for  watching  the
last  moments  of  Mohammad,  has  made  the  most  of  her  position  ;
throughout  her  statements  there  is  a  patent  endeavour  to  exclude  even
the  mention  of  'Ali  and  his  partisans.  There  is,  secondly,  the  party  of
'Ah,  who  (with  the  view  of  strengthening  their  dogma  that  the
divine  right  of  succession  was  vested  in  him  and  his  posterity)  attribute
to  him  every  important  part  in  the  scene.  And,  lastly,  there  are  the
'Abbasids  (holding  the  right  of  succession  to  reside  in  their  line),
whose  tendency  is  to  magnify  Al-'Abbas  and  his  family.  Every  tradition
is  coloured  more  or  less  by  these  factions  ]  and  it  is  necessary  to  steer
very  cautiously  between  them.


tion


484


SICKNESS  AND  DEATH


[chap.


Mohammad
retires  to
'A'isha's
room


He  chides
the  mur-
muring at
Osama's
appoint-
ment


'A'isha,  it  is  rather  I  that  have  need  to  cry  My  head,  my
head!'  Then  in  a  tenderer  strain:  'But  wouldst  thou  not
desire  to  be  taken  whilst  I  am  yet  alive ;  so  that  I  might
pray  over  thee,  and  wrapping  thee,  'A'isha,  in  thy  winding-
sheet,  myself  commit  thee  to  the  grave?'  'That  happen  to
another,'  exclaimed  'A'isha,  'and  not  to  me!'  archly  adding:
'  Ah,  that,  I  see,  is  what  thou  wishest  for !  Truly,  I  can
behold  thee,  when  all  was  over,  returning  straightway  hither,
and  sporting  with  a  new  beauty  in  my  chamber  here ! '  The
Prophet  smiled  at  'A'isha's  raillery,  but  was  too  ill  for  a
rejoinder ;  and  so,  again  with  a  sad  complaint  of  the
grievous  ailment  in  his  head,  passed  on  to  the  apartment  of
Meimuna,  whose  day  it  was.  The  fever  returning  upon  him
shortly  with  increasing  violence,  he  called  his  wives  around
him,  and  said  :  '  Ye  see  that  I  lie  very  sick  :  I  am  not  able  to
visit  you  in  turn  ;  if  it  be  pleasing  unto  you,  I  will  remain  in
the  room  of  'A'isha.'  They  agreed,  and  so,  his  clothes
having  been  wrapped  loosely  about  him,  and  his  head  bound
round  with  a  napkin,  he  walked  with  the  support  of  'All  and
Al-'Abbas  to  the  apartment  of  'A'isha.  Hardly  yet  twenty
years  of  age,  and  never  before  used  to  such  a  duty,  she
tended  with  affectionate  solicitude  the  death-bed  of  her  aged
husband.

For  seven  or  eight  days  the  fever,  although  unchecked,
did  not  confine  Mohammad  entirely  to  the  house.  He  was
able  to  move  into  the  Mosque  (the  door  of  his  apartment
opening  into  its  courts)  and  lead,  though  feebly,  the  public
prayers.  He  had  been  ill  about  a  week,  when  perceiving
that  the  sickness  gained  ground,  with  occasional  fits  of
swooning,  he  resolved  upon  an  effort  to  address  his  followers,
whose  murmurs  at  the  appointment  of  the  youthful  Osama
to  the  command  of  the  army  for  Syria  had  reached  his  ears.
'  Fetch  me,'  he  said,  '  seven  skins  of  water  from  as  many
different  wells,  that  I  may  bathe  and  then  go  forth  unto
them.'  They  procured  the  water,  and,  seating  him  in
Hafsa's  bathing  vessel,  poured  it  upon  him  from  the  skins
till  he  held  up  his  hand  and  cried  '  Enough ! '  Meanwhile
the  people,  both  men  and  women,  having  assembled  in  the
Mosque,  it  was  told  the  Prophet  that  they  had  come  together,
and  that  many  wept.  Refreshed  now  by  the  bath,  his  head
bandaged,  and  a  sheet  drawn  loosely  round  him  (for  it  was


xxxiii.]  THE  SYRIAN  EXPEDITION  485

summer),  he  went  forth  at  the  hour  of  prayer  into  the
Mosque  ;  and,  when  the  service  was  ended,  seated  himself
upon  the  pulpit  and  proceeded  thus  : — '  Ye  people  !  What  is
this  which  hath  reached  my  ears,  that  some  amongst  you
murmur  against  my  appointment  of  Osama  to  command  the
Syrian  expedition  ?  Now,  if  ye  blame  my  appointment  of
Osama,  verily  heretofore  ye  blamed  likewise  my  appointment
of  his  father  Zeid  before  him.  And  I  swear  by  the  Lord
that  he  verily  was  well  fitted  for  the  command,  and  that  his
son  after  him  is  well  fitted  also.  Truly  Osama  is  one  of  the
men  most  dearly  beloved  by  me,  even  as  his  father  was.
Wherefore,  do  ye  treat  him  well,  for  he  is  one  of  the  best
amongst  you.'

Then  after  a  pause  ;  '  Verily,  the  Lord  hath  offered  unto Private  doors
one  of  his  servants  the  choice  betwixt  this  life and that  Jf^'^i"^  ^"'°

the  Mosque

which  is  nigh  unto  Himself;  and  the  servant  hath  chosen  closed
that  which  is  nigh  unto  his  Lord.'  The  people  were  slow  to
catch  this  his  first  expressed  anticipation  that  the  illness
would  prove  his  last.^  But  Abu  Bekr  saw  it,  and  burst  into
tears.  Mohammad  bade  him  not  to  weep,  and  immediately
added  a  touching  proof  of  his  affection  ;  for,  turning  to  the
people,  he  said  :  '  Verily  the  chiefest  among  you  all  for  love
and  devotion  to  me  is  Abu  Bekr.  If  I  were  to  choose  a
bosom  friend  it  would  be  he  :  but  Islam  hath  made  a  closer
brotherhood  amongst  us  all.  Now  let  every  door  that  leadeth
into  the  Court  be  closed,  excepting  only  the  door  of  Abu
Bekr.'  Accordingly  the  relatives  of  Mohammad  and  Chief
men  whose  houses  skirted  the  quadrangle  of  the  Mosque,
closed  their  doors  opening  into  it,  that  of  Abu  Bekr  alone
excepted.  Thus  the  busy  hum  and  tread  were  hushed  as
became  the  precincts  of  death,  and  the  courts  of  the  Mosque

^  It  is  likely  that  the  expression  used  by  Mohammad  regarding  the
c/ioice  of  deaih  or  life  was  of  a  more  general  nature,  such  as  'that  he
preferred  to  depart  and  be  near  his  Lord'  (something,  perhaps,  in  the
manner  of  Paul's  words,  Philip,  i,  21)  ; — which  would  easily  be  con-
verted into  the  mysterious  phrase  'that  he  had  j/iade  election  of  Paradise.'
Against  the  text  it  might  be  urged  that  after  such  a  declaration  the
people  ought  to  have  been  more  prepared  for  the  Prophet's  death  when
it  did  happen.  But  the  scene  after  his  death  was  justified  by  the
immediate  circumstances,  and  is  to  my  apprehension  quite  consistent
with  even  a  more  explicit  statement  by  Mohammad  than  this,  of  his
forebodings.


SICKNESS  AND  DEATH


[chap.


Mohammnd
commends
Citizens  to
his  Follow-
ers' care


Abu  Bekr
appointed
to  lead
public
prayers


frequented  only  by  worshippers  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  and  by
knots  of  whispering  inquirers  after  the  Prophet's  health.^

As  he  was  about  to  re-enter  'A'isha's  room,  Mohammad
turned  again,  and,  in  testimony  of  his  gratitude  to  the  people
of  Medina,  thus  addressed  them  ; — '  Ye  that  are  Refugees
from  Mecca  and  elsewhere,  hearken  unto  me  !  Ye  increase,
and  throng  into  the  city  daily.  But  the  men  of  Medina  do
not  increase.  They  will  remain  ever  as  they  are  this  day.
And  verily  they  are  dear  unto  me,  for  amongst  them  it  was
that  I  found  refuge.  Wherefore  honour  their  honourable
men,  and  treat  well  their  excellent  ones.'  Then,  having
urged  the  early  departure  of  the  Syrian  expedition,  he
retired  into  the  chamber  of  'A'isha.^

The  exertion  and  excitement  of  this  address  aggravated
the  Prophet's  sickness.  On  the  following  day,  when  the
hour  of  public  prayer  came  round,  he  desired  water  for  the
customary  ablutions ;  but,  on  attempting  to  rise,  he  found
that  his  strength  had  failed,  so  he  commanded  that  Abu
Bekr  should  conduct  the  prayers  in  his  stead ;  and  having
done  so,  fell  back  into  a  swoon.  Quickly  recovering,  he
inquired  whether  the  commission  had  been  conveyed  to  his
friend.  'A'isha  replied  :  '  O  Prophet !  Truly  Abu  Bekr  is  a
man  of  a  tender  heart,  and  weepeth  readily.  The  people  would
with  difficulty  hear  his  voice.'  'Command  that  he  lead  the
prayers,'  repeated  Mohammad  in  a  loud  and  impatient  tone.
'A'isha,  still  clinging  to  the  hope  that  Mohammad  would  be
able  himself  to  perform  the  duty,  began  again  in  a  similar
strain.  Displeased  and  irritated,  Mohammad  exclaimed :
'  Truly,  ye  resemble  the  foolish  women  in  the  story  of
Joseph:^  give  command  forthwith  as  I  desire.'  The  com-
mand was  given,  and  Abu  Bekr  conducted  the  public  prayers
during  the  few  remaining  days  of  the  Prophet's  life.*

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1005  f.  -  Ibid.,  p.  1007.

^  See  Sijra  xii.  The  Commentators  refer  this  expression  to  the
scene  in  which  the  women  of  Egypt  cut  their  hands  in  astonishment  at
the  beauty  of  Joseph.

*  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1008;  At-Tabari,  i.  181 1  f.  Tradition  is  quite
unanimous  as  to  the  above  account.  The  only  point  on  which  I  have
ventured  to  deviate  from  it,  is  the  motive  of  'A'isha.  She  herself  says
that  she  objected  simply  from  the  fear  that  people  would  ever  after
dislike  her  father  for  having  stood  up  in  the  Prophet's  place,  and  would
attribute  any  evil  that might  happen to ill-luck arising out of  such


XXXIII.]  ABU  BEKR  LEADS  PRAYERS  487

Closely  joined  together  as  is  spiritual  authority  in Islam Mohammad
with temporal  command,  the  right  of  presiding  at public f^^'J^j^'f'"!'
prayer was from  the very  first  recognised  as  the  mark  of  to  him  as
chief  secular  authority. There  can  be  little  doubt,  I  think,  J'uiif  ^p^^j/
that Mohammad,  by nominating Abu Bekr to  this  duty,
intended  the  delegation  of  power  to  him  while  laid  aside,  if
not  to  mark  him  also  as  successor  after  death. It  is  related
that  on  one  occasion  Abu  Bekr  happened  not  to  be  present
when the  summons  to  prayer  was  sounded  by  Bilal ; and
that  'Omar  having  received,  as  he  erroneously  believed,  the
command  of  Mohammad  to  officiate  in  his  room,  stood  up  in
the  Mosque,  and  in  his  powerful  voice  commenced  the  Tekbir,
'  Great  is the Lord ! ' preparatory to the daily service.
Mohammad,  overhearing  it  from  his  apartment,  called  aloud
with  energy  : '  No  !  No  !  No  !  The  Lord  and  the  whole  body
of  Believers  forbid  it ! None  but  Abu  Bekr ! Let  no  one  lead
the  prayers  but  only  he  ! '  ^

While  thus  unable  to  leave  the  room  of  'A'isha,  Moham- He  urges
mad  was  too  weak  to  attend to  any  public  business. Yet  despatch  of

Osurnu  s

the  Syrian  expedition  weighed  upon  his  mind  ;  and  he  kept  army
saying  to  those  around  him  :  '  Send  off  quickly  the  army  of
Osama.' He  also  inquired  about  the  embassies  daily  arriving
at  Medina,  and  enjoined  the  same  hospitable  treatment  and
gift  of  similar  largesses  as  he  had  been  wont  to  bestow.

The  sickness  had  now  lasted  nearly  a  fortnight  when,  on Increase  of
the  night  of  Saturday,  it  began to  assume  a  very  serious Saturday
aspect. The  fever  rose  to  such  a  pitch  that  the  hand  could night,  mh

Rabi'  I

hardly  be  kept  upon  him  from  the  burning  heat. His  body


usurpation.  This  I  believe  to  be  an  afterthought.  'A'isha  was  ambitious
enough,  and  no  doubt  rejoiced  greatly  at  this  indication  of  her  father  to
the  chief  command.  But  she  was  also  overcome  at  the  moment  by
concern  for  her  husband,  and  could  not  bear  the  admission  that  he  was
so  dangerously  ill  as  the  nomination  appeared  to  imply.  It  seemed  to
her  to  be  a  foreboding  of  his  end  : — an  inauspicious  forestalling  of  the
future. Hence  she  deprecated  the  idea.

One  set  of  traditions  makes  her  to  propose  that  'Omar  should  conduct
the  prayers  in  her  father's  stead.  This  is  unlikely  ;  but  supposing  it  to
be  true,  her  proposal  may  have  arisen  from  the  same  cause  ; — she  knew
well  that  Mohammad  would  not  pass  over  Abu  Bekr,  and  may  from
false  modesty,  or  it  may  be  real  delicacy,  have  suggested  that  'Omar,
and  not  her  father,  should  be  nominated  to  the  invidious  post.

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1009.


A.H.  .\i.
June  6,
A.D. 632


488  SICKNESS  AND  DEATH  [chap.

was  racked  with  pain ;  restless  and  moaning,  he  tossed
about  upon  his  bed.  Alarmed  at  a  severe  paroxysm,  Um
Selama  screamed  aloud.  Mohammad  rebuked  her  :  '  Quiet ! '
he  said ;  *  no  one  crieth  out  so  but  an  unbeliever.'  During
the  night,  'A'isha  sought  to  comfort  him,  and  suggested  that
he  should  seek  for  consolation  in  the  lessons  he  had  so
often  taught  to  others  when  in  sickness  :  '  O  Prophet ! '  she
said,  '  if  one  of  us  had  moaned  thus,  thou  wouldst  surely  have
found  fault  with  her.'  '  Yes,'  he  replied,  '  but  I  burn  with  the
fever-heat  of  any  two  of  you  together.'  '  Then,'  exclaimed
another,  'thou  shalt  surely  have  a  double  reward.'  'Yea,'  he
answered, — 'for  I  swear  by  Him  in  whose  hands  is  my  life,
that  there  is  not  upon  the  earth  a  Believer,  sore  afflicted  with
calamity  or  disease,  but  the  Lord  thereby  causeth  his  sins  to
fall  off  from  him,  even  as  the  leaves  from  a  tree  in  autumn.'
At  another  time  he  said  :  'Suffering  is  an  expiation  for  sin.
Verily,  if  the  Believer  suffer  but  the  scratch  of  a  thorn,  the
Lord  raiseth  his  rank  thereby,  and  wipeth  away  from  him  a
sin.'  And  again,  '  Believers  are  tried  according  to  their
faith.  If  a  man's  faith  be  strong,  so  are  his  sufferings;  if  he
be  weak,  they  are  proportioned  thereunto.  Yet  in  any  case,
the  suffering  shall  not  be  remitted  until  he  walk  upon  earth
without  the  guilt  of  a  single  transgression  cleaving  to  him.'
Sayings  of  '  Omar,  approaching  the  bed,  placed  his  hand  on  the
Mohammad sufferer's  forehead,  and  suddenly  withdrew  it  from  the  great

on  his  death-  ,  ^ ^ , ,,,  -1,1  r  -.i r

bed  heat: O  Prophet! he  said,  'how  fierce  is  the  fever  upon

thee ! '  '  Yea,  verily,'  replied  Mohammad,  '  but  I  have  been
during  the  night  season  repeating  in  praise  of  the  Lord
seventy  Suras,  and  among  them  the  seven  long  ones.'  'Omar
answered  :  '  Why  not  rest  and  take  thine  ease,  for  hath  not
the  Lord  (and  here  he  quoted  the  Kor'an)  forgiven  t/iee  a//  f/ij/
sins,  tlie  former  and  the  latter?'  '  Nay,'  replied  Mohammad,
'  for  wherefore  should  I  not  yet  be  a  faithful  servant  unto
Him?'  An  attendant,  while  Mohammad  lay  covered  up,
put  his  hand  below  the  sheet  and,  feeling  the  excessive  heat,
made  a  remark  like  that  of  'Omar.  On  which  the  Prophet
said  ; — '  Just  as  this  affliction  prevaileth  now  against  me,
even  so  shall  my  reward  hereafter  be.'  '  And  who  are  they,'
asked  another,  'that  suffer  the  severest  trials?'  'The
prophets  and  the  righteous,'  answered  Mohammad ;  and
then  he  made  mention  of  one  prophet  having  been  destroyed


XXXIII. ]


LAST  WORDS


489


by  lice,  and  of  another  who  was  tried  with  poverty,  so
that  he  had  but  a  rag  to  cover  his  nakedness  withal ;  '  yet
each  of  them  rejoiced  exceedingly  in  his  affliction,  even  as
one  of  you  having  found  great  spoil  would  rejoice  and  be
glad'

All  Sunday  he  lay  in  a  helpless  and  at  times  delirious Osama
state. Osama,  who  had  delayed  his  march  to  see  what  the Sunday,T2t
issue  might  be,  came  in  from  the  Jurf  to  visit  him. Remov- Rabr  i.
ing  the  clothes,  he  stooped  down  and  kissed  the  Prophet's  ^

face,  but  there  was  no  audible  response.  Mohammad  only
raised  his  hands  in  the  attitude  of  blessing,  and  then  placed
them  on  the  young  Commander's  head,  who  then  returned  to
the  camp.^

During  some  part  of  this  day,  Mohammad  complained  of  Mohammad
pain  in  his  side,  and  the  suffering  became  so  great  that  he  ft'g'jv^^g
became  unconscious.  Um  Selama  advised  that  physic  should
be  given  him.  Asma,^  step-sister  of  Meimuna,  prepared  a
draught  after  an  Abyssinian  recipe,  and  they  forced  it  into
his  mouth.  Reviving  from  its  effects  he  perceived  the  un-
pleasant taste,  and  cried  :  '  What  is  this  that  ye  have  done
to  me  ?  Ye  have  even  given  me  physic ! '  They  confessed
that  they  had  done  so,  and  enumerated  the  simples  of  which
Asma  had  compounded  it.^  '  Out  upon  you  ! '  he  exclaimed
angrily  ;  '  this  is  a  remedy  for  the  pleurisy,  which  she  hath
learned  in  the  land  of  Abyssinia ;  an  evil  disease  is  it
which  the  Lord  will  not  let  attack  me.  Now  shall  ye  all  of
you  within  this  chamber  partake  of  the  same.  Let  not  one
remain  without  being  physicked,  even  as  ye  have  physicked
me,  excepting  only  my  uncle,  A1-' Abbas'  So  all  the  women
arose,  and  they  poured  the  physic,  in  presence  of  the  dying
Prophet,  into  each  other's  mouths.*

1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1007.  2  See  ante^  p.  396.

^  Indian  wood  and  a  little  Wars  seed  mixed  with  some  drops  of  olive
oil.

■*  This  scene  is  well  attested.  How  strangely  it  must  have  contrasted
with  the  solemnity  of  the  Prophet's  death-bed!  Meimuna  pleaded  that
she  was  under  a  vow  of  fasting,  and  could  not,  therefore,  allow  anything,
even  medicine,  to  pass  her  lips  ;  but  the  excuse  was  unavailing.
Another  tradition  represents  Mohammad  as  grounding  his  displeasure
at  being  forced  to  take  the  physic,  on  the  fact  that  'he  was  then  fasting.'
He  had,  perhaps,  made  some  vow  to  this  effect  in  reference  to  his
sickness.


49°


SICKNESS  AND  DEATH


[chap.


Mohammad
in  fever
curses
Jews  and
Christians


Mohammad
calls  for
writing
materials


After  this  strange  scene,  the  conversation  turning  upon
Abyssinia,  Um  Selama  and  Um  Hablba,  who  had  both  been
exiles  there,  spoke  of  the  beauty  of  the  cathedral  of  Maria
there,  and  of  the  wonderful  pictures  on  its  walls.  Over-
hearing it,  Mohammad  was  displeased,  and  said;  'These  are
the  people  who,  when  a  saint  among  them  dieth,  build  over
his  tomb  a  place  of  worship,  and  then  adorn  it  with  their
pictures ; — in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  the  worst  part  of  all
creation.'  Restless  and  apparently  delirious,  he  kept  now
drawing  the  bed-clothes  up  over  his  face,  now  casting  them
off  again ; — and  in  the  excitement  and  perhaps  wanderings
of  the  moment,  cried  out ; — '  The  Lord  destroy  the  Jews  and
Christians !  ^  Let  his  anger  be  kindled  against  those  that
turn  the  tombs  of  their  Prophets  into  places  of  worship  !  O
Lord,  let  not  my  tomb  -be  ever  an  object  of  worship  !  Let
there  not  remain  any  faith  but  that  of  Islam  throughout
Arabia!'"^  About  this  time,  recognising  'Omar,  and  some
other  chief  Companions  in  the  room,  he  called  out :  *  Fetch
me  hither  pen  and  ink,  that  I  may  make  for  you  a  writing
which  shall  hinder  you  from  going  astray  for  ever.'  'Omar
said :  '  He  wandereth  in  his  mind.  Is  not  the  Kor'an  suffi-
cient for  us  ? '  But  the  women  wished  that  the  writing
materials  should  be  brought ;  and  a  discussion  ensued.
*  Come,  let  us  ask  him,'  said  one,  '  and  see  whether  he
wandereth.' So they asked him  regarding  the  writing  he


*  Some  authorities  omit  the  Christians  from  this  tradition.

2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1021.  Lit.^  'Let  there  not  remain  two  religions,'
&c.  See  ante^  pp.  381,  454,  460.  The  facts  there  given  prove  that  there
was  no  ^(?w;«a;Z(^  recognised  by  his  people  as  such,  given  by  the  Prophet
for  the  expulsion  either  of  the  Jews  or  Christians  from  Arabia.  Had
there  been,  Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar  would  no  doubt  have  made  it  their
first  obligation  to  fulfil  the  order, — existing  treaties  and  engagements
notwithstanding.  A  command  of  Mohammad  was  never  questioned
during  his  life,  much  less  after  his  death.  The  last  sentence  must
therefore  either  be  without  foundation,  or,  what  is  more  likely,  having
been  uttered  in  delirium,  was  not  felt  to  be  binding.  If  uttered  even  in
delirium,  it  is  a  significant  index  of  the  current  of  Mohammad's  thoughts.

According  to  some  traditions  Mohammad  said  that  he  had  three
injunctions  to  deliver  ;  one  concerned  the  treatment  of  the  embassies
arriving  at  Medina  (see  ajite^  p.  455) ;  the  second  directed  the  ejection  of
Jews  and  Christians  from  Arabia  ;  before  he  could  explain  the  third,  he
became  unconscious.  Other  injunctions  are  mentioned,  as  kindness  to
slaves  ;  paying  tithes  ;  observing  prayer,  iS:c.


xxxiii.]  COURSE  OF  ILLNESS  491

had spoken of; but  he  no  longer  had  any  thought  of  it.

'  Leave me  thus  alone,'  he said, '  for my present state is

better  than  that  which  ye  call  me  to.'^ In  the  course  of  the

day  he  called  'A'isha  to  him,  and  said  :  '  Where  is  that  gold He  disui-

which  I  gave  unto  thee  to  keep?' On  her  replying  that  it ^lutes  dms

was  by  her,  he  desired  that  she  should  spend  it  at  once  in

charity. Then  he  dozed  off  in  a  half-conscious  state,  and  some

time  after  asked  if  she  had  done  as  he  desired  her. On  her

saying  that  she  had  not  yet  done  so,  he  called  for  the  money

(apparently  a  portion  of  the  tithe  income) ;  she  placed  it  in

his  hand,  and  counted  six  golden  pieces. He  directed  that

it  should  be  divided  among  certain  indigent  families; and

then  lying  down  he  said  : '  Now I  am  at  peace. Verily  it

would  not  have  become  me  to  meet  my  Lord,  and  this  gold

still  in  my  hands.' ^

All  Sunday  night  the  illness  lay  heavy  upon  him. He  was Improvement
overheard  praying,  in  apparent  anticipation  of  his  approaching °"  Monday
end  ; — '  O  my  soul ! Why  seekest  thou  refuge  elsewhere  than 13th  of
in  God  alone?'^ The morning  brought  relief The  fever  junJg^"
and  the  pain  abated  ;  and  there  was  some  return  of  strength.

1  Either  speaking  incoherently,  or  meaning  that  he  did  not  feel
equal  to  the  task.  AI-'Abbas  lamented  the  irreparable  loss  of  what
Mohammad  intended  to  dictate  through  their  quarrelling.  But  Moham-
mad was  evidently  wandering  when  he  called  for  the  writing  materials.
According  to  another  tradition,  when  the  women  were  about  to  bring
the  writing  materials,  'Omar  chided  them:  'Quiet!'  he  said.  'Ye
behave  as  women  always  do  ;  when  your  master  falleth  sick  ye  burst
into  tears,  and  the  moment  he  recovereth  but  a  little,  then  ye  begin
embracing  him.'  Mohammad,  jealous  even  on  his  death-bed  of  the  good
name  of  his  wives,  was  roused  by  these  words,  and  said  :  'Verily,  they
are  better  than  ye  are;'  which,  if  true,  shows  that  Mohammad  was
only  partially  delirious.

-  The  story  is  told  in  various  ways,  but  the  version  in  the  text  is
probably  correct.  Some  traditions  unite  the  incident  with  one  of  those
strange  tales  of  'A'isha,  contrasting  the  Prophet's  poverty  with  his
benevolence  ;  she  was  obliged  (she  says)  to  send  to  a  neighbour  to  get
oil  for  her  lamp  when  Mohammad  was  on  his  death-bed.  There  are
many  traditions  to  show  Mohammad's  unwillingness  to  retain  money  in
his  possession.  He  used  to  give  everything  away  in  charity ;  and  did
not  even  like  retaining  money  in  his  house  over  the  night.  But  they  are
probably  exaggerated.

3  In  all  his  previous  illnesses,  Mohammad  had  prayed  for  his  recovery.
This  prayer,  according  to  tradition,  signified  that  now  his  expectation
was  to  depart.


492


SICKNESS  AND  DEATH


[chap.


Mohammad
comes  out
to  morning
prayer  ;


The  dangerous  accession  of  fever  on  the  previous  night
having  become  known,  the  Mosque  was  crowded  in  the
morning  at  the  hour  of  prayer  by  anxious  worshippers.
Abu  Bekr,  as  usual,  led  the  devotions;  as  Imam  he  stood  in
the  place  of  Mohammad  before  the  congregation,  his  back
turned  towards  them.^  He  had  ended  the  first  Raka'  (or
prostration),  and  the  people  had  just  stood  up  for  the  second,
when  the  curtain  of  'A'isha's  door  (to  the  left,  and  a  little
way  behind  Abu  Bekr)  slowly  moved  aside,  and  Mohammad
himself  appeared.  As  he  entered  the  assembly,  he  whispered
in  the  ear  of  Al-Fadl,  son  of  A1-' Abbas,  who  with  a  servant
supported  him  : — '  The  Lord  verily  hath  granted  unto  me
refreshment  ^  in  prayer ; '  and  he  looked  around  him  with  a
gladsome  smile  marked  by  such  as  at  the  moment  caught  a
glimpse  of  his  countenance.^  That  smile,  no  doubt,  was  the
index  of  deep  emotion  in  his  heart.  What  doubts  or  fears
may  have  crossed  the  mind  of  Mohammad  as  he  lay  on  the
bed  of  death,  and  felt  that  the  time  was  drawing  nigh  when
he  must  render  an  account  to  that  God  whose  Messenger  he
professed  to  be, — tradition  affords  us  no  grounds  even  to
conjecture.  The  rival  pretensions  of  Toleiha,  Al-Aswad,
and  Museilima  may  haply  have  suggested  misgivings  such
as  those  which,  at  the  opening  of  his  mission,  had  long  ago
distracted  his  soul.  If  any  doubts  and  questionings  had
arisen  in  his  mind,  the  sight  of  the  great  congregation,  in
attitude  devout  and  earnest,  may  have  caused  him  comfort
and  reassurance.  That  which  brings  forth  good  fruit  (he
may  have  said  to  himself)  must  itself  be  good.  The  mission
which  had  transformed  debased  idolaters  into  spiritual
worshippers  such  as  these,  and  which,  wherever  accepted  and
believed  in,  was  daily  producing  the  same  wonderful  change,
must  surely  be  divine,  and  the  voice  from  within  which
prompted  him  to  undertake  it  must  have  been  the  voice  of
the Almighty revealed through His ministering spirit.

1  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  Mohammadan  prayers,  the  whole
congregation,  the  Imam  (leader)  included,  look  towards  Mecca.  The
people  ranged  in  rows  behind  him  follow  all  his  movements.

"  Lit.,  '  Cooling  of  the  eyes.'

3  That  is  by  the  portion  of  the  congregation  in  a  line  with  the  door,
who  were  standing  sideways  to  it,  and  by  all  behind  them.  Those  in
front  had  their  backs  partly  towards  him  ;  but  some  of  them  also  may
probably  have  turned  round  to  see  the  cause  of  the  general  sensation.


XXXIII.]  ATTENDS  PRAYERS  493

Perhaps  it  was  some  thought  like  this  which,  passing  at  the
moment  through  the  Prophet's  mind,  Hghted  up  his  counten-
ance with  a  smile  of  joy  that  diffused  gladness  over  the
crowded  court.

Having  paused thus  for  a  moment  at  the  door  of  his  And  takes
apartment,  Mohammad,  supported  as  before,  walked  softly  to besid^'kbu
the  front  where  Abu  Bekr  stood. The  people  made  way  for Bekr
him,  opening  their  ranks  as  he  advanced. Abu  Bekr  heard
the  rustle  (for  he  never  turned  at  prayer  or  looked  to  the
right  hand  or  the  left)  and,  guessing  the  cause,  stepped  back-
wards to  vacate  the  leader's  place. But  Mohammad  motioned
him  to  go  on,  and,  taking  his  hand,  moved  forward  towards  the
pulpit. There  on  the  ground  he  sat  by  the  side  of  Abu  Bekr,
who  resumed  the  service,  and  finished  it  in  customary  form.

When the  prayers  were  ended,  Abu  Bekr  entered  into
conversation  with  Mohammad. He  rejoiced  to  find  him  to
all  appearance  convalescent. *  O  Prophet,'  he  said, '  I  perceive  Abu  Bekr
that  by  the  grace  of  God  thou  art  better  to-day,  even  as  we ??^^  ^?  '^'f  *
desire  to  see  thee. Now  this  day  is  the  turn  of  my  wife,  the the  Sunh
daughter  of  Kharija  ; shall  I  go  and  visit  her?'^ Moham-
mad gave  him  permission. So  he  departed  to  her  house  at
the  Sunh,  a  suburb  of  the  upper  city.

Mohammad  then  sat  down  for  a  little  while  in  the  court- Mohammad
yard  of  the  Mosque,  near  the  door  of  'A'isha's  apartment, theteople''
and  addressed  the  people  who,  overjoyed  to  find  him  again around  him
amongst  them,  crowded  round. He  spoke  with  emotion,  and
with  a  voice  still  so  powerful  as  to  reach  beyond  the  outer
doors  of  the  Mosque. '  By  the  Lord  ! '  he  said,  '  as  for  my-
self, verily,  no  man  can  lay  hold  of  me  in  any  matter  j^ I
have  not  made  lawful  anything excepting  that  which  God
hath made  lawful ; nor have I prohibited aught  but  that
which  God  in  his  Book  hath  prohibited.' Osama  coming  up
to  bid  farewell,  Mohammad  said  to  him  : '  Go  forward  with

^  This  was  the  wife  whom  he  had  married  at  Medina,  from  amongst
the  Beni'l-Harith,  see  ante^  p.  169.  The  Muslims  all  followed  Moham-
mad's custom  of  giving  a  day  in  succession  to  each  of  their  wives.

'^  In  this  expression  probably  originated  the  highly  improbable
traditions  that  Mohammad  on  this  occasion  called  upon  all  claimants  to
state  what  demands  they  had  against  him  ;  some  creditors  having
claims  of  very  trifling  amount  came  forward,  it  is  said,  and  he  discharged
their  debts.  The  appeal  somewhat  resembles  that  of  Samuel  (i  Sam.
jcii.  3)-


494


SICKNESS  AND  DEATH


[chap.


Mohammad
retires  ex-
hausted
to  'A'isha's
room


The  hour
of  death
draws  near


Mohammad
dies  reclinin]
on  'A'isha's
bosom


the  army ;  and  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  be  with  thee ! '
Then  turning  to  the  women  who  sat  close  by :  '  O  Fatima,
my  daughter ! '  he  exclaimed,  '  and  thou  Saflya,  my  aunt !
Work  ye  out  that  which  shall  gain  acceptance  for  you  with
the  Lord:  for  I  verily  have  no  power  with  Him  to  save  you
in  anywise.'  Having  said  this,  he  arose  and  was  helped  back
into  the  chamber  of  'A'isha.^

It  was  but  the  flicker  of  an  expiring-  taper.  Exhausted,
he  lay  down  upon  the  pallet  stretched  upon  the  floor ;  and
'A'isha,  seeing  him  to  be  very  weak,  raised  his  head  from  the
pillow,  and,  as  she  sat  by  him  on  the  ground,  laid  it  tenderly
upon  her  bosom.  At  that  moment,  one  entered  with  a  green
toothpick  in  his  hand.^  Seeing  that  his  eye  rested  on  it,
and,  knowing  it  to  be  such  as  he  liked,  'A'isha  asked  whether
he  would  like  to  have  it.  He  signified  assent.  Chewing  it  a
little  to  make  it  soft  and  pliable,  she  placed  it  in  his  hand.
This  pleased  him  ;  he  took  it  up  and  used  it  for  the  moment
vigorously. Then  he  put  it  down  again.^

His  strength  now  rapidly  sank.  He  seemed  to  be  aware
that  death  was  drawing  near.  Calling  for  a  pitcher  of  water,
and  therewith  wetting  his  face,  he  prayed  thus  :  '  O  Lord,  I
beseech  thee  assist  me  in  the  agonies  of  death  !'  Then  three
times  earnestly  ; — '  Gabriel,  come  clo.se  unto  me  ! '

He  now  began  to  blow  upon  himself,  perhaps  in  the  half-
'  consciousness  of  delirium,  ejaculating  the  while  a  petition
which  in  the  sick-room  he  used  to  repeat  over  persons
who  were  very  ill.  When,  from  weakness,  he  ceased,  'A'isha
took  up  the  task  and  continued  to  blow  upon  him  and  recite
the  same  prayer.  Then,  seeing  that  he  was  very  low,  she  took
hold  of  his  right  hand  and  rubbed  it  (as  he  himself  used  to  do
with  the  sick),  repeating  all  the  while  the  earnest  invocation."*

•  [Ibn  Ishak  says  Al-'Abbas  invited  'All  to  come  with  him  to
Mohammad  to  secure  the  chief  rule  for  themselves,  but  'All  refused  on
the  ground  that  to  do  so  would,  if  the  request  were  refused,  ruin  their
prospects  forever. Ibn  Hisham,  p.  ion.

2  In  the  east,  the  fresh  and  tender  wood  of  trees  is  used  for  this  pur-
pose, cut  into  thin  and  narrow  pieces.
2  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  loii.

*  The  prayer  was  :  '  Take  away  evil  and  misfortune^  O  tlioii  Lord  of
mankijid !  Grant  a  cure  for  thou  art  the  best  Physician.  There  is  no
cure  besides  t]ti7ie ;  it  leave th  nought  of  the  disease  behind.^

I have  omitted  mention of Gabriel's incantation over the dying


XXXIII.]  DEATH  495

But  he  could  not  now  bear  even  this,  saying ; — '  Take  thy
hand  from  off  me  ;  it  cannot  help  me  now.'  After  a  little,  in
a  whisper  :  '  Lord,  grant  me  pardon  ;  and  join  me  to  the
companionship  on  high.'  Then  at  intervals :  '  Eternity  in
Paradise  ! '  '  Pardon  ! '  '  The  blessed  companionship  on
high!'  He  stretched  himself  gently.  Then  all  was  still.
His  head  grew  heavy  on  the  breast  of  'A'isha.  The  Pro-
phet of  Arabia  was  no  more.

Softly  removing  his  head  from  her  bosom,  'A'isha  placed 'A'isha

replaces
his  head  on
Prophet;  the  story  of  the  Angel  of  Death  asking  permission  to  exercise  the  pillow
his  vocation  upon  him  ;  the  voices  of  unseen  visitants  wailing,  &c.  But
the  following  tradition  is  illustrative  of  Mohammadan  ideas  on  the  sub-
ject: — 'Three  days  before  the  death  of  Mohammad,  Gabriel  came  down
to  visit  him  :  "O  Ahmed  !"  he  said,  "the  Lord  hath  deputed  me  thus  as
an  honour  and  peculiar  favour  unto  thee,  that  He  may  inquire  concerning
that  which  indeed  He  knoweth  better  than  thou  thyself:  He  asketh.
How  thou  fijjdest  thyself  this  day  ?^^  "  Gabriel  !"  replied  the  Prophet,  *' I
find  myself  in  sore  trouble  and  agony."  Next  day,  Gabriel  again  visited
Mohammad,  and  accosted  him  in  the  same  words  ;  Mohammad  replied
as  before.  On  the  third  day,  Gabriel  descended  with  the  Angel  of
Death  ;  and  there  also  alighted  with  him  another  angel,  Ismail,  who
inhabiteth  the  air,  never  ascending  up  to  heaven,  and  never  before
having  descended  to  the  earth  since  its  creation  :  he  came  now  in  com-
mand of  70,000  angels,  each  in  command  of  70,000  more.  Gabriel,
preceding  these,  addressed  Mohammad  in  the  same  words  as  before,
and  received  the  same  reply.  Then  said  Gabriel:  "This,  O  Moham-
mad !  is  the  Angel  of  Death.  He  asketh  of  thee  permission  to  enter.
He  hath  asked  permission  of  no  man  before,  neither  shall  he  ask  it  of
any  after  thee."  Mohammad  gave  permission  ;  so  the  Angel  of  Death
entered  the  room,  and  stood  before  Mohammad,  and  said  :  "O  Ahmed,
Prophet  of  the  Lord  !  Verily  God  hath  sent  me  unto  thee,  and  hath
commanded  me  to  obey  thee  in  all  that  thou  mayest  direct.  Bid  me
to  take  thy  soul,  and  I  will  take  it ;  bid  me  to  leave  it,  and  I  will  do
accordingly."  To  which,  Mohammad  replied;  "Wilt  thou,  indeed,  do
so,  O  Angel  of  Death  !  "  The  angel  protested  that  his  mission  was  even  so,
to  do  only  that  which  Mohammad  might  command.  On  this,  Gabriel
interposed,  and  said:  "  O  Ahmed  !  verily  the  Lord  is  desirous  of  thy
company."  "  Proceed,  then,"  said  Mohammad,  addressing  the  Angel  of
Death,  "and  do  thy  work,  even  as  thou  art  commanded."  Gabriel  now
bade  adieu  to  Mohammad  :  "Peace  be  on  thee,"  he  said,  "  O  Prophet
of  the  Lord  !  This  is  the  last  time  that  I  shall  tread  the  earth  ;  with
this  world  I  have  now  concern  no  longer."  So  the  Prophet  died  ;  and
there  arose  a  wailing  of  celestial  voices  (the  sound  was  audible,  but  no
form  was  seen)  saying :  "Peace  be  on  you,  ye  inhabztatits  of  this  house,
and  mercy  from  the  Lord  and  his  blessitig  /  Every  soul  shall  taste  death" '
— and  so  on.


496  SICKNESS  AND  DEATH  [chap,  xxxiii.

it on the pillow. Then she rose and joined the other

women as they beat their faces in loud and bitter

lamentation.

It  was  still  It  was  yet  little  after  mid-day. But  a  moment  ago,  as

but  a  little j^  were,  Mohammad  had  entered  the  Mosque  cheerful,  and  to
after  mid-day  '  •  ,

all  appearance  convalescent. He  now  lay  cold  in  death.


CHAPTER  XXXIV


THE  EVENTS  WHICH  FOLLOWED  ON  THE
DEATH  OF  MOHAMMAD

13//;  and  \\th  of  Rab'i\  A.H.  y.\.—June  8  and(),  A.D.  632

The  news  of  the  Prophet's  death,  spreading  rapidly  over
Medina,  soon  reached  Abu  Bekr  in  the  suburb  of  the  Sunh.
Immediately  he  mounted  his  horse,  and  rode  back  to  the
Mosque  in  haste.

Meanwhile,  a  strange  scene  was  being  enacted  there.
Shortly  after  Mohammad  had  breathed  his  last,  'Omar
entered  the  apartment  of  'A'isha,  and,  lifting  up  the  sheet
which  covered  the  body,  gazed  wistfully  at  the  features  of  his
departed  master.^  All  was  so  placid,  so  natural,  so  unlike
death,that  'Omar  could  not  believe  the  mournful  truth.  Starting
up,  he  exclaimed  wildly  :  '  The  Prophet  is  not  dead  ;  he  hath
but  swooned  away.'  Al-Moghira,  Standingby,  vainly  sought  to
convince  him  that  he  was  mistaken.  '  Thou  liest ! '  cried
'Omar,  as,  quitting  the  chamber  of  death,  they  entered  the
courts  of  the  Mosque  ; — '  the  Apostle  of  God  is  not  dead.
Thine  own  seditious  spirit  hath  suggested  this  imagination.
The  Prophet  of  the  Lord  shall  not  die  until  he  have  rooted
out  every  hypocrite  and  unbeliever.'  The  crowd  which,  at
the  rumour  of  the  Prophet's  death,  rapidly  gathered  in  the
Mosque,  attracted  now  by  the  loud  and  passionate  tones  of
'Omar,  flocked  around  him,  and  he  went  on  haranguing  them
in  similar  strain  ; — '  The  hypocrites  would  persuade  you,  O
Believers  !  that  Mohammad  is  dead.  Nay  !  but  he  hath  gone
to  his  Lord,  even  as  Moses,  son  of'Imran,  who  remained  absent
forty  days,  and  then  returned  after  his  followers  had  said
that  he  was  dead.  So,  verily,  by  the  Lord  !  the  Prophet  shall
1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1012  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  i8i6  f.


News  of
Moham-
mad's death
reaches  Abu
Bekr

'Omar
wildly  de-
claims that
Mohammad
had  only
swooned
away


497


2  I


498


AFTER  DEATH  OF  MOHAMMAD


[chap.


Abu  Bekr
visits  scene
of  death  ;


return,  and  of  a  certainty  shall  cut  off  the  hands  and  feet  of
them  that  dare  say  that  he  is  dead.'  'Omar  found  a  willing
audience.  It  was  but  a  little  while  before  that  the  Prophet
had  been  amongst  them,  had  joined  with  them  in  prayer  on
that  very  spot,  and  had  gladdened  their  hearts  by  hope  of
speedy  convalescence.  The  echo  of  his  voice  was  hardly  yet
silent  in  the  courts  of  the  Mosque,  Sudden  alternations  of
hope  and  despair  disturb  equilibrium  of  the  mind,  and  unfit
it  for  exercise  of  calm  and  dispassionate  judgment.  The
events  of  the  day  had  been  pre-eminently  calculated  to
produce  such  effect  upon  the  people,  who,  now  carried  away
by  'Omar's  fervour,  gladly  persuaded  themselves  that  he
might  be  in  the  right.

Just  then  appeared  Abu  Bekr.  Passing  through  the
Mosque,  he  listened  for  a  moment  to  the  frenzied  words  of
'Omar,  and,  without  pausing  further,  walked  onwards  to  the
door  of  'A'isha's  chamber.  Drawing  the  curtain  softly  aside,
he  asked  leave  to  enter.  '  Come,'  they  replied  from  within,
*  for  this  day  no  permission  needeth  to  be  asked.'  Then  he
entered,  and,  raising  the  striped  sheet  which  covered  the  bed,
stooped  down  and  kissed  the  face  of  his  departed  friend,
saying :  '  Sweet  wast  thou  in  life,  and  sweet  thou  art  in
death.'  After  a  moment,  he  took  the  head  between  his
hands,  and,  slightly  lifting  it,  gazed  on  the  well-known  features,
now  fixed  in  death,  and  exclaimed  :  '  Yes,  thou  art  dead  !
Alas,  my  friend,  my  chosen  one !  Dearer  than  father  or
mother  to  me  !  Thou  hast  tasted  the  bitter  pains  of  death ;
and  (referring  to  'Omar's  wild  words  without)  thou  art  too
precious  with  the  Lord,  that  he  should  give  thee  the  bitter
cup  to  drink  a  second  time !  Gently  putting  down  the  head
upon  its  pillow,  he  stooped  again  and  kissed  the  face ;  then
replaced  the  covering  and  withdrew.
Convinces  Leaving  the  room,  Abu  Bekr  went  at  once  to  the  spot

'Omar  and  without,  where  'Omar,  in  the  same  excited  state,  was
that  Moham- haranguing  the  people.  'Silence!'  cried  Abu  Bekr,  as  he
mad  IS  really  drew  near,  '  'Omar  !  sit  thee  down.  Be  quiet ! '  But  'Omar
went  on,  not  heeding  the  remonstrance.  So  Abu  Bekr,
turning  from  him,  began  himself  to  address  the  assembly;  no
sooner  did  they  hear  his  voice  open  with  the  customary
exordium,  than  they  quitted  'Omar  and  gave  attention  to
the  words  of  Abu  Bekr,  who  proceeded  thus :  '  Hath  not  the


xxxiv]


ABU  BEKR  AND  'OMAR


499


Almighty  revealed  this  verse  unto  his  Prophet  saying, —
"  Verily  thou  sJialt  die,  and  they  shall  die"  ?  And  again,  after
the  battle  ofOhod, — ^^  Mohamviad  is  no  more  than  an  Apostle  ;
verily  the  other  Apostles  have  deceased  before  him.  What  thejt  ?
If  he  were  to  die,  or  be  killed,  would  ye  turn  back  upon  your
heels  ? "  Let  him  then  know,  whosoever  worshippeth
Mohammad,  that  Mohammad  indeed  is  dead  :  but  whoso
worshippeth  God,  let  him  know  that  the  Lord  livethand  doth
not  die.*  The  words  of  the  Kor'an  fell  like  a  knell  on  the
ears  of  'Omar  and  all  who  with  him  had  buoyed  themselves
with  the  delusive  hope  of  Mohammad's  return  to  life.  The
quiet  and  reflecting  mind  of  Abu  Rekr  had  no  doubt  of  late
dwelt  upon  these  passages  during  the  Prophet's  illness.  To
the  people  in  general  they  had  not  occurred,  at  least  in
connection  with  the  present  scene.  When  they  heard  them
now  repeated,  '  it  was  as  if  they  had  not  known  till  that
moment  that  such  words  existed  in  the  Kor'an ' ;  and,
the  truth  now  bursting  upon  them,  they  sobbed  aloud.
'Omar  himself  would  relate:  'By  the  Lord!  it  was  so  that,
when  I  heard  Abu  Bekr  reciting  those  verses,  I  was  horror-
struck,  my  limbs  trembled,  I  dropped  down,  and  I  knew  of  a
certainty  that  the  Prophet  indeed  was  dead.'

The  greater  part  of  the  army,  when  the  Prophet  died,  was Army  at  the
still  at  the  Turf,  three  miles  distant  from  Medina. Encouraged ^"'^  breaks

-' '  ^  up  and

by  his  seeming  convalescence  that  morning  in  the  Mosque,  returns  to
they  had  rejoined  their  camp.  Osama,  mindful  of  his  master's
strict  injunction,  had  given  the  order  for  immediate  march,
and  his  foot  was  already  in  the  stirrup,  when  a  swift  messenger
from  his  mother.  Urn  Aiman,  announced  the  Prophet's  death.
The  army,  stunned  by  the  intelligence,  at  once  broke  up,  and
returned  to  Medina.  Osama,  preceded  by  the  standard-
bearer,  went  direct  to  the  Mosque,  and  planted  the  great
banner  there  at  the  door  of 'A'isha's  house.

It  was  now  towards  the  afternoon  when  one  came  running
hastily  towards  the  Mosque  to  say  that  the  chief  men  of
Medina,  with  Sa'd  ibn  'Obada  at  their  head,  had  assembled
in  one  of  the  halls  of  the  city,  and  were  proceeding  to  choose
Sa'd  for  their  leader  :  ^  '  If  ye,  therefore  (addressing  Abu  Bekr
and  others  still  in  the  Mosque),  desire  to  have  the  command,
come  quickly  thither  before  the  matter  shall  have  been
1  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1013  ft. ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1817  ft".,  1837  ft.


Medina


Citizens  of

Medina
assemble


500  AFTER  DEATH  OF  MOHAMMAD  [CIIAP.

settled,  and  opposition  become  dangerous.'  On  hearing  this
report,  Abu  Bekr,  after  arranging  that  the  family  of  the
Prophet  should  be  undisturbed  while  they  washed  the  corpse
and  laid  it  out,  hurried  in  company  with  'Omar  and  Abu
•Obeida,  to  the  hall  where  the  people  had  assembled.  There
was  urgent  necessity  for  their  presence.  The  men  of  Medina,
in  anticipation  of  the  Prophet's  death,  were  brooding  over
their  supersession  by  the  once  dependent  strangers  whom
they  had  received  as  refugees  from  Mecca  :  '  Let  them  have
their  own  chief,*  was  the  general  cry  ;  '  but  as  for  us,  we  shall
have  a  chief  for  ourselves.'  Sa'd,  who  lay  sick  and  covered
over  in  a  corner  of  the  hall,  had  already  been  proposed  for
the  chiefship  of  the  Citizens,  when  suddenly  Abu  Bekr  and
his  party  entered.  'Omar,  still  in  a  state  of  excitement,  was
on  the  point  of  giving  vent  to  his  feelings  in  a  speech  which
he  had  in  his  mind,  when  Abu  Bekr,  afraid  of  his  rashness
and  impetuosity,  held  him  back,  and  himself  addressed  the
people.  'Omar  used  in  after  days  to  say  that  Abu  Bekr
anticipated  all  his  arguments,  and  expressed  them  in  language
the  most  eloquent  and  persuasive.  '  Ye  men  of  Medina ! '  he
said,  '  all  that  ye  speak  of  your  own  excellence  is  true.
There  is  no  people  upon  earth  deserving  all  this  praise  more
than  ye  do.  But  the  Arabs  will  not  recognise  the  chief
command  elsewhere  than  in  our  tribe  of  Koreish.  We  are
the  Ameers;  ye  are  our  VVazeers.''^  'Not  so,'  shouted  the
indignant  Citizens,  '  but  there  shall  be  an  Ameer  from
amongst  us,  and  an  Ameer  from  amongst  you.'  '  That  can
never  be,  said  Abu  Bekr;  and  he  repeated  in  a  firm
commanding  voice  :  '  We  are  the  Ameers ;  you  are  our
Wazeers.  We  are  the  noblest  of  the  Arabs  by  descent ;
and  the  foremost  in  the  glory  of  our  City.  There !  Choose
ye  whom  ye  will  of  these  two  (pointing  to  'Omar  and  Abu
'Obeida)  and  do  allegiance  to  him. '  ^  '  Nay  ! '  cried  'Omar,
Abu  Bekr  in  words  which  rose  high  and  clear  above  the  growing  tumult
sworn  fealty  of  the  assembly  ;  'did  not  the  Prophet  himself  command  that
thou,  O  Abu  Bekr,  shouldst lead the prayers? Thou  art

^  Ameer,  Chief. Wazeer,  or  Vizier,  Deputy.

^  There  was  nothing  in  the  antecedents  of  Abu  'Obeida  to  sustain  a
claim  to  the  Caliphate.  He  was  simply  named  by  Abu  Bekr  as  being  the
only  other  Koreishite  present.  He  subsequently  bore  a  conspicuous  part
in  the  conquest  of  Syria.


XXXIV.]  ABU  BEKR  CALIPH  501

our  Master,  and  to  thee  we  pledge  our  allegiance — thou
whom  the  Prophet  loved  the  best  amongst  us  all ! '  So
saying  he  seized  the  hand  of  Abu  Bekr,  and,  striking  it,
pledged  faith  to  him.  The  words  touched  a  cord  that
vibrated  in  every  Believer's  heart,  and  his  example  had  the
desired  effect.  Opposition  vanished,  and  Abu  Bekr  was
saluted  Caliph  (Successor)  of  the  departed  Prophet.^

Meanwhile 'All,  Osama,  and Al-Fadl, the son of Al- Body  of
'Abbas,  with  one  or  two  of  the  Prophet's  servants,  had  been J^.°'3^nj
busily employed in the room of  'A'isha. There on the laid  out.
spot  on  which  he  breathed  his  last,  they  washed  the  body
and  laid  it  out.^ The  garment  in  which  he  died was  left
upon  him  :  two  sheets  of  fine  white  linen  were  wound  around
it ;  and  over  all  was  cast  a  covering  of  striped  Yemen  stuff.
Thus  the  body remained during  the night,  and until  the
time  of  burial.

On  the  morrow,  when  the  people  had  assembled  in  the Speech  ot
Mosque,  Abu Bekr  and  'Omar  came  forth  to meet  them, ^jw-ance
'Omar  first  addressed  the  great  assemblage :  '  O  ye  people  ! publicly
that  which I  spoke unto  you  yesterday  was  not  the  truth. ^^^  Bekr.
Verily,  I find  that  it  is  not  borne  out  by  the  Book  which Tuesday,_^
the Lord hath revealed, nor by the covenant which we juneg^'
made with  his Apostle. As  for me,  verily I hoped that
the  Apostle  of  the  Lord  would  continue  yet  a  while  amongst

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1013  fif.  •,  At-Tabari,  i.  1819.  Khalifa  (Caliph)
signifies  '  Successor.'

2  As  usual,  when  the  name  of  'All  is  introduced,  tradition  is  over-
spread with  fiction.  A  heavenly  voice  was  heard  ordering  the  attendants
not  to  make  bare  the  Prophet's  body,  for  the  eyes  of  any  one  that  looked
upon  his  nakedness  would  forthwith  be  destroyed.  When  'All  raised  the
limbs,  they  yielded  to  his  touch,  as  if  unseen  hands  were  aiding  him  ;
another,  essaying  to  do  the  same,  found  the  weight  insupportable.  Thus
Al-Facll,  who  had  ventured  on  the  task,  was  well  nigh  dragged  down,
and  called  out  for  help  :  '  Haste  thee,  'All  !  Hold,  for  my  back  is  break-
ing with  the  weight  of  this  limb'  Al-'Abbas  refused  to  enter  the  room
at  the  time,  'because  Mohammad  had  desired  always  to  be  hid  from  him
while  he  bathed.'

Besides  the  three  named  in  the  text  (who,  as  the  nearest  and  most
intimate  friends,  naturally  superintended  the  washing  of  the  body),  one
of  the  Medina  Citizens,  Aus  ibn  al-Khaula,  was  admitted  by  'All  into  the
room.  Another  son  of  Al-'Abbas  is  also  named  by  some  authorities  as
having  been  present  The  servants  employed  on  the  occasion  were
Shakran  and  Salih. Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1018  f.


502


AFTER  DEATH  OF  MOHAMMAD


[chap.


Speech  of
Abu  Bekr
on  his  in-
auguration


Discontent
of  'All  and
Fatima


US,  and  speak  in  our  ears  a  word  such  as  might  seem  good
unto  him  and  be  a  perpetual  guide  unto  us.  But  the  Lord
hath  chosen  for  his  Apostle  the  portion  which  is  with
Himself,  in  preference  to  that  which  is  with  you.  And
truly  the  Word,  that  same  word  which  directed  your
Prophet,  is  with  us  still.  Take  it,  therefore,  for  your  guide
and  ye  shall  never  go  astray.  And  now,  verily,  hath  the
Lord  placed  your  affairs  in  the  hands  of  him  that  is  the
best  amongst  us;  The  Companion  of  His  Prophet,  the  sole
companion.  The  second  of  tJie  two  when  they  were  m  the  cave
alone.  Arise  !  Swear  fealty  to  him  ! '  Forthwith  the  people
crowded  round,  and  one  by  one  they  swore  allegiance  upon
the  hand  of  Abu  Bekr.

The  Ceremony  ended,  Abu  Bekr  arose  and  said :  '  Ye
people !  now,  verily,  I  have  become  the  Chief  over  you,
although  I  am  not  the  best  amongst  you.  If  I  do  well,
support  me ;  if  I  err,  then  set  me  right.  In  truth  and
sincerity  is  faithfulness,  and  in  falsehood  perfidy.  The
weak  and  oppressed  among  you  in  my  sight  shall  be  strong,
until  I  restore  his  right  unto  him,  if  the  Lord  will ;  and
the  strong  oppressor  shall  be  weak,  until  I  wrest  from  him
that  which  he  hath  taken.  Now  hearken  to  me ;  when  a
people  leaveth  off  to  fight  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  verily
He  casteth  them  away  in  disgrace.  Know  also  that
wickedness  never  aboundeth  in  any  nation,  but  the  Lord
visiteth  that  nation  with  calamity.  Wherefore  obey  me,
even  as  I  shall  obey  the  Lord  and  His  Apostle.  Whenso-
ever I  disobey  them,  obedience  is  no  longer  binding  on
you. Arise  to  prayers  ! and  the  Lord  have  mercy  on  you  ! '  ^

The  homage  done  to  Abu  Bekr  was  almost  universal.
Sa'd  ibn  'Obada,  deeply  chagrined  at  being  superseded,  is
said  by  some  to  have  remained  aloof^  It  is  probable  that
'All,  while  the  people  were  swearing  allegiance,  remained
in  his  own  house  or  in  the  chamber  of  mourning.  The
doctrine  of  his  party  is  that  he  expected  the  Caliphate
for  himself;  but  there  was  nothing  whatever  in  his  previous
position,  or in the language and actions of  the Prophet

^  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1017  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1829,  1835.

"  It  is  even  said  that  he  retired  in  disgust  to  Syria,  where  he  died.
At-Tabari,  on  the  other  hand,  relates  that  he  submitted  to  Abu  Bekr,  and
acknowledged  his  authority. I.  1842  ff.


XXXIV.]  *AL!  and  FATIMA  503

towards him,  which could have led to such anticipation.
As  the  husband of  Mohammad's  only  surviving daughter,
indeed,  he  felt  aggrieved  when  Abu  Bekr  refused  the  claim
of  his  wife  to  inherit her father's share in the lands of
Fadak  and of  Kheibar. But Fatima failed in producing
any evidence of her father's intention to bestow this
property  on  her,  and  the  Caliph  justly  held  that  it  should
be  reserved  for  those  purposes  of  State  to  which  Mohammad
had  in  his  lifetime  devoted  it. Fatima  took  the  denial  so Fatima  re-
much  to  heart  that  she  held  no  intercourse  with  Abu  Bekr "oc^gty  of
during  the  short  remainder  of  her  life. Whether  'All  swore Abu  Bekr
allegiance  at  the  first  to  his  new  chief,  or  refused  to  do  so,
it  was  certainly  not  till  Fatima's  death,  six  months  after  that
of  her father,  that  he  recognised with any  cordiality  the
title  of  Abu  Bekr  to  the  Caliphate.^

^  Some  traditions  say  that  he  swore  allegiance  at  the  first,  with  the
rest  ;  others,  that  he  refused  to  do  so  till  after  Fatima's  death.

The  traditions  of  Fatima's  deep  grief  at  the  loss  of  her  father,  and  of
her  joy  at  his  prophecy  that  she  would  soon  rejoin  him  in  heaven,  &c.,
hardly  accord  with  the  persistent  manner  in  which  she  urged  her  claim
to  the  property.  '  On  the  day  after  her  father's  death,'  we  learn  from  Al-
Wakidi,  '  Fatima  repaired  with  'All  to  Abu  Bekr,  and  said  :  "  Give  me
the  inheritance  of  my  father  the  Prophet."  Abu  Bekr  inquired  whether
she  meant  his  household  goods  or  his  landed  estates.  '''' Fadak  and
K/icibar"  she  replied  "and  the  tithe  lands  at  Medina, — my  inheritance
therein,  even  as  thy  daughters  will  inherit  of  thee  when  thou  diest."
Abu  Bekr  replied  :  "  Verily,  thy  father  was  better  than  I  am,  and  thou
art  better  than  my  daughters  are.  But  the  Prophet  hath  said,  No  o?ie
shall  be  my  heir;  that  which  I  leave  shall  be  for  alms.  Now,  therefore,
the  family  of  Mohammad  shall  not  eat  of  that  property  ;  for,  by  the  Lord,
I  will  not  alter  a  tittle  of  that  which  the  Prophet  ordained  ;  all  shall
remain  as  it  was  in  his  lifetime.  But,"  continued  he,  "if  thou  art  certain
that  thy  father  gave  thee  this  property,  I  will  accept  thy  word,  and
fulfil  thy  father's  direction."  She  replied  that  she  had  no  evidence
excepting  that  of  the  maid-servant  Um  Aiman,  who  had  told  her  that  her
father  had  given  her  Fadak.  Abu  Bekr,  therefore,  adhered  to  his
decision.' [At-Tabari  couples  Al-'Abbas  with  Fatima — i.  1825.]


CHAPTER XXXV

THE BURIAL

Grave  pre- WHEN  Abu  Bekr  had  ended  his  address,  preparations  were

vi'fshVs made for the burial. The people differed regarding the

house.  place most fitting for the grave. Some urged that the

'^^h^Rabi'  I  body  should  be  buried  in  the  Mosque  close  by  the  pulpit,

June  9  and  some,  beneath  the  spot  where  as  their  Imam  he  had  so

long  led  the  daily  prayers,  while  others  wished  to  inter  him

beside his followers in the graveyard without the city.

Abu Bekr,  with  whom as Caliph the matter  rested now,

approved none of  these proposals : for,  said  he,  *  I have

heard it from the lips of Mohammad himself, that in

whatsoever  spot a  prophet  dieth,  there  also  should  he  be

buried.' He  therefore  gave  command  that  the  grave  should

be  dug  where  the  body  was  still  lying within the house

of'A'isha.'i

Grave  dug  Another  question arose as to the form in which the

in  vaulted tomb should be prepared. Tv/o fashions prevailed in

Arabia  :  in  one  kind,  the  bottom  or  pavement  of  the  grave

was flat ; in the other, it was partly excavated for the

reception of  the  body,  a  ledge  being  left on one side  of

the vault or cavity. The former was the plan followed

at Mecca, the latter at Medina ; and for  each there was

a  separate  gravedigger. Both were  now summoned. The

man of Medina first appearing, dug the grave in the

vaulted form ; and so this fashion  is followed by all

Mohammadans  to  the  present  day.

Body  visited The  body  remained  upon the  bier  for  four-and-twenty

by  people hours,  namely,  from  the  afternoon  of  Monday  to  the  same

Abu  Bekr hour  on  the  following  day. On  Tuesday  it  was  visited  by

all  the  inhabitants  of  the  city. They  entered  in  companies

'  Ibn  Hisham,  p.  1019  ;  At-Tabari,  i.  1830  ff.
504


and  'Omar


CHAP.  XXXV.]  BODY  VIEWED  BY  PEOPLE  505

by  the  door  which  opened  into  the  Mosque;  and,  after
gazing  once  more  on  the  countenance  of  their  Prophet
and  praying  over  his  remains,  retired  by  the  opposite
entrance.  The  room  was  crowded  to  the  utmost  at  the
time  when  Abu  Bekr  and  'Omar  entered  together.  They
are  said  to  have  prayed  as  follows:  'Peace  be  upon  thee,
O  Prophet  of  God ;  and  mercy  from  the  Lord  and  his
blessing !  We  bear  testimony  that  the  Prophet  of  God
hath  delivered  the  message  revealed  to  him  ;  hath  fought
in  the  ways  of  the  Lord  until  that  God  brought  forth  his
religion  unto  victory ;  hath  fulfilled  his  words,  commanding
that  he  alone  in  his  Unity  is  to  be  worshipped  ;  hath  drawn
us  to  himself,  and  been  kind  and  tender-hearted  to  Believers  ;
hath  sought  no  recompense  for  delivering  to  us  the  Faith,
neither  hath  he  sold  it  for  a  price  at  any  time ! '  And  all
the  people  said,  Avien !  Amen!  The  women  followed  in
companies,  when  the  men  had  departed  ;  and  then  the
children  and  even  the  slaves  crowded  round  the  bier  for
a  last  look  at  their  Prophet's  face.

In  the  evening  the  final  rites  were  paid  to  the  remains.  Burial
A  red  mantle,  worn  by  him,  was  first  spread  as  a  soft  cover-
ing at  the  bottom  of  the  grave ;  then  the  body  was  lowered
into  its  last  resting-place  by  the  same  loving  hands  that  had
washed  and  laid  it  out.  The  vault  was  built  over  with
unbaked  bricks,  and  the  grave  filled  up.^

'  There  is  wonderful  rivalry,  at  least  among  the  traditionists,  as  to
which  person  was  the  last  to  quit  the  interior  of  the  tomb.  Al-Moghlra
asserts  that,  having  dropped  his  ring  into  the  grave,  he  was  allowed  to  go
down  and  pick  it  up,  and  thus  was  the  last.  Others,  hold  that  'All  sent
down  his  son  Al-Hasan  to  fetch  the  ring.  Others,  that  'All  denied  the
story  of  the  ring  altogether.  Some  allege  that  one  or  other  of  the  sons  of
Al-'Abbas  was  'the  first  to  enter,  and  the  last  to  leave,  the  grave.'  These
variations  form  a  good  example  of  the  rivalry  of  the  'Alid  and  'Abbasid
traditions.

I  must  not  omit  a  tradition  which  seems  to  me  to  illustrate  the
naturalness  of  'Omar's  scepticism  regarding  the  Prophet's  death.  Um
Selama  says  :  '  I  did  not  believe  that  Mohammad  was  really  dead,  till  I
heard  the  sound  of  the  pickaxes  at  the  digging  of  the  grave,  from  the
next  room.'  'A'isha  also  says  that  the  sound  of  the  pickaxes  was  the  first
intimation  she  had  of  the  approaching  interment.  She  had  apparently
retired,  with  the  other  wives,  to  an  adjoining  apartment.  [Ibn  Hisham,
p.  1020,  says  they  did  not  know  about  the  burial  of  Mohammad  until  they
heard  the  mattocks  in  the  middle  of  the  night.]


5o6


THE  BURIAL


[chap.  XXXV.


'A'isha
continued
to  occupy
apartment
next  the
grave


'A'isha  continued  as  before  to  live  in  her  house  thus
honoured  as  the  Prophet's  cemetery.  She  occupied  a  room
adjoining  that  which  contained  the  grave,  but  partitioned  off
from  it.  When  her  father  died,  he  was  buried  close  by  the
Prophet  in  the  same  apartment,  and  in  due  time  'Omar  also.
It  is  related  of  'A'isha  that  she  used  to  visit  this  room
unveiled  till  the  burial  of  'Omar,  when  (as  if  a  stranger  had
been  introduced)  she  never  entered  unless  veiled  and  fully
dressed.^


1  'A'isha  tells  us,  she  once  dreamt  that  three  moons  fell  from  the
heavens  into  her  bosom,  which  she  hoped  portended  the  birth  of  an  heir.
After  her  husband's  death,  Abu  Bekr  told  her  that  the  grave  of
Mohammad  in  her  house  was  the  first  and  best  of  the  moons  ;  the  other
two  were  the  graves  of  Abu  Bekr  himself  and  of  'Omar.  She  survived
the  Prophet  forty-seven  years.

Al-Wakidi  says  there  was  no  wall  at  first  round  Mohammad's  house.
'Omar  surrounded  it  with  a  low  wall,  which  'Abdallah  ibn  az-Zubeir
increased.


CHAPTER XXXVI

CAMPAIGN OF OSAMA ON THE SYRIAN BORDER  ; AND
CONCLUSION

The  first  concern  of  Abu  Bekr,  on  assuming  the  Caliphate, Campaign

was  to  despatch  the  Syrian  army,  and  thus  fulfil  the  dying ^^j^^x™^'

wish of Mohammad. But the horizon was lowering all June,  July,

around  ;  and  many  urged  that  the  Muslim  force  should  not ^^' ^^

be  sent  just  yet  upon  this  distant  expedition. Even  'Omar

joined  in  the  cry  :  '  Scatter  not  the  Believers ;  rather  keep

our  army  here  :  we  may  have  need  of  it  yet  to  defend  the

city.' 'Never!'  replied Abu Bekr; 'the  command of the

Prophet  shall  be  carried  out,  even  if  I  be  left  here  in  the  city

all  alone,  prey  to  the  wolves  and  beasts  of  the  desert' Then

they besought  that  a more experienced soldier might be

appointed  to  the  chief  command. On  this,  the  Caliph  arose

in  wrath. '  Out  upon  thee  ! '  he  cried,  as  he  seized  'Omar  by

the  beard  ;  '  hath  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord  named  Osama  to

the  leadership,  and  dost  thou  counsel  me  to  take  it from

him  ! ' He  would  admit  of  no  excuse  and  no  delay  ;  and  so

the  force  was  soon  marshalled  again  at  the  Jurf. Abu  Bekr

repaired  to  the  camp,  and,  treating  Osama  with  the  profound

respect due to a commander appointed by Mohammad

himself,  begged  permission  that  'Omar  might  be  left  behind

at  Medina  as  his  counsellor. The  request  was  granted. He

then  bade  Osama  farewell,  and  exhorted  him  to  go  forward

in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  fulfil  the  commission  received

at  the  Prophet's  hands. The  army  marched  ;  and  the  Caliph,

with  'Omar  alone,  returned  to  Medina.^

Within  twenty  days  of  his  departure  from  the  Jurf,  Osama His  trium-
had  overrun  the  province  of  the  Belka. In  fire  and  blood,  he f'^^l'^,^"'^"

^  •  _  ^°  Medina

avenged  his  father's  death  and  the  disastrous  field  of  Muta.

1  Al-rabari,  i.  1848  ff.
607


5oS  SYRIAN  CAMPAIGN  [chap.

'  They  ravaged  the  land,'  says  the  historian,  '  with  the  well-
known  cry  of  Yd  inansur  aniit  ("  Strike,  ye  conquerors ! "),
they  slew  all  who  ventured  to  oppose  them  in  the  field,  and
carried  off  captive  the  remainder.  They  burned  the  villages,
the  fields  of  standing  corn,  and  the  groves  of  palm-trees  ;  and
there  went  up  behind  them,  as  it  were,  a  whirlwind  of  fire
and  smoke.' ^  Having  thus  fulfilled  the  Prophet's  last  com-
mand, they  retraced  their  steps.  It  was  a  triumphal  pro-
cession as  they  approached  Medina ;  Osama  rode  upon  his
father's  horse,  and  the  banner,  bound  so  lately  by
Mohammad's  own  hand,  floated  before  him.  Abu  Bekr  and
the  Citizens  went  forth  to  meet  him,  and  received  the  army
with  acclamations  of  joy.  Attended  by  the  Caliph,  and  the
chief  Companions,  Osama  proceeded  to  the  Mosque,  and
offered  up  prayer  with  thanksgiving  for  the  success  which
had  so  richly  crowned  his  arms.^


The  rapid  With  the  return  of  Osama's  army  to  Medina  a  new  era

Mu^slirrT  opens  upon  us.  The  Prophet  had  hardly  departed  this  life
conquest  when  Arabia  was  convulsed  by  the  violent  endeavour  of  its
tribes  to  shake  off  the  trammels  of  Islam,  and  regain  their
previous  freedom.  The  hordes  of  the  desert  rose  up  in
rebellion,  and  during  the  first  year  of  his  Caliphate  Abu
Bekr  had  to  struggle  for  the  very  existence  of  the  faith.
Step  by  step  the  wild  Bedawin  were  subdued  and  forced  to
tender  their  submission.  By  a  master-stroke  of  policy,  they
were  induced  again  to  take  up  their  arms,  and,  aroused  by
the  prospect  of  boundless  spoil,  to  wield  them  on  the  side  of
Islam.  Like  bloodhounds  eager  for  the  chase,  they  were  let
forth  upon  mankind — the  whole  world  their  prey.  They
gloried  in  the  belief  that  they  were  the  hosts  of  God,  destined

1  Al-Wakidi  represents  Osama  as  killing  in  battle  the  very  man  that
slew  his  father.

2  Ibn  Sa'd,  p.  137.  The  tidings  of  this  bloody  expedition  alarmed
Heraclius,  and  he  sent  a  strong  force  into  the  Belka.  The  attention
Abu  Bekr  had  first  to  be  directed  nearer  home.  Reinforced  by  the  army
of  Osama,  he  had  to  quell  the  fierce  spirit  of  insurrection  rising  all  around.
But  a  year  had  not  elapsed,  when  he  was  again  in  a  position  to  take  the
field  in  Syria,  and  to  enter  on  the  career  of  conquest  which  quickly
wrested  from  the  Empire  that  fair  province.


XXXVI.]  CONCLUSION  509

for  the  conversion  of  His  elect  and  for  the  destruction  of  His
enemies.  The  cry  of  religion  thus  disguised  or  gilded  every
lower  motive.  The  vast  plunder  of  Syria  and  Al-'Irak  was
accepted  as  but  the  earnest  of  a  greater  destiny  yet  in  store.
Once  maddened  by  the  taste  of  blood,  the  lust  of  spoil,  and
capture  without  stint  of  female  slaves,  into  a  wild  and  irre-
sistible fanaticism,  the  armies  of  Arabia  swept  their  enemies
everywhere  before  them.  Checked  towards  the  north  by  the
strongholds  of  Asia  Minor  and  the  Bosphorus,  the  surging
wave  spread  to  the  east  and  to  the  west  with  incredible
rapidity,  till  in  a  few  short  years  it  had  engulfed  in  common
ruin  the  earliest  seats  of  Christianity  and  the  faith  of
Zoroaster.

But  these  are  matters  beyond  the  subject  of  this  volume. Lives  of
I  will  merely  add  that  the  simplicity  and  earnestness  of  Abu Caliphs  an
Bekr,  and  of  'Omar  also,  the  first  two  Caliphs,  are  strong argument
evidence  of  their  belief  in  the  sincerity  of  Mohammad;  and mad's  '
the  belief  of these  men  must  carry undeniable weight  in sincerity
the formation  of  our  own  estimate  of  his character,  since
the  opportunities they  enjoyed for  testing  the  grounds  of
their  conviction  were  both  close  and  long-continued. It  is
enough  that  I  allude  to  this  consideration,  as  strengthening
generally  the  view  of  Mohammad's  character  which  through-
out I  have  sought  to  support.


CHAPTER XXXVII


THE PERSON AND CHARACTER OF MOHAMMAD


Geneml
review  of
Moham-
mad's
character


Personal
appearance


His  o-ait


It  may  be  expected  that,  before  bringing  this  work  to  a
close,  I  should  gather  into  one  review  the  chief  traits  in  the
character  of  Mohammad,  which  at  different  stages  of  his  life,
and  from  various  points  of  view,  have  in  the  course  of  the
history  been  presented  to  the  reader.  This  I  will  now  briefly
attempt.^

The  person  of  Mohammad,  as  he  appeared  in  the  prime
of  life,  has  been  portrayed  in  an  early  chapter ;  and  though
advancing  age  may  have  somewhat  relaxed  the  outlines  of
his  countenance  and  affected  the  vigour  of  his  carriage,  yet
the  general  aspect  remained  unaltered  to  the  end.  His  form,
though  little  above  mean  height,  was  stately  and  command-
ing. The  depth  of  feeling  in  his  dark  black  eye,  and  the
winning  expression  of  a  face  otherwise  attractive,  gained  the
confidence  and  love  of  strangers,  even  at  first  sight.  His
features  often  unbended  into  a  smile  full  of  grace  and  con-
descension. '  He  was,'  says  an  admiring  follower,  'the  hand-
somest and  bravest,  the  brightest-faced  and  most  generous
of  men.  It  was  as  though  the  sunlight  beamed  in  his
countenance.'  Yet  when  anger  kindled  in  his  piercing
glance,  the  object  of  his  displeasure  might  well  quail  before
it.  His  stern  frown  was  the  augury  of  death  to  many  a
trembling  captive.  In  later  years,  the  erect  figure  began  to
stoop ;  but  the  step  was  still  firm  and  quick.  His  gait  has
been  likened  to  that  of  one  descending  rapidly  a  hill.  When
he  made  haste,  it  was  with  difficulty  that  one  kept  pace  with

*  Most  of  the  illustrations  here  given  are  taken  from  the  section  of
Al-Wakidi  on  the  '  appearance  and  habits  of  the  Prophet.'  In  the  Supple-
ment also  will  be  found  a  selection  of  traditions  on  the  subject  taken
from  the  same  section

510


CHAP.  XXXVII.]  PERSONAL  APPEARANCE  511

him.  He  never  turned,  even  if  his  mantle  caught  in  a  thorny
bush,  so  that  his  attendants  talked  and  laughed  freely  behind
him  secure  of  being  unobserved.

Thorough  and  complete  in  all  his  actions,  he  took  in  hand  His  habits
no  work  without  bringing  it  to  a  close.  The  same  habit  per-  ^  o'0"g
vaded  his  manner  in  social  intercourse.  If  he  turned  in
conversation  towards  a  friend,  he  turned  not  partially,  but
with  his  full  face  and  his  whole  body.  '  In  shaking  hands,
he  was  not  the  first  to  withdraw  his  own ;  nor  was  he  the
first  to  break  off  in  converse  with  a  stranger,  nor  to  turn
away  his  ear.'

A  patriarchal  simplicity  pervaded  his  life.  His  custom  Simplicity
was  to  do  everything  for  himself.  If  he  gave  an  alms  he
would  place  it  with  his  own  hand  in  that  of  the  petitioner.
He  aided  his  wives  in  their  household  duties,  mended  his
clothes,  tied  up  the  goats,  and  even  cobbled  his  sandals.
The  ordinary  dress  was  of  plain  white  cotton  stuff,  made  like
his  neighbours'  ;  but  on  high  and  festive  occasions  he  wore
garments  of  fine  linen,  striped  or  dyed  in  red.  He  never
reclined  at  meals.  He  ate  with  his  fingers  ;  and,  when  he  had
finished,  he  would  lick  them  before  he  wiped  his  hands.  The
indulgences  to  which  he  was  most  addicted  were  '  Women,
scents,  and  food.'  In  the  first  two  of  these,  'A'isha  tells  us,
he  had  his  heart's  desire ;  and  when  she  adds  that  he  was  .
straitened  in  the  third,  we  can  only  attribute  the  saying  to
the  vivid  contrast  between  the  frugal  habits  at  the  birth  of
Islam,  and  the  luxurious  living  which  rapidly  followed  in  the
wake  of  conquest  and  prosperity.  Mohammad,  with  his
wives,  lived,  as  we  have  seen,  in  a  row  of  low  and  homely
cottages  built  of  unbaked  bricks,  the  apartments  separated  by
walls  of  palm-branches  rudely  daubed  with  mud,  while
curtains  of  leather,  or  of  black  haircloth,  supplied  the  place
of  doors  and  windows.  He  was  to  all  easy  of  access — '  even
as  the  river's  bank  to  him  that  draweth  water  from  it,' — yet
he  maintained  the  state  and  dignity  of  real  power.  No
approach  was  suffered  to  familiarity  of  action  or  of  speech.
The  Prophet  must  be  addressed  in  subdued  accents  and  in  a
reverential  style.  His  word  was  absolute  ;  his  bidding  law.
Embassies  and  deputations  were  received  with  the  utmost
courtesy  and  consideration.  In  the  issue  of  rescripts  bearing
on their representations, or in other matters of State,


512  PERSON  AND  CHARACTER  [chap.

Mohammad  displayed  all  the  qualifications  of  an  able  and
experienced  ruler,  as  the  reader  will  have  observed  from  the
numerous  examples  given.  And  what  renders  this  the  more
strange  is  that  he  was  never  known  himself  to  write ;  and,
indeed,  rather  rejoiced  (as  his  followers  still  do)  in  the  title
o{  An-Ncbi  al-Uinmi^  or  the  Illiterate  Prophet.^
Urbanity  A  remarkable  feature  was  the  urbanity  and  consideration

of'di^rs^^^^^  with  which  Mohammad  treated  even  the  most  insignificant
tion  of  his followers. Modesty and kindliness, patience, self-

denial,  and  generosity,  pervaded  his  conduct,  and  riveted  the
affections  of  all  around  him.  He  disliked  to  say  No.  If
unable  to  answer  a  petitioner  in  the  affirmative,  he  preferred
silence.  '  He  was  more  bashful,'  says  'A'isha,  'than  a  veiled
virgin ;  and  if  anything  displeased  him,  it  was  rather  from
his  face,  than  by  his  words,  that  we  discovered  it ;  he  never
smote  any  one  but  in  the  service  of  the  Lord,  not  even  a
woman  or  a  servant'  He  was  not  known  ever  to  refuse  an
invitation  to  the  house  even  of  the  meanest,  nor  to  decline  a
proffered  present  however  small.  When  seated  by  a  friend,
'  he  did  not  haughtily  advance  his  knees  towards  him.'  He
possessed  the  rare  faculty  of  making  each  individual  in  a
company  think  that  he  was  the  favoured  guest.  If  he  met
any  one  rejoicing  at  success  he  would  seize  him  eagerly  and
cordially  by  the  hand.  With  the  bereaved  and  afflicted  he
sympathised  tenderly.  Gentle  and  unbending  towards  little
children,  he  would  not  disdain  to  accost  a  group  of  them  at
play,  with  the  salutation  of  peace.  He  shared  his  food,  even
in  times  of  scarcity,  with  others  ;  and  was  sedulously  solici-
tous for  the  personal  comfort  of  every  one  about  him.  A
kindly  and  benevolent  disposition  pervades  all  these  illustra-
tions of  his  character.
Fritn'ship  Mohammad  was also a  faithful friend. He loved Abu

Bekr  with  the  close  affection  of  a  brother ;  'All,  with  the  fond
partiality  of  a  father.  Zeid,  the  Christian  slave  of  Khadija,
was  so  strongly  attached  by  the  kindness  of  the  Prophet,
that  he  preferred  to  remain  at  Mecca  rather  than  return
home  with  his  own  father :  '  I  will  not  leave  thee,'  he  said,
cHnging  to  his  patron,  '  for  thou  hast  been  a  father  and  a
mother  to  me.' The  friendship  of  Mohammad  survived  the

^  The  fact  is  noticed  in  the  Kor'an,  Sura  vii. 157-8,  and  is  largely
used  to  the  present  day  as  an  argument  for  its  being  inspired.


XXXVII.]


SIMPLICITY  AND  CRUELTY


513


death  of  Zeid,  and  his  son  Osama  was  treated  by  him  with
distinguished  favour  for  the  father's  sake.  'Othman  and
'Omar  were  also  the  objects  of  a  special  attachment ;  and  the
enthusiasm  with  which,  at  Al-Hodeibiya,  the  Prophet  entered
into  '  the  Pledge  of  the  Tree '  and  swore  that  he  would
defend  his  beleaguered  son-in-law  even  to  the  death,  was  a
signal  proof  of  faithful  friendship.  Numerous  other  instances
of  Mohammad's  ardent  and  unwavering  regard  might  be
adduced.  And  his  affections  were  in  no  instance  misplaced  ;
they  were  ever  reciprocated  by  a  warm  and  self-sacrificing
love.

In the exercise of a power absolutely dictatorial, Moderation
Mohammad  was  just  and  temperate. Nor  was  he  wanting  in ^"^.^.^g-

:  .  1 1  •  -1  nanimity

moderation  towards  his  enemies,  when  once  they  had  cheer-
fully submitted  to  his  claims.  The  long  and  obstinate
struggle  against  his  pretensions  maintained  by  the  inhabit-
ants of  Mecca  might  have  induced  its  conqueror  to  mark  his
indignation  in  indelible  traces  of  fire  and  blood.  But
Mohammad,  excepting  a  few  criminals,  granted  a  universal
pardon  ;  and,  nobly  casting  into  oblivion  the  memory  of  the
past,  with  all  its  mockery,  its  affronts  and  persecution,  he
treated  even  the  foremost  of  his  opponents  with  a  gracious
and  even  friendly  consideration.  Not  less  marked  was  the
forbearance  shown  to  'Abdallah  and  the  Disaffected  citizens
of  Medina,  who  for  so  many  years  persistently  thwarted  his
designs  and  resisted  his  authority,  nor  the  clemency  with
which  he  received  the  submissive  advances  of  tribes  that
before  had  been  the  most  hostile,  even  in  the  hour  of  victory.

But  the  darker  shades,  as  well  as  the  brighter,  must  be Cruelty

depicted  by  the  faithful  historian. Magnanimity  or  modera- ^o^arls

enemies

tion  are  nowhere  discernible  in  the  conduct  of  Mohammad
towards  such  of  his  enemies  as  failed  to  tender  a  timely
allegiance.  On  the  field  of  Bedr  he  exulted  over  the  dead,
with  undisguised  and  ruthless  satisfaction ;  and  several
prisoners, — accused  of  no  crime  but  that  of  scepticism  or
political  opposition, — were  deliberately  executed  at  his  com-
mand. The  Prince  of  Kheibar,  after  being  subjected  to  cruel
torture  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  the  treasures  of  his
tribe,  was,  with  his  cousin,  put  to  death  for  having  concealed
them,  and  his  wife  led  captive  to  the  conqueror's  tent.
Sentence  of  exile  was  enforced  by  Mohammad  with  rigorous

2  K


514


PERSON  AND  CHARACTER


[chap.


Craft  and
artifice


Domestic
life  ; poly-
gamy


severity  on  two  whole  Jewish  tribes  residing  at  Medina ;  and
of  a  third,  h'kewise  his  neighbours,  the  women  and  children
were  sold  into  captivity,  while  the  men,  amounting  to  six  or
eight  hundred,  were  butchered  in  cold  blood  before  his  eyes.

In  his  youth  Mohammad  earned  amongst  his  fellows  the
honourable  title  of  '  the  Faithful.'  But  in  later  years,  however
much  sincerity  and  good  faith  may  have  guided  his  conduct
in  respect  of  friends,  craft  and  deception  were  not  wanting
towards  his  foes.  The  conduct  of  his  followers  at  Nakhla,
where  the  first  blood  in  the  internecine  warfare  with  Koreish
was  shed,  although  at  the  outset  disavowed  by  Mohammad
for  its  treacherous  breach  of  the  sacred  usages  of  Arabia,  was
eventually  justified  by  a  revelation  from  heaven.  Abu  Basir,
the  freebooter,  was  countenanced  by  the  Prophet  in  a  manner
scarcely  consistent  with  the  letter,  and  certainly  opposed  to
the  spirit,  of  the  truce  of  Al-Hodeibiya.  The  plea  on  which
the  Beni  an-NadIr  were  besieged  and  expatriated  (namely,
that  Gabriel  had  revealed  their  design  against  the  Prophet's
life)  was  feeble  and  unworthy  of  an  honest  cause.  When
Medina  was  beleaguered  by  the  Confederate  army,
Mohammad  sought  the  services  of  No'eim,  a  treacherous  go-
between,  and  employed  him  to  sow  distrust  amongst  the
enemy  by  false  reports ;  '  for, '  said  he,  *  what  else  is  War  but
a  game  of  deception?'  In  his  prophetical  career,  political
and  personal  ends  were  frequently  compassed  by  divine  reve-
lations, which,  whatever  more,  were  certainly  the  direct
reflection  of  his  own  wishes.  The  Jewish  and  Christian
systems,  at  first  adopted  honestly  as  the  basis  of  his  own
religion,  had  no  sooner  served  the  purpose  of  establishing  a
firm  authority,  than  they  were  cast  aside  and  virtually  dis-
owned. And  what  is  perhaps  worst  of  all,  the  dastardly  as-
sassination of  political  and  religious  opponents,  countenanced,
if  not  in  some  cases  directed,  by  Mohammad  himself,  leaves  a
painful  reflection  upon  his  character.

In  domestic  life  the  conduct  of  Mohammad  (if  we  except  the
unchecked  range  of  his  uxorious  inclinations)  was  exemplary.
As  a  husband  his  fondness  and  devotion  were  entire,  border-
ing at  times  upon  jealousy.  As  a  father  he  was  loving  and
tender.  In  his  youth  he  lived  a  virtuous  life  ;  and  at  the  age
of  twenty-five  married  a  widow  forty  years  old,  during  whose
lifetime  for  five-and-twenty  years  he  was  a  faithful  husband


XXXVII.]


DOMESTIC  LIFE


515


to  her  alone.  Yet  it  is  remarkable  that  during  this  period  were
composed  most  of  those  passages  of  the  Kor'an  in  which  the
black-eyed  '  Houries, '  reserved  for  Believers  in  Paradise,  are
depicted  in  such  glowing  colours.  Shortly  after  the  death  of
Khadija,  he  married  again ;  but  it  was  not  till  the  mature  age
of  fifty-fourthat  he  made  the  dangerous  trial  of  polygamy,
by  taking  'A'isha,  yet  a  child,  as  the  rival  of  Sauda.  Once
the  natural  limits  of  restraint  were  overpassed,  Mohammad
fell  a  prey  to  his  strong  passion  for  the  sex.  In  his  fifty-sixth
year  he  married  Hafsa ;  and  the  following  year,  in  two  suc-
ceeding months,  Zeinab  bint  Khozeima  and  Um  Selama.
But  his  desires  were  not  to  be  satisfied  by  the  range  of  a
harim  already  in  advance  of  Arab  custom,  and  more  numerous
than  was  permitted  to  any  of  his  followers ;  rather,  as  age
advanced  they  were  stimulated  to  seek  for  new  and  varied
indulgence.  A  few  months  after  his  nuptials  with  Zeinab  and
Um  Selama,  the  charms  of  a  second  Zeinab  were  by  accident
discovered  too  fully  before  his  admiring  gaze.  She  was  the
wife  of  Zeid,  his  adopted  son  and  bosom  friend  ;  but  he  was
unable  to  smother  the  flame  she  had  kindled  in  his  breast ;
and,  by  divine  command,  she  was  taken  to  his  embrace.  In
the  same  year  he  wedded  a  seventh  wife,  and  also  a  concubine.
And  at  last,  when  he  was  full  threescore  years  of  age,  no
fewer  than  three  new  wives,  besides  Mary  the  Coptic  slave,
were  within  the  space  of  seven  months  added  to  his  already
well-filled  harlm.  The  bare  recital  of  these  facts  may  justify
the  saying  of  Ibn  Al-'Abbas :  '  Verily  the  chiefest  among
the  Muslims  (meaning  Mohammad)  was  the  foremost  of  them
in  his  passion  for  women  ; ' — a  fatal  example  imitated  too
readily  by  his  followers,  who  here  adopt  the  Prince  of  Medina,
rather  than  the  Prophet  of  Mecca,  for  their  pattern.

Thus  the  social  and  domestic  life  of  Mohammad,  fairly
and  impartially  viewed,  is  seen  to  be  chequered  by  light  and
shade.  While  there  is  much  to  form  the  subject  of  nearly
unqualified  praise,  there  is  likewise  much  which  cannot  be
spoken  of  but  in  terms  of  reprobation.

Proceeding  now  to  consider  the  religious  and  prophetical
character  of  Mohammad,  the  first  point  which  strikes  the
biographer  is  his  constant  and  vivid  sense  of  a  special  and
all-pervading  Providence.  This  conviction  moulded  his
thoughts  and  designs,  from  the  minutest  actions  in  private


Conviction  of
special  Pro-
vidence


5i6  PERSON  AND  CHARACTER  [chap.

and  social  life  to  the  grand  conception  that  he  was  destined
to  be  the  Reformer  of  his  people  and  of  all  Arabia.  He
never  entered  a  company  '  but  he  sat  down  and  rose  up  with
the  mention  of  the  Lord.'  When  the  first-fruits  of  the
season  were  brought  to  him,  he  would  kiss  them,  place  them
upon  his  eyes,  and  say  :  *  Lord,  as  thou  hast  shown  us  the
first,  show  unto  us  likewise  the  last'  In  trouble  and  afflic-
tion, as  well  as  in  prosperity  and  joy,  he  ever  saw  and  humbly
acknowledged  the  hand  of  God.  A  fixed  persuasion  that
every  incident,  small  and  great,  is  ordered  by  the  divine  will,
led  to  the  strong  expressions  of  predestination  which  abound
in  the  Kor'an.  It  is  the  Lord  who  turneth  the  hearts  of  man-
kind :  and  alike  faith  in  the  believer,  and  unbelief  in  the
infidel,  are  the  result  of  the  divine  fiat.  The  hour  and  place
of  every  man's  death,  as  all  other  events  in  his  life,  are  estab-
lished by  the  same  decree  ;  and  the  timid  believer  might  in
vain  seek  to  avert  the  stroke  by  shunning  the  field  of  battle.
But  this  persuasion  was  far  removed  from  the  belief  in  a
blind  and  inexorable  fate  ;  for  Mohammad  held  the  progress  of
events  in  the  divine  hand  to  be  amenable  to  the  influence  of
prayer.  He  was  not  slow  to  attribute  the  conversion  of  a
scoffer  like  'Omar,  or  the  removal  of  an  impending  misfortune
(as  the  deliverance  of  Medina  from  the  Confederate  hosts),  to
the  effect  of  his  own  earnest  petitions  to  the  Lord.  On  the
other  hand,  he  was  often  the  subject  of  superstitious  dread.
He  feared  to  sit  down  in  a  dark  place  until  a  lamp  had  been
lighted ;  and  his  apprehension  was  at  times  raised  by  the
wind  and  clouds.  He  would  fetch  prognostications  from  the
manner  in  which  a  sword  was  drawn  from  the  scabbard.  A
special  virtue  was  attributed  to  being  cupped  an  even  number
of  times,  and  on  a  certain  day  of  the  week  and  month.  He
was  also  guided  by  omens  drawn  from  dreams  :  but  these
may,  perhaps,  have  been  regarded  by  him  as  intimations  of
the  divine  will.
Moham-  The  growth  in  the  mind  of  Mohammad  of  the  conviction

^^^'^ . that  he  was  appointed  to  be  a  Prophet  and  Reformer  is  inti-

unwavering  ,  ^  ^ , .  , ,  . , ,. / .  •• i t^ •  i

steadfastness  mately  Connected  with his belief  in a special Providence

at  Mecca embracing  the  spiritual  as  well  as  material  world  ;  and  out

of  that  conviction  arose  the  confidence that the  Almighty

would  crown  his  mission  with  success. While  still  at  Mecca,

there is no reason to doubt that the questionings and


XXXVII.]  FORTITUDE  517

aspirations  of  his  inner  soul  were  regarded  by  him  as  pro-
ceeding directly  from  God.  The  h'ght  which  gradually  illu-
minated his  mind  with  a  knowledge  of  the  divine  unity  and
perfections,  and  of  the  duties  and  destiny  of  man, — light
amidst  gross  darkness, — must  have  emanated  from  the  same
source  ;  and  He  who  in  his  own  good  pleasure  had  thus
begun  the  work  would  surely  carry  it  through  to  a  successful
ending.  What  was  Mohammad  himself  but  an  instrument  in
the  hand  of  the  great  Worker?  Such,  no  doubt,  were  the
thoughts  which  strengthened  him,  alone  and  unsupported,  to
brave  for  many  weary  years  the  taunts  and  persecutions  of  a
whole  people.  In  estimating  the  signal  moral  courage  thus
displayed,  it  must  not  be  overlooked  that  for  what  is  ordi-
narily termed/z^j/j-zV^/ courage  Mohammad  was  not  remarkable.
It  may  be  doubted  whether  he  ever  engaged  personally  in
active  conflict  on  the  battle-field.  Though  he  often  accom-
panied his  forces,  he  never  himself  led  them  into  action,  or
exposed  his  person  to  avoidable  danger.  And  there  were
occasions  on  which  (as  when  challenged  by  *  Abdallah  to  spare
the  Beni  Kainuka',  alarmed  by  the  altercation  at  the  wells  of
Al-MoraisI',  or  pressed  by  the  mob  at  Al-Ji'rana)  he  showed
symptoms  of  a  faint  heart.  Yet  even  so,  it  only  brings  out  in
higher  relief  the  singular  display  of  moral  daring.  Let  us  for
a  moment  look  to  the  period  when  a  ban  was  proclaimed  at
Mecca  against  all  citizens,  whether  professed  converts  or  not,
who  espoused  his  cause  or  ventured  to  protect  him  ;  and  when
along  with  these,  he  was  shut  up  in  the  SJii'b  or  quarter  of
Abu  Talib,  and  there  for  three  years,  without  prospect  of
relief,  endured  want  and  hardship.  Strong  and  steadfast
must  have  been  the  motives  which  enabled  him,  amidst  such
opposition  and  apparent  hopelessness  of  success,  to  maintain
his  principles  unshaken.  No  sooner  was  he  released  from
this  restraint  than,  despairing  of  his  native  city,  he  went  forth
solitary  and  unaided  to  At-Ta'if,  and  there  summoned  its
rulers  and  inhabitants  to  repentance,  with  the  message  which
he  said  he  had  from  his  Lord ;  on  the  third  day  he  was  driven
out  of  the  town  with  ignominy,  while  blood  flowed  from
wounds  inflicted  on  him  by  the  populace.  Retiring  to  a  little
distance,  he  poured  forth  his  complaint  to  God,  and  then
returned  to  Mecca,  there  to  resume  the  same  outwardly
hopeless  cause,  with  the  same  high  confidence  in  its  ultimate


Medina


518  PERSON  AND  CHARACTER  [chap.

success.  We  search  in  vain  through  the  pages  of  profane
history  for  a  parallel  to  the  struggle  in  which  for  thirteen
years  the  Prophet  of  Arabia,  in  the  face  of  discouragement
and  threats,  rejection  and  persecution,  retained  thus  his  faith
unwavering,  preached  repentance,  and  denounced  God's  wrath
against  his  godless  fellow-citizens.  Surrounded  by  a  little
band  of  faithful  men  and  women,  he  met  insults,  menace,
and  danger  with  a  lofty  and  patient  trust  in  the  future.  And
when  at  last  the  promise  of  safety  came  from  a  distant  quarter
he  calmly  waited  until  his  followers  had  all  departed,  and
then  disappeared  from  amongst  an  ungrateful  and  rebellious
people.
And  at  Not  less  marked was the firm front and unchanging

faith  in  eventual  victory,  which  at  Medina  bore  him  through
seven  years  of  mortal  conflict  with  his  native  city ;  and
enabled  him,  sometimes  even  under  defeat,  and  while  his
influence  and  authority  were  yet  Hmited  and  precarious
even  in  the  city  of  his  adoption,  to  speak  and  to  act  in  the
constant  and  undoubted  expectation  of  victory.
Denunciation  From  the  earliest  period  of  his  religious  convictions,  the
the^snf'and  UNITY,  or  idea  of  One  great  Being  guiding  with  almighty
idolatry  power  and  wisdom  all  creation,  and  yet  infinitely  above
it,  gained  a  thorough  possession  of  his  mind.  Polytheism
and  idolatry,  at  variance  with  this  grand  principle,  were
indignantly  condemned  as  levelling  the  Creator  with  the
creature.  On  one  occasion  alone  did  Mohammad  swerve
from  this  position,  when  he  admitted  that  the  goddesses
of  Mecca  might  be  adored  as  a  medium  of  approach  to
God.  But  the  inconsistency  was  soon  perceived ;  and
Mohammad  at  once  retraced  his  steps.  Never  before  nor
afterwards  did  the  Prophet  deviate  from  the  stern  denuncia-
tion of  idolatry.
Earnestness  As  he  was  himself  the  subject  of  convictions  thus  deep

^^ll/'u"^^'^^ and  powerful,  it  will  readily  be  conceived  that  his  exhorta-

of  Moham-  f  >  J

mad  at  tions were  distinguished by  a  correspondmg strength  and

'^^'^^^  cogency. Master  of  eloquence,  his  language  was  cast  in  the

purest  and  most  persuasive  style  of  Arabian  oratory.  His
fine  poetical  genius  exhausted  the  imagery  of  nature  in  the
illustration  of  spiritual  truths ;  and  a  vivid  imagination
enabled  him  to  bring  before  his  people  the  Resurrection
and  the  Day  of  judgment,  the  joys  of  believers  in  Paradise,


xxxvii]  SINCERITY  AT  MECCA  519

and  the  agonies  of  lost  spirits  in  Hell,  as  close  and  impending
realities.  In  ordinary  address,  his  speech  was  slow,  distinct,
and  emphatic  ;  but  when  he  preached  '  his  eye  would  redden,
his  voice  rise  high  and  loud,  and  his  whole  frame  agitate
with  passion,  even  as  if  he  were  warning  the  people  of  an
enemy  about  to  fall  on  them  the  next  morning  or  that  very
night,'  In  this  thorough  earnestness  lay  the  secret  of  his
success.  And  if  these  stirring  appeals  had  been  given  forth
as  nothing  more  than  what  they  really  were,  the  outgoings
of  a  warm  and  active  conviction,  they  would  have  afforded
no  ground  for  cavil ;  or,  yet  a  step  further,  should  he  have
represented  them  as  the  teaching  of  a  soul  guided  by
natural  inspiration,  or  even  enlightened  by  divine  influence, —
such  a  course  would  not  have  differed  materially  from  that
trodden  by  many  a  sincere,  though  it  may  be  erring,
philanthropist  in  other  ages  and  other  lands.  But,  in  the
development  of  his  system,  the  claims  of  Mohammad  to
inspiration  far  transcended  such  assumptions.  His  inspira-
tion was  essentially  oracular.  The  Prophet  was  but  the
passive  organ  which  received  and  transmitted  a  heavenly
message.  His  revelations  were  not  the  fruit  of  a  subjective
process  in  which  the  soul,  burning  with  divine  life  and
truth,  sought  to  impress  the  stamp  of  its  own  convictions
on  those  around.  The  process,  on  the  contrary,  was  one
which  Mohammad  professed  to  be  entirely  external  to
himself — independent  of  his  own  reasoning,  affections,  and
will.  The  words  of  inspiration,  whether  purporting  to  be
a  portion  of  the  Kor'an  or  a  simple  message  of  direction,
were  produced  as  a  real  and  objective  intimation,  conveyed
to  him  immediately  from  the  Almighty  or  through  the
angel  Gabriel  His  messenger.  Such  was  the  position
assumed  by  Mohammad.  How  far  this  conviction  was
fostered  by  epileptic  or  supernatural  paroxysms  (which  do
not,  however,  come  prominently  to  view  at  least  in  the  later
stages  of  his  career)  or  by  cognate  physiological  phenomena,
it  is  impossible  to  determine.  We  may  readily  admit  that
at  the  first  Mohammad  did  believe,  or  persuaded  himself  to
believe,  that  his  revelations  were  dictated  by  a  divine
agency.  In  the  Meccan  period  of  his  life  there  certainly
can  be  traced  no  personal  ends  or  unworthy  motives  belying
this  conclusion. Mohammad then  was  nothing  more  than


520  PERSON  AND  CHARACTER  [CHAP.

he  professed  to  be,  'a  simple  Preacher  and  a  Warner';
he  was  the  despised  and  rejected  prophet  of  a  gainsaying
people,  having  no  ulterior  object  but  their  reformation.  He
may  have  mistaken  the  right  means  for  effecting  this  end,
but  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  doubting  that  he  used
those  means  in  good  faith  and  with  an  honest  purpose.
At  Medina  But the scene changes at Medina. There temporal

worldly power,  aggrandisement,  and  self-gratification  mingled  rapidly


motives


gle  with  with  the  grand  object  of  the  Prophet's  life ;  and  they  were
spiritual  sought  and  attained  by  just  the  same  instrumentality.
Messages  from  heaven  were  freely  brought  down  to  justify
political  conduct,  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  to  inculcate
religious  precept.  Battles  were  fought,  executions  ordered,
and  territories  annexed,  under  cover  of  the  Almighty's  sanc-
tion. Nay,  even  personal  indulgences  were  not  only  excused
but  encouraged  by  the  divine  approval  or  command.  A
special  license  was  produced,  allowing  the  Prophet  many
wives ;  the  affair  with  Mary  the  Coptic  bond-maid  was
justified  in  a  separate  Sura;  and  the  passion  for  the  wife  of
his  own  adopted  son  and  bosom  friend  was  the  subject  of
an  inspired  message  in  which  the  Prophet's  scruples  were
rebuked  by  God,  a  divorce  permitted,  and  marriage  with
the  object  of  his  unhallowed  desires  enjoined.  If  we  say
that  such  *  revelations '  were  believed  by  Mohammad
sincerely  to  bear  the  divine  sanction,  it  can  only  be  in
a  modified  and  peculiar  sense.  He  surely  must  be  held
responsible  for  that  belief;  and,  in  arriving  at  it,  have  done
violence  to  his  judgment  and  the  better  principles  of  his
nature.
Rapid  moral  As  the  natural  result,  we  trace  from  the  period  of
declension Mohammad's arrival at Medina a marked and rapid

the  natural  •  i  .  1  i  t i

consequence  declension  in  the  system  he  niculcated.  Intolerance
quickly  took  the  place  of  freedom  ;  force,  of  persuasion.
The  spiritual  weapons  designed  at  first  for  higher  objects
were  no  sooner  devoted  to  the  purposes  of  temporal
authority,  than  temporal  authority  was  employed  to  give
weight  and  temper  to  those  spiritual  weapons.  The  name
of  the  Almighty  imparted  a  terrible  strength  to  the  sword
of  the  State ;  and  the  sword  of  the  State  yielded  a  willing
return  by  destroying  'the  enemies  of  God'  and  sacrificing
them at the shrine of the new religion. '  Slay the


XXXVII.]


DECLENSION  AT  MEDINA


5ii


Moham-
mad Hnism


unbelievers  wheresoever  ye  find  them,'  was  now  the  watch-
word of  Islam.  '  Fight  in  the  ways  of  God  until  opposition
be  crushed  and  the  Religion  become  the  Lord's  alone.'
The  warm  and  simple  devotion  breathed  by  the  Prophet
and  his  followers  at  Mecca,  when  mingled  with  worldly
motives,  soon  became  dull  and  vapid  ;  while  faith  degen-
erated into  a  fierce  fanaticism,  or  evaporated  in  a  lifeless
round  of  formal  ceremonies.  In  its  final  evolution,  Islam
left  far  behind  the  toleration  of  early  days  when  the  men
of  Mecca  were  told  that  '  there  should  be  no  force  in
religion,'  but  that  conscience  alone  must  rule.  And  so
also  with  the  former  Revelations  which  yielded  the  Prophet
the  first  firm  foothold  for  his  aspiring  step.  The  Jewish
faith,  whose  pure  fountainhead  was  now  so  much  more
accessible  than  before,  as  well  as  the  less  familiar  Gospel,
having  served  his  purpose,  were  in  spite  of  all  former
protestations  of  allegiance,  cast  silently  aside.  Islam,  now
resting  on  the  sword,  had  done  with  them.

And  what  have  been  the  effects  of  the  system  which.  Benefits  of
established  by  such  instrumentality,  Mohammad  has  left
behind  him  ?  We  may  freely  concede  that  it  banished  for
ever  many  of  the  darker  elements  of  superstition  for  ages
shrouding  the  Peninsula.  Idolatry  vanished  before  the
battle-cry  of  Islam ;  the  doctrine  of  the  Unity  and  infinite
perfections  of  God,  and  of  a  special  all-pervading  Providence,
became  a  living  principle  in  the  hearts  and  lives  of  the
followers  of  Mohammad,  even  as  in  his  own.  An  absolute
surrender  and  submission  to  the  divine  will  (the  idea
embodied  in  the  very  name  of  IslciDi)  was  demanded  as  the
first  requirement  of  the  faith.  Nor  are  social  virtues  wanting.
Brotherly  love  is  inculcated  towards  all  within  the  circle  of
the  faith ;  infanticide  proscribed  ;  orphans  to  be  protected,
and  slaves  treated  with  consideration  ;  intoxicating  drinks
prohibited,  so  that  Mohammadanism  may  boast  of  a  degree
of  temperance  unknown  to  any  other  creed.

Yet  these  benefits  have  been  purchased  at  a  costly  price.
Setting  aside  considerations  of  minor  import,  three  radical  by  its  evils
evils  flow  from  the  faith  in  all  ages  and  in  every  country,
and  must  continue  to  flow  so  long  as  the  Kor'dn  is  the  standard
of  Belief.  First  :  Polygamy,  Divorce,  and  Slavery  strike  at
the  root  of  public  morals,  poison domestic  life,  and  disor-


Outweighed


S2i


PERSON  AND  CHARACTER


fCHAP.


Inconsis-
tencies run
through  the
character  of
Mohammad


ganise  society ;  while  the  Veil  removes  the  female  sex  from
its  just  position  and  influence  in  the  world.  Second  :  free-
dom of  thought  and  private  judgment  are  crushed  and  an-
nihilated. Toleration  is  unknown,  and  the  possibility  of  free
and  liberal  institutions  foreclosed.  Third  :  a  barrier  has
been  interposed  against  the  reception  of  Christianity.  They
labour  under  a  miserable  delusion  who  suppose  that  Moham-
madanism  paves  the  way  for  a  purer  faith.  No  system
could  have  been  devised  with  more  consummate  skill  for
shutting  out  the  nations  over  which  it  has  sway  from  the
Christian  faith  ;  for  there  is  in  it  just  so  much  truth,  truth
borrowed  from  previous  Revelations  yet  cast  in  another
mould,  as  to  divert  attention  from  the  need  of  more.
Idolatrous  Arabia  (judging  from  the  analogy  of  other  nations)
might  have  been  aroused  to  spiritual  life,  and  the  adoption
of  the  faith  of  Jesus ;  while  Mohammadan  Arabia  is,  to  the
human  eye,  sealed  against  the  benign  influences  of  the
Gospel.  Many  a  flourishing  land  in  Africa  and  in  Asia
which  once  rejoiced  in  the  light  and  liberty  of  Christianity,
is  now  crushed  and  overspread  by  darkness  gross  and
barbarous.  It  is  as  if  their  day  of  grace  had  come  and  gone,
and  there  remained  to  them  'no  more  sacrifice  for  sins.'
That  a  brighter  morn  will  yet  dawn  on  these  countries  we
may  not  doubt ;  but  the  history  of  the  past,  and  the  condi-
tion of  the  present,  is  not  the  less  true  and  sad.  The  sword
of  Mohammad,  and  the  Kor'an,  are  the  most  stubborn
enemies  of  Civilisation,  Liberty,  and  Truth  which  the  world
has  yet  known.

In  conclusion,  I  would  warn  the  reader  against  seeking  to
portray  for  himself  a  character  in  all  its  parts  consistent,  as
that  of  Mohammad.  On  the  contrary,  the  strangest  incon-
sistencies were  blent  (as  we  so  often  find)  throughout  his
life.  The  student  will  trace  for  himself  how  pure  and  lofty
aspirations  were  first  tinged,  and  then  gradually  lowered,  by
a  half-unconscious  self-deception.  Nor  will  he  fail  to  observe
that  simultaneously  with  the  anxious  desire  to  extinguish
idolatry  and  promote  religion  and  virtue  in  the  world,  there
arose  in  his  later  years  a  tendency  to  self-indulgence  ;  till  in
the  end,  assuming  to  be  the  favourite  of  Heaven,  he  justified
himself  by  '  revelations,'  releasing  himself  in  some  cases  from
social proprieties ,  and the commonest obligations  of  self-


XXXVII.]  CONCLUSION  $23

restraint.  He  will  remark  that  while  Mohammad  cherished
a  kind  and  tender  disposition, '  weeping  with  them  that  weep,'
and  binding  to  his  person  the  hearts  of  his  followers  by  the
ready  and  self-sacrificing  offices  of  love  and  friendship,  he
could  yet  gloat  over  the  massacre  of  an  entire  tribe,  and
savagely  consign  an  innocent  babe  to  the  fires  of  hell.  Incon-
sistencies such  as  these  continually  present  themselves  from
the  period  of  the  Prophet's  arrival  at  Medina.  It  is  by  the
study  of  them  that  his  character  must  be  rightly  apprehended.
And  the  key  may  be  found,  I  believe,  in  the  chapter  on  the
doubts  and  difficulties  that  beset  his  first  search  after  truth,
and  how  he  emerged  therefrom.  When  once  he  dared  to
assume  the  name  of  the  Most  High  as  the  seal  and  authority
of  his  own  words  and  actions,  the  germ  was  laid  from  which
were  developed  the  perilous  inconsistencies  of  his  later  life.

Mohammad  and  the  Kor'an,  the  author  of  Islam  and  Conclusion
the  instrument  by  which  he  achieved  success,  are  themes
worthy  the  earnest  attention  of  mankind.  If  I  have  at  all
succeeded  in  contributing  some  fresh  materials  towards  the
formation  of  a  correct  judgment  upon  them,  many  hours  of
study,  snatched  not  without  difficulty  from  engrossing  avoca-
tions, will  have  secured  an  ample  recompense.

Description  of  Mohammad  from  the
Biography  of  Ibn  Sa'd^


In  what  follows  I  offer  the  reader  a  selection  from  Ibn Extracts
Sa'd's  chapter  on  the  person  and  character  of  Mohammad. 1''°'^  ^^"
The  traditions  will,  I  trust,  prove  interesting  in  themselves,
as  well  as  illustrate  the  style  of  the  Prophet's  biographers.

Description  of  Mohammad  in  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Prophecies
C^j;/)^/.— Mohammad  was  thus  foretold  :  '  O  Prophet !  We  Mlhamnfad
have  sent  thee  to  be  a  Witness  and  a  Preacher  of  good
tidings,  and  a  Warner,  and  a  Defender  of  the  Gentiles.
Thou  art  my  servant  and  my  messenger.  I  have  called  thee
Al-MutawakkiL  (he  that  trusteth  in  the  Lord).  He  shall  not
be  one  that  doeth  iniquity,  nor  one  that  crieth  aloud  in  the
streets  ;  he  shall  not  recompense  evil  for  evil,  but  he  shall  be
one  that  passeth  over  and  forgiveth.  His  kingdom  shall  be
Syria.  Mohammad  is  my  elected  servant  ;  he  shall  not  be
1  At-Tabari,  i.  1789  ff.


§24  IBN  SA'D'S  DESCRIPTION  [chaP.

severe  nor  cruel.  I  shall  not  take  him  away  by  death,  till  he
make  straight  the  crooked  religion ;  and  till  the  people  say,
There  is  no  God  but  the  Lord  alone.  He  shall  open  the  eyes
of  the  blind,  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf,  and  the  covered  hearts.'
These  are  evident  accommodations  of  passages  in  Isaiah  xlii.
and  Ixi.  In  one  set  of  traditions  from  'A'isha,  she  speaks  of
them  as  prophecies  from  the  Gospel,  in  ignorance  that  they
are  quoted  there  (Matt.  xii.  i8)  as  applying  to  Jesus.

His  dis-  His disposition. — When 'A'isha was questioned about

position  Mohammad,  she  used  to  say :  '  He  was  a  man  just  such  as
yourselves  ;  he  laughed  often  and  smiled  much.'  But  how
would  lie  occupy  himself  at  home  ?  '  Even  as  any  of  you
occupy  yourselves.  He  would  mend  his  clothes,  and  cobble
his  shoes.  He  used  to  help  me  in  my  household  duties  ;  but
what  he  did  oftenest  was  to  sew.  If  he  had  the  choice
between  two  matters,  he  would  always  choose  the  easier,  so
as  that  no  sin  accrued  therefrom.  He  never  took  revenge
excepting  where  the  honour  of  God  was  concerned.  When
angry  with  any  person,  he  would  say,  "  What  hath  taken  such
a  one  that  he  shoidd  soil  Jiis  forehead  in  the  mud  I " '

Humility  His  humility  was  shown  by  his  riding  upon  asses,  by  his

accepting  the  invitation  even  of  slaves,  and  when  mounted
by  his  taking  another  behind  him.  He  would  say  :  '  I  sit  at
meals  as  a  servant  doeth,  and  I  eat  like  a  servant :  for  I  really
am  a  servant ; '  and  he  would  sit  as  one  that  was  always  ready
to  rise.  He  discouraged  (supererogatory)  fasting,  and  works
of  mortification.  When  seated  with  his  followers,  he  would
remain  long  silent  at  a  time.  In  the  Mosque  at  Medina,
they  used  to  repeat  pieces  of  poetry,  and  tell  stories  regarding
the  incidents  that  occurred  in  the  'days  of  ignorance,'  and
laugh ;  and  Mohammad,  listening  to  them,  would  smile  at
what  they  said.  He  hated  nothing  more  than  lying;  and
whenever  he  knew  that  any  of  his  followers  had  erred  in  this
respect,  he  would  hold  himself  aloof  from  them  until  he  was
assured  of  their  repentance.

Speech  His  manner  of  speech. — He  did  not  speak  rapidly,  running

his  words  into  one  another,  but  enunciated  each  syllable  dis-
tinctly, so  that  what  he  said  was  imprinted  in  the  memory  of
every  one  who  heard  him.  When  at  public  prayers,  it  might
be  known  from  a  distance  that  he  was  speaking  by  the
motion  of  his  beard. He  never  read  in  a  singing  or  chantinsr


XXXVII.]


PERSONAL  HABITS


525


Gait


Habits  in
eating


style ;  but  he  would  draw  out  his  voice,  resting  at  certain

places. Thus,  in  the  prefatory  words  of  a  Sura,  he  would

pause after bisinillaJii, after ar-Rahmdn, and again after

ar-Rahun. His  walking. — One  says  that  at a funeral  he

saw Mohammad  walking,  and  remarked to a  friend how

rapidly  he  moved  along;  it  seemed  as  if  he  'were  doubling

up  the  ground.' He  used  to  walk  so  rapidly  that  the  people

half  ran  behind  him,  and  could  hardly  keep  up  with  him.

His  eating. — He  never  ate  reclining,  for  Gabriel  had  told  him

that  such  was  the  manner  of  kings ; nor  had  he  ever  two

followers  to  walk  behind him. He used to eat  with  his

thumb  and  his  two  forefingers ;  and  when  he  had  done  would

lick  them,  beginning  with  the  middle  one. When  offered  by

Gabriel  the  valley  of  Mecca  full of  gold,  he  preferred  to

forego  it ;  saying,  that  when  he  was  hungry  he  would  come

before  the  Lord  lowly,  and  when  full,  with  praise. Excellence Moderation

of  his  Morals. — A  servant  maid  being  once  long  in  returning

from  an  errand,  Mohammad  was  annoyed,  and  said :  '  If  it

were  not  for  the  law  of  retaliation,  I  should  have  punished

you  with this toothpick ' (i.e.  with an inappreciably light

punishment).

Attitude  at  Prayers. — He  used  to  stand  for  such  a  length
of  time  at  prayer  that  his  legs  would  swell.  When  remon-
strated with,  he  said :  '  What !  Shall  I  not  behave  as  a
thankful  servant  should  ? '  He  never  yawned  at  prayer.
When  he  sneezed  he  did  so  with  a  subdued  voice,  covering
his  face.  At  funerals  he  never  rode  ;  he  would  remain  silent
on  such  occasions,  as  if  conversing  with  himself,  so  that  the
people  used  to  think  he  was  holding  communication  with
the  dead.

His  personal  appearance  and  habits. — He  used  to  wear  two
garments.  His  izdr  (under-garment)  hung  down  three  or
four  inches  below  his  knees.  His  mantle  was  not  wrapped
round  him  so  as  to  cover  his  body,  but  he  would  draw  the
end  of  it  under  his  shoulder.  He  used  to  divide  his  time
into  three  parts :  one  was  given  to  God,  the  second  allotted
to  his  family,  the  third  to  himself.  When  public  business
began  to  press  upon  him  he  gave  up  one-half  of  the  latter
portion  to  the  service  of  others.  When  he  pointed  he  did  so
with  his  whole  hand ;  and  when  he  was  astonished  he  turned
his  hand  over  (with  the  palm  upwards). In  speaking  with


Customs  at
prayer


Appearance,
habits,  &C.


526


IBN  SA'D'S  DESCRIPTION


[chap.


Refusal  to
make  per-
sonal use  of
the  tithes


Food
relished


another,  he  brought  his  hand  near  to  the  person  addressed ;
and  he  would  strike  the  palm  of  the  left,  on  the  thumb  of  the
right,  hand.  Angry,  he  would  avert  his  face ;  joyful,  he
would  look  downwards.  He  often  smiled,  and  when  he
laughed  his  teeth  used  to  appear  white  as  hailstones.  In  the
interval  allotted  for  the  purpose,  he  received  all  that  came  to
him,  listened  to  their  representations,  and  occupied  himself
in  disposing  of  their  business  and  in  hearing  what  they  had
to  tell  him.  He  would  say  on  such  occasions :  '  Let  those
that  are  here  give  information  regarding  that  which  passeth
to  them  that  are  absent ;  and  they  that  cannot  themselves
appear  to  make  known  their  necessities,  let  others  report
them  to  me  in  their  stead ;  the  Lord  will  establish  the  feet  of
such  in  the  day  of  judgment'

While  he  accepted  presents,  he  refused  anything  that  had
been  offered  as  tithe  (Sadaka) ;  neither  would  he  allow  any
one  of  his  family  to  accept  what  was  brought  in  tithe ;  *  for,'
said  he,  '  tithes  (or  alms)  are  the  impurity  of  mankind '  {i.e.
that  which  cleanses  their  impurity).  His  scruples  were  so
strong,  that  he  would  not  eat  even  a  date  picked  up  on  the
road,  lest  perchance  it  might  have  dropped  from  a  tithe  load.
One  day,  little  Al-Hasan  was  playing  by  his  grandfather
when  a  basketful  of  dates  was  brought  in ;  on  inquiry,
Mohammad  found  that  they  were  tithe,  and  ordered  them
to  be  taken  away  and  given  to  the  poor  Refugees.  But
Al-Hasan,  having  taken  up  one  to  play  with,  had  already  put
it  in  his  mouth ;  the  Prophet,  seeing  this,  opened  the  boy's
mouth,  and  pulled  it  out,  saying,  '  the  family  of  Mohammad
may  not  eat  of  the  tithes.'

Food  zvliich  he  relished. — Mohammad  had  a  special  liking
for  sweetmeats  and  honey.  A  tailor  once  invited  him  to  his
house  and  placed  before  him  barley  bread,  with  stale  suet ;
there  was  also  a  pumpkin  in  the  dish ;  now  Mohammad
greatly  relished  the  pumpkin.  His  servant  Anas  used  to
say  as  he  looked  at  the  pumpkin :  '  Dear  little  plant,  how  the
Prophet  loved  thee  ! '  He  was  also  fond  of  cucumbers  and  of
undried  dates.  When  a  lamb  or  a  kid  was  being  cooked,
Mohammad  would  go  to  the  pot,  take  out  the  shoulder  and
eat  it.  Abu  Rafi'  tells  us  :  '  I  once  slew  a  kid  and  dressed  it.
The  Prophet  asked  me  for  the  forequarter  and  I  gave  it  to
him. "  Give me another"  he said ; and I gave him the


xxxvii]  CHOICE  OF  FOODS  527

second.  Then  he  asked  for  a  third.  "O  Prophet!"  I  replied,
"there  are  but  two  forequarters  to  a  kid."  ''Nay"  said
Mohammad,  "  hadst  thou  reinained  silent,  thou  wouldst  have
handed  to  me  as  many  forequarters  as  I  asked  for."  He  used
to  eat  moist  dates  and  cooked  food  together.  What  he  most
relished  was  a  mess  of  bread  cooked  with  meat,  and  a  dish  of
dates  dressed  with  butter  and  milk.  When  he  ate  fresh
dates  he  would  keep  such  as  were  bad  in  his  hand.  One
asked  on  a  certain  occasion  that  he  would  gave  him  the  dates
so  rejected.  ' Not  so'  he  answered  ;  '  what  I  do  not  like  for
myself  I  do  not  like  to  give  to  thee.'  Once  a  tray  of  fresh
dates  was  brought  to  him  ;  he  sat  down  on  his  knees,  and
taking  them  up  by  handfuls,  sent  a  handful  to  each  of  his
wives ;  then'  taking  another  handful,  he  ate  it  himself.  He
kept  throwing  the  date  stones  on  his  left  side,  and  the
domestic  fowls  came  and  ate  them  up.  He  used  to  have
sweet  (rain)  water  kept  for  his  use.

Food  which  he  disliked. — On  Mohammad's  first  arrival  at  Food  dis-
Medina,  Abu  Eiyub  used  to  send  him  portions  of  baked  ^'^^"^
food.  On  one  occasion  the  dinner  was  returned  uneaten,
without  even  the  marks  of  the  Prophet's  fingers.  On  being
asked  the  reason,  he  explained  that  he  had  refrained  from
the  dish  because  of  the  onions  that  were  in  it,  for  the  angel
which  visited  him  disliked  onions ;  but  others  he  said  might
freely  eat  of  them.  So  also  with  garlic ;  he  would  never
allow  it  to  pass  his  lips ;  'fori  said  he,  '  /  Jiave  i?ttercours-e
with  one  (meaning  Gabriel)  with  whom  ye  have  not.'  He
disliked  flour  made  of  almonds,  saying  that  it  was  'spend-
thrift's food.'  He  would  never  partake  of  the  large  lizard,  for
he  thought  it  might  have  been  the  beast  into  which  a  party
of  the  children  of  Israel  were  changed  ;  but  he  said  there
was  no  harm  in  others  eating  it.  When  drinking  milk,
Mohammad  once  said,  '  When  a  man  eateth  let  him  pray
thus  :  O  Lord!  grant  Thy  blessi?ig  upon  this,  and  feed  me  with
better  than  this  !  But  to  whomsoever  the  Lord  giveth  milk
to  drink,  let  him  say  :  O  Lord!  grant  Thy  blessing  upon  this^
and  vouchsafe  unto  me  an  increase  thereof;  for  there  is  no
other  thing  which  combineth  both  food  and  drink  save  milk
alone.'

Mohammad's  fondness  for  womett and  scents. — A  great Women
array  of  traditions  are  produced  to  prove  that  the  Prophet  ^°^  ^"^^"^^


528


IBN  SA'D'S  DESCRIPTION


[chap


Straitened
means  at
Medina


liked  these  of  all  things  in  the  world  the  best.  'A'isha  used
to  say  :  '  The  Prophet  loved  three  things — women,  scents,  and
food  ;  he  had  his  heart's  desire  of  the  two  first,  but  not  of  the
last'  In  respect  to  scents,  traditions  have  been  already
quoted  in  Chapter  XVII.,  p.  331  n.

Narrow7iess  of  means  at  Medina. — A  long  section  is
devoted  to  this  subject,  containing  many  such  traditions  as
the  following.  Fatima  once  brought  Mohammad  a  piece  of
bread ;  it  was  the  first  that  had  passed  his  lips  for  three  days.
•A'isha  tells  us  that  for  months  together  Mohammad  did  not
get  a  full  meal.  '  Months  used  to  pass,'  she  says  again,  '  and
no  fire  would  be  lighted  in  Mohammad's  house  either  for
baking  bread  or  cooking  meat.  How,  then,  did  ye  live  ?  By
the  "  two  black  things  "  (dates  and  water),  and  by  what  the
citizens  used  to  send  unto  us  ;  the  Lord  requite  them  !  Such
of  them  as  had  milch  cattle  would  send  us  a  little  milk.  The
Prophet  never  enjoyed  the  luxury  of  two  kinds  of  food  the
same  day ;  if  he  had  flesh  there  was  nothing  else ;  and  so  if
he  had  dates  ;  so  likewise  if  he  had  bread.  We  possessed  no
sieves,  but  used  to  bruise  the  grain  and  blow  off  the  husks.
One  night  Abu  Bekr  sent  Mohammad  the  leg  of  a  kid.
'A'isha  held  it  while  the  Prophet  cut  off  a  piece  for  himself  in
the  dark ;  and  in  his  turn  the  Prophet  held  it  while  'A'isha
cut  off  a  piece  for  herself  "  What"  exclaimed  the  listeners,
"  and  ye  ate  without  a  lamp  !  "  "  Yea,"  replied  'A'isha  ;  "  had
we  possessed  oil  for  a  lamp,  think  ye  not  that  we  should  have
lighted  it  for  our  food  ?  " '

Abu  Hureira  explains  the  scarcity  thus:  '  It  arose,'  he
says,  '  from  the  great  number  of  Mohammad's  visitors  and
guests ;  for  he  never  sat  down  to  food  but  there  were  some
followers  with  him.  Even  the  conquest  of  Kheibar  did  not
put  an  end  to  the  scarcity ;  because  Medina  has  an  intract-
able soil,  which  is  ordinarily  cultivated  for  dates  only,  the
staple  food  of  its  inhabitants.  There  did  not  exist  in  the
country  means  of  support  sufficient  for  the  greatly  increased
population.  Its  fruits  are  the  commonest  products  of  the
soil,  which  want  little  water ;  and  such  water  as  was  needed
the  people  used  to  carry  on  their  backs,  for  in  these  days
they  had  few  camels.  One  year,  moreover,  a  disease  (pre-
mature shedding)  smote  the  palms,  and  the  harvest  failed.
It  is  true  that  a  dish  used  to  be  sent  for  the  Prophet's  table


xxxviL]  STRAITENED  MEANS  529

from  the  house  of  Sa'd  ibn  'Obada,  every  day  until  his  death,
and  also  in  the  same  manner  by  other  Citizens ;  and  the
Refugees  used  to  aid  likewise ;  but  the  claims  upon  the
Prophet  increased  greatly,  from  the  number  of  his  wives  and
dependants.'

I  have  repeatedly  noticed  these  stories,  and  have  attri-
buted them  to  the  frugal  habits  of  Mohammad  compared
with  the  sudden  growth  of  wealth  and  splendour  in  the  Cali-
phate. The  products  of  the  surrounding  country  were,  no
doubt,  at  first  inadequate  to  the  wants  of  the  great  numbers
who  flocked  with  Mohammad  to  Medina.  But  it  is  evident
that  although  Mohammad,  in  the  early  years  of  the  Hijra,
may  have  been  reduced  to  common  fare,  he  could  hardly
have  ever  suffered  want^  especially  with  so  many  devoted
followers  about  him.  It  is  the  vivid  contrast  between  the
luxury  prevalent  in  the  days  when  tradition  was  growing  up,
and  the  simple  life  of  Mohammad,  which  mainly  gave  rise  to
these  ideas.  Thus  'Abd  ar- Rahman,  when  in  after  years  he
used  to  fare  sumptuously  on  fine  bread  and  every  variety  of
meats,  would  weep  while  looking  at  his  richly  furnished  table,
thinking  of  the  Prophet's  straitened  fare.  Another  upbraids
his  comrade  who  could  not  live  without  bread  made  of  the
finest  flour  :  *  What ! '  said  he  ;  '  the  Prophet  of  the  Lord,  to
the  last  hour  of  his  life,  never  had  two  full  meals  on  the  same
day,  of  bread  and  of  oil ;  and  behold,  thou  and  thy  fellows
vainly  luxuriate  on  the  delicacies  of  this  life,  as  if  ye  were
children !'

The'  S  ear  of  prophecy  on  the  back  of  Mohammad. — This, 'Seal' of
says  one,  was  a  protuberance  on  the  Prophet's  back  of  the P''<^P^^'^y
size  and  appearance  of  a  pigeon's  &^%. Ibn  Sarjis  describes
it  as  having  been  as  large  as  his  closed  fist,  with  moles  round
about  it. Abu  Rimtha,  whose  family  were  skilled  in  surgery,
offered  to  remove  it,  but  Mohammad  refused,  saying  : '  The
Physician  thereof  is  He  who  placed  it  where  it  is.' According
to another tradition, Mohammad said to Abu Rimtha
Come hither  and  touch  my  back ;  which  he  did,  drawing  his
fingers  over  the  prophetical  seal,  and,  'behold  there  was  a
collection  of  hairs  upon  the  spot'  ^ I  have  not  before  noticed
this  'seal,'  because  it  is  so  surrounded  with  supernatural  tales
that  it  is  extremely  difficult  even  to  conjecture  what  it  really
^  Cf.  At-Tabari,  i.  ijgoi.

2  L


530  IBN  SA'D'S  DESCRIPTION  [chap.

was.  It  is  said  to  have  been  the  divine  seal  which,  according
to  the  Scriptures,  marked  Mohammad  as  the  last  of  the
Prophets.  How  far  Mohammad  himself  encouraged  this  idea
it  is  impossible  to  say.  From  the  traditions  quoted  above,  it
would  seem  to  have  been  nothing  more  than  a  mole  of
unusual  size,  and  the  saying  of  Mohammad  that  '  God  had
placed  it  there '  was  probably  the  germ  of  the  supernatural
associations  which  grew  up  concerning  it.  Had  the  Prophet
really  attributed  any  divine  virtue  to  this  mole,  he  would
have  spoken  very  differently  to  one  who  offered  to  lance  or
remove  it.

Hair  On his hair} — It reached, a follower tells us, to his

shoulders ;  according  to  another  to  the  tip  of  his  ears.  His
hair  used  to  be  combed  ;  it  was  neither  curling  nor  smooth.
He  had,  says  one,  four  curled  locks.  His  hair  was  ordinarily
parted,  but  he  did  not  care  if  it  was  not  so.  According  to
another  tradition,  '  The  Jews  and  Christians  used  to  let  their
hair  fall  down,  while  the  heathen  parted  it.  Now  Mohammad
loved  to  follow  the  people  of  the  Book  in  matters  concerning
which  he  had  no  express  command.  So  he  used  to  let  down
his  hair  without  parting  it. Subsequently,  however,  he  fell

Cupping  into  the  habit  of  parting  it.'  On  his  being  cupped. — Some  of
the  many  traditions  on  this  head  have  been  quoted  elsewhere.
It  was  a  cure  which  Gabriel  directed  him  to  make  use  of  He
had  the  blood  buried  lest  the  dogs  should  get  at  it.  On  one
occasion,  Mohammad  having  fainted  after  being  cupped,  an
Arab  is  said  to  have  gone  back  from  the  profession  of  Islam.

Moustache  On  his  vwustache. — Mohammad  used  to  clip  his  moustache.
A  Magian  once  came  to  him  and  said  :  *  You  ought  to  clip
your  beard  and  allow  your  moustaches  to  grow.'  '  Nay,'  said
the  Prophet,  '  for  my  Lord  hath  commanded  me  to  clip  the
moustaches  and  allow  the  beard  to  grow.'

Dress  On his dress. — Various traditions are quoted on the

different  colours  he  used  to  wear, — white  chiefly,  but  also
red,  yellow,  and  green.  He  sometimes  put  on  woollen  clothes.
'A'isha  exhibited  a  piece  of  woollen  stuff  in  which  she  swore
that  Mohammad  died.  She  said  that  he  once  had  a  black
woollen  dress ;  and  she  still  remembered,  as  she  spoke,  the
contrast  between  the  Prophet's  fair  skin,  and  the  black  cloth.
'  The  odour  of  it,  however,  becoming  unpleasant,  he  cast  it
^  Cf.  At-Tabari,  i.  1792  f.


xxxvii]  DRESS  531

off, — for  he  loved  sweet  odours.'  He  entered  Mecca  on  the
taking  of  the  city  (some  say)  with  a  black  turban.  He  had
also  a  black  standard.  The  end  of  his  turban  used  to  hang
down  between  his  shoulders.  He  once  received  the  present
of  a  scarf  to  be  worn  as  a  turban  ;  it  had  a  figured  or  spotted
fringe,  and  this  he  cut  off  before  wearing  it.  He  was  very
fond  of  striped  Yemen  stuffs.  He  used  to  wrap  his  turban
many  times  round  his  head,  and  '  the  lower  edge  of  it  would
appear  like  the  soiled  clothes  of  an  oil-dealer.'  He  once
prayed  in  a  silken  dress,  and  then  cast  it  aside  with
abhorrence,  saying  :  '  Sjich  stuff  ii  doth  not  become  the  pious  to
wear.'  On  another  occasion,  as  he  prayed  in  a  figured  or
spotted  mantle,  the  spots  attracted  his  notice  ;  when  he  had
ended  he  said  :  '  Take  azvay  that  mantle,  for  verily  it  hath
distracted  me  in  my  prayers,  a?id  bring  me  a  common  one!
His  sleeve  ended  at  the  wrist.  The  robes  in  which  he  was
in  the  habit  of  receiving  embassies,  and  his  fine  Hadramaut
mantle,  remained  with  the  Caliphs  ;  when  worn  or  rent  these
garments  were  mended  with  fresh  cloth  ;  and  in  after  times
the  Caliphs  used  to  wear  them  at  the  festivals.  When  he  put
on  new  clothes,  whether  an  undergarment,  a  girdle,  or  a
turban,  the  Prophet  would  offer  up  a  prayer  such  as  this:
•  Praise  be  to  the  Lord,  who  hath  clothed  me  with  that
which  shall  hide  my  nakedness  and  adorn  me  while  I  live.
I  pray  Thee  for  the  good  that  is  in  this  raiment,  and  I
seek  refuge  from  the  evil  that  is  in  the  same.'  Mohammad
had  a  piece  of  tanned  leather  which  was  ordinarily  spread
for  him  in  the  Mosque,  to  pray  upon.  He  had  also  a  mat
of  palm-fibre  for  the  same  purpose  :  this  was  always  taken,
after  the  public  prayers,  into  his  wives'  apartments  for  use
there.

On  his  golden  ring. — Mohammad  had  a  ring  made  of  gold  ;  Golden  ring
he  used  to  wear  it,  with  the  stone  inwards,  on  his  right  hand.
The  people  began  to  follow  his  example  and  make  rings  of
gold  for  themselves.  Thereupon  the  Prophet,  ascending  the
pulpit,  sat  down  and,  taking  off  the  ring,  said  :  By  the  Lord
I  will  not  wear  this  ring  ever  again  ;  so  saying,  he  threw  it  from
him.  And  all  the  people  did  likewise.  According  to  another
tradition,  he  cast  it  away  because  it  had  distracted  his
attention  when  preaching ;  or,  again,  because  the  people  were
attracted by  it. He then prohibited the use altogether


53-


IBN  SA'D'S  DESCRIPTION


[chap.


Silver  ring of golden Signet rings. On his silver ring. — Already
mentioned  at  p.  Ixvii.

Shoes  On  his  shoes. — His  servant,  Anas,  had  charge  of  his  shoes

and  of  his  water-pot.  After  his  master's  death  Anas  used  to
show  the  shoes.  They  were  after  the  Hadramaut  pattern,
with  two  thongs.  In  the  year  lOO  or  i  lo  A.H,,  one  went  to
buy  shoes  at  Mecca,  and  tells  us  that  the  shoemaker  offered
to  make  them  exactly  after  the  model  of  Mohammad's,  which
he  said  he  had  seen  in  the  possession  of  Fatima,  grand-
daughter of  A1-' Abbas.  His  shoes  used  to  be  cobbled.  He  was
in  the  habit  of  praying  with  his  shoes  on.  On  one  occasion,
having  taken  them  off  at  prayers,  all  the  people  did  likewise  ;
but  Mohammad  told  them  there  was  no  necessity,  for  he  had
merely  taken  off  his  own  because  Gabriel  had  apprised  him
that  there  was  some  dirty  substance  attaching  to  them
(cleanliness  being  required  in  all  the  surroundings  at  prayer).
The  thongs  of  his  shoes  once  broke  and  they  mended  them
for  him  by  adding  a  new  piece ;  after  the  service  Mohammad
desired  the  shoes  to  be  taken  away  and  the  thongs  restored
as  they  were  before  ;  '  for,'  said  he,  '  I  was  distracted  at  prayer
thereby.'

Toothpicks  His  toothpicks. — 'A'isha  tells  us  that  Mohammad  never  lay

down,  by  night  or  by  day,  but  on  waking  he  applied  the  tooth-
pick to  his  teeth  before  he  performed  ablution.  He  used  it  so
much  as  to  wear  away  his  gums.  The  toothpick  was  always
placed  conveniently  for  him  at  night,  so  that,  when  he  got  up
to  pray,  he  might  use  it  before  his  lustrations.  One  says  that
he  saw  him  with  the  toothpick  in  his  mouth,  and  that  he  kept
saying '«,  '«,  as  if  about  to  vomit.  His  toothpicks  were  made
of  the  green  wood  of  the  palm-tree.  He  never  travelled
without  one.  Articles  of  toilet. — Already  noticed  at  p.  331.
He  very  frequently  oiled  his  hair,  poured  water  on  his  beard,
and  applied  antimony  to  his  eyes.  The  Prophet  used  to  snuff
sinisini  (sesamum),  and  wash  his  hands  in  a  decoction  of  the
wild  plum-tree.  When  he  was  afraid  of  forgetting  anything,  he
would  tie  a  thread  on  his  finger  or  his  ring.

Armour  Amiour. — Four  Sections  are  devoted to  the  description

of  his  armour — swords,  coats  of  mail,  shields,  lances,  and  bows.

Horses  His  horscs,  &c. — The  first  horse  which  Mohammad  ever

possessed  was  one  he  purchased  of  the  Beni  Fezara,  for  ten
'  At-Tabari,  i.  1782  ff.  ;  Ibn  Koteiba,  p.  T^  f.


Articles  of
toilet


XXXVII.]  HIS  HORSES  AND  CAMELS  533

ounces  of  silver,  and  he  called  its  name  Es-Sekb  (running
water),  from  the  easiness  of  its  paces.  Mohammad  was
mounted  on  it  at  the  battle  of  Ohod,  when  there  was  but  one
other  horse  from  Medina  on  the  field.  He  had  also  a  horse
called  Sabaha;  he  raced  it  and  it  won,  and  he  was  greatly
rejoiced  thereat  He  had  a  third  horse  named  Al-Murtajis
(neigher).  When  the  white  mule  Duldul  arrived  from  the
Mukaukis,  Mohammad  sent  it  to  his  wife  Um  Selama ;  and
she  gave  some  wool  and  palm-fibre,  of  which  they  made  a
rope  and  halter.  Then  he  brought  out  a  garment,  doubled  it
fourfold,  and  throwing  it  over  the  back  of  the  mule,  straight-
way mounted  it,  with  one  of  his  followers  behind  him.  This
mule  survived  till  the  reign  of  Mu'awiya.  Farwa  (the  Syrian
governor  said  to  have  died  a  martyr)  sent  the  Prophet  a  mule
called  Fidda  (Silver)  and  he  gave  it  to  Abu  Bekr ;  also  an  ass,
which  died  on  the  march  back  from  the  Farewell  pilgrimage.
He  had  another  ass  called  Yitfiir.  'All  was  anxious  to  breed
a  mule  similar  to  that  of  Mohammad ;  but  Mohammad  told
him  that  '  no  one  would  propose  so  unnatural  a  cross  save  one
that  lacked  knowledge.'  Ridijig  camels. — Besides  Al-Kaswa,  Riding
Mohammad  had  a  camel  called  Al-Adbd,  which  in  speed  ^^^^^^
outstripped  all  others.  Yet  one  day  an  Arab  passed  it  when
at  its  fleetest  pace.  The  Muslims  were  chagrined  at  this ;
but  Mohammad  reproved  them,  saying  :  '  It  is  the  property
of  the  Lord,  that  whensoever  men  exalt  anything,  or  seek  to
exalt  it,  then  He  putteth  down  the  same.'  Milch  camels. —  Milch  camels
Mohammad  had  twenty  milch  camels,  the  same  that  were
plundered  at  Al-Ghaba.  Their  milk  was  for  the  support  of
his  family  :  every  evening  they  gave  two  large  skinsful.  Um
Selama  relates :  *  Our  chief  food  when  we  lived  with
Mohammad  was  milk.  The  camels  used  to  be  brought  from
Al-Ghaba  every  evening.  I  had  one  called  Al-'Aris,  and
'A'isha  one  called  As-Semrd.  The  herdman  fed  them  at  Al-
Jauwanlya  and  brought  them  to  our  homes  in  the  evening.
There  was  also  one  for  Mohammad.  Hind  and  Asma,  two
herdmen,  used  to  feed  them,  one  day  at  Dhu'1-Jedr,  the  other
at  Al-Jemma.  They  beat  down  leaves  from  the  wild  trees
for  them,  and  on  these  the  camels  fed  during  the  night
They  were  milked  for  the  guests  of  the  Prophet,  and  his
family  got  what  was  over.  If  the  evening  drew  in  and  the
camels'  milk  was  late  in  being  brought,  Mohammad  would


534


IBN  SA'D'S  DESCRIPTION


[chap.


say :  *  The  Lord  make  thirsty  him  who  maketh  thirsty  the
Milch  flocks  family  of  Mohammad  at  night.'  Milch  flocks. — Mohammad
had  seven  goats  which  Um  Aiman  used  to  tend  (this "probably
refers  to  an  early  period  of  his  residence  at  Medina).^  His
flocks  grazed  at  Dhu'1-Jedr  and  Al-Jemma  alternately,  and
were  brought  back  to  the  house  of  the  wife  whose  turn  it  was
for  Mohammad  to  be  in  her  chamber.  A  favourite  goat
having  died,  the  Prophet  desired  its  skin  to  be  tanned.
He  attached  a  peculiar  blessing  to  the  possession  of  goats.
'  There  is  no  house,'  he  would  say,  *  possessing  a  goat,  but
a  blessing  abideth  thereon  ;  and  there  is  no  house  possessing
three  goats,  but  the  angels  pass  the  night  there  praying  for
Servants  its  inmates  until  the  morning.'  Mohammad's  sei'vants. —
Fourteen  or  fifteen  persons  are  mentioned  who  served  the
Prophet  at  various  times.  His  slaves  he  always  freed.^
Houses  The  houses  of  his  wives. — 'Abdallah  ibn  Yazld  relates  that

he  saw  the  houses  in  which  the  wives  of  the  Prophet  dwelt,  at
the  time  when  'Omar  ibn  'Abd  al-'Aziz,  governor  of  Medina,
(about  A.H.  lOo)  demolished  them.  They  were  built  of
unburnt  bricks,  and  had  separate  apartments  with  partitions
of  palm-branches,  daubed  (or  built  up)  with  mud  ;  he  counted
nine  houses,  each  having  separate  rooms,  in  the  space  extend-
ing from  the  house  of  'A'isha  to  the  house  of  Asma  daughter
of  Al-Hosein.  Observing  the  dwelling-place  of  Um  Selama,
he  questioned  her  grandson  concerning  it ;  and  he  told  him
that  when  the  Prophet  was  absent  on  the  expedition  to
Tebuk,  Um  Selama  built  up  an  addition  to  her  house  with  a
wall  of  unburnt  bricks.  When  Mohammad  returned,  he
went  in  to  her  and  asked  what  new  building  this  was.  She
replied :  '  I  purposed,  O  Prophet,  to  shut  out  the  glances  of
men  thereby  ! '  Mohammad  answered  :  '  O  Um  Selama !
verily,  the  most  unprofitable  thing  that  eateth  up  the  wealth
of  a  believer  is  building.'  A  citizen,  present  at  the  time,
confirmed  this  account,  and  added  that  the  curtains  (Anglo-
Indict,  Purdas)  of  the  doors  were  of  black  hair-cloth.  He
was  present,  he  said,  when  the  despatch  of  the  Caliph  *Abd
al-Malik  (a.h.  86-88)  was  read  aloud,  commanding  that  these
houses  should  be  taken  down  and  the  site  brought  within  the
area  of  the  Mosque,  and  he  never  witnessed  sorer  weeping
than  there  was  amongst  the  people  that  day.  One
^  Cf.  At-Tabari,  i.  1786.  2  qt  y^^  Koteiba,  p.  70  f.


XXXVII.]  HOUSES  OF  HIS  WIVES  535

exclaimed  :  '  I  wish,  by  the  Lord !  that  they  would  leave
these  houses  alone  just  as  they  are ;  then  would  those  that
spring  up  hereafter  in  Medina,  and  strangers  from  the  ends
of  the  earth,  come  and  see  what  kind  of  building  sufficed  for
the  Prophet's  own  abode,  and  the  sight  thereof  would  deter
men  from  extravagance  and  pride.'  There  were  four  houses
of  unburnt  bricks,  with  apartments  partitioned  off  by  palm-
braiiches ;  and  five  houses  made  of  palm-branches  built  up
with  mud  and  without  any  separate  apartments.  Each  was
three  yards  in  length.  Some  say  that  they  had  leather
curtains  for  the  doors.  One  could  reach  the  roof  with  the
hand.  The  house  of  Haritha  was  next  to  that  of  Moham-
mad. Now  whenever  Mohammad  took  to  himself  a  new
wife,  he  added  another  house  to  the  row,  and  Haritha  was
obliged  successively  to  remove  his  house,  and  to  build  on
the  space  beyond.  At  last  this  was  repeated  so  often  that
the  Prophet  said  to  those  about  him  :  *  Verily,  it  shameth
me  to  turn  Haritha  over  and  over  again  out  of  his  house.'

Mohammad's  private  property. — There  were  seven  gardens  Properties
which  Mukheirik  the  Jew  left  to  Mohammad.  'Omar  ibn
'Abd  al-'AzTz,  the  Caliph,  said  that,  when  governor  of  Medina,
he  ate  of  the  fruit  of  these,  and  never  tasted  sweeter  dates.
Others  say  that  these  gardens  formed  a  portion  of  the  con-
fiscated estates  of  the  Beni  an-Nadlr.  They  were  afterwards
dedicated  perpetually  to  pious  purposes.  Mukheirik  is  said
to  have  been  a  learned  Jewish  priest  and  a  leader  of  the
Beni  Kainuka',  who  '  recognised  Mohammad  by  his  marks,
and  identified  him  as  the  promised  Prophet'  But  the  love
of  his  own  religion  prevailed,  so  that  he  did  not  openly  join
Islam.  Nevertheless,  on  the  day  of  Ohod  he  put  on  his
armour,  notwithstanding  it  was  the  Sabbath  day,  and  went
forth  with  the  Muslims  and  was  killed.  His  corpse  was
found  and  was  buried  near  the  Muslims ;  but  he  was  not
prayed  over,  nor  did  Mohammad  beg  mercy  for  his  soul  then
or  afterwards ;  the  utmost  he  would  say  of  him  was,  ^Mu-
kheirik, the  best  of  the  Jews  !'  He  had  large  possessions  in
groves  and  gardens,  and  left  them  all  to  Mohammad.^

Mohammad  had  three  other  properties  : — I. The  confis-
cated lands  of  the  Beni  an-Nadlr. The  produce  of  these  was
appropriated  to  his  own  wants. One  of  the  plots  was  called
^  A{-Tabari,  i.  1424.


536  IBN  SA'D'S  DESCRIPTION  [chap,  xxxvii.

Mashrabat  Uni  Ibrahim,  the  '  summer  garden  of  (Mary)  the
mother  of  Ibrahim,'  where  the  Prophet  used  to  visit  her.
II.  Fadak  ;  the  fruits  of  this  were  reserved  as  a  fund  for
indigent  travellers.  III.  The  fifth  share,  and  the  lands
received  by  capitulation,  in  Kheibar.  These  were  divided
into  three  parts.  Two  were  devoted  for  the  benefit  of  the
Muslims  generally  {i.e.  for  State  purposes) ;  the  proceeds  of
the  third,  Mohammad  assigned  for  the  support  of  his  own
family ;  and  what  remained  over  he  added  to  the  fund  for
the  use  of  the  Muslims.
Wells  Wells  from  zvhich  Mohammad  drank. — A  variety  of  wells

are  enumerated  out  of  which  Mohammad  drank,  and  on
which  he  invoked  a  blessing,  spitting  into  them.  One  night
as  he  sat  by  the  brink  of  the  well  called  Gharsh,  he  said :
'  Verily,  I  am  sitting  beside  one  of  the  fountains  of  Paradise.'
He  praised  its  water  above  that  of  all  other  wells,  and  not
only  drank  of  it  but  bathed  in  it.  He  also  drank  from  the
fountain  of  Buda'a,  taking  up  the  water  in  both  his  hands
and  sipping  it.  He  would  send  the  sick  to  bathe  in  this
fountain,  *  and  when  they  had  bathed,  it  used  to  be  as  if  they
were  loosed  from  their  bonds.'  The  well  called  Ruma
belonged  to  a  man  of  the  Beni  Muzeina.  Mohammad  said
that  it  would  be  a  meritorious  deed  if  any  one  were  to  buy
this  well  and  make  it  free  to  the  public.  'Othman,  hearing
this,  purchased  the  well  for  400  dinars,  and  attached  a  pulley
to  it.  Mohammad,  again  happening  to  pass  the  well,  and
apprised  of  what  'Othman  had  done,  prayed  the  Lord  to
grant  him  a  reward  in  Paradise,  and  calling  for  a  bucket  of
water  drank  therefrom,  and  praised  the  water,  saying  that  it
was  both  cold  and  sweet.


INDEX


'Abbas,  Al-,  uncle  of  Mohammad,
xxxvii-xxxviii,  Ivii,  ex  «.,  lo,
34,  129,  130,  135  «.,  166  «.,  172
«.,  232  «.,  252,  389,  403-406,
409,  416,  417,  430,  482,  483  «•,
484,  489,  491  n.,  494  «.,  501  «.,

5°3  n-
'Abbasids, xxxvii-xl, Ixxvii, Ixxx,

Ixxxiii, Ixxxvi, 403, 483 «.,

505  n.
'Abd  al-Harith,  Bishop  of  Beni'l-

Harith,  459.
al-Keis,  Beni^  399  n.

Malik,  Caliph,  534

MasTh,  chief  of  the  Beni  Kinda,

459
Muttalib,  ex  «.,  cxiii,  cxiv,  cxv,
cxvi,  cxvii,  cxix,  2,  3,  4,  5,
9,  17,  36,  58,  63,  89,  106,
129,  170,  226,  259,  417
'Ozza. .5^1?  Abu  Lahab
ar-Rahman ('Aziz),  of  the  Beni
Jo'fi,  467
Rahman  ibn  'Auf,  52 «., 58,
'  69, 174,  175  «•>  227,  273,
320  «.,  347,  359 ;z.,  529  ;
his  conjugal  relations,  174,

347
'Abdallah, father  of  Mohammad,
ex  ;;.,  cxv,  4,  359

ibn  Abi  Omeiya,  403  n.

ibn  Arkat  [Oreikit],  136  n.

ibn  az-Zubeir,  Ixvi,  32  «.,  141  «.,
506  n.

ibn  Jahsh,  208,  209,  210,  300

ibn  Jud'an,  14  f.,  18,  66

ibn  Mas'ud,  xvii  «.,  xx  «.,  Ixvi  «.,
59,  201,  227

ibn  Obei,  116,  131,  181,  182,  238,
241,  242,  254,  256,  257,  268,
269  «.,  281,  282,  284,  296,
297,  298,  300,  302  «.,  440, 447,
448,  513,  517

637


'Abdallah  ibn  'Omar,  38 1  ;/.,  421
ibn  Oneis,  276,  277,  349
ibn Rawaha, 349, 381 n., 387,

393,  394,  395
ibn  Um  Mektum,  65,  119  «.,  256
ibn  YazTd,  534
son  of  Abu  Bekr,  140,  141
son  of  Abu Kohafa. See  Abu

Bekr
son  of  Abu  Sarh,  xv  «.,  230,  410,

411
son  of  AI-'Abbas,  472  «.,  474,  515
the  poet,  232
'Abd  ed-Dar,  eix,  ex,  exix,  3,  223,

258  n.
'Abd Menaf, cix,  ex,  cxi,  exix,  3,
88 _
Shams,  cix,  ex  «.,  cxi,  exii,  exix,

15,33,415
Abel,  fable  concerning,  100
Ablution,  ceremonial,  333  n.
Abraha, the Abyssinian invader,

li,  Ixx,  exvi,  3,  5,  9,41,  355

Abraham,  xev,  xcix,  ev,  exviii,  17,

36,  83,  84,  92  n.,  99,  100,  149,

152,  180,  231  «.,  409,  472  n.

Abrahamie  tribes,  114

'Abs,  Beni,  351,  398  ;  their  ensign,

352
Abu  'Afak,  240

'Amir,  180,  253,  258,  447  7i.
'Azza,  the  poet,  executed,  267
BasTr,  364,365,  514
Bekr ('Abdallah, son of Abu
Kohafa), xv «., xxi, xxv,
xxxvi, xlix  «., Iv «., Ixviii,
Ixxii,  42,  49  «.,  52  «.,  56,  57,
58,  59,  67,  89,  91,  113,  122,
123  n., 135, 136, 138, 139-
143, 165, 168  «., 169, 171,
172,  173,  219,  222,  224,  231,
250,  255,  263,  266, 279 w.,
283, 285,  296  «.,  300,  301,


538


INDEX


303  n.,  338  «.,  342,  348  «,
356>  359,  363  «•,  379,  3^6  «.,
390,  396  «.,  397,  402  «.,  408,
415,  4i6«.,  418,419  «•,  427,
440,  451,  452,  459,  463,  477,
478,  479,  481,  482,  485,  486,
487,  490,  492,  493,  497,  498,
499,  500,  501,  502,  503,  504,
505, 506, 507, 508  «., 509,
512,528,  533
Abu  Bera,  278,  279,  280  n.,  465
Da'ud,  xlii
Dujana,  260

Eiyub,  170,  171,  378,  527
Fukeiha. See  Yesar
Hanzala,  404
Hodheifa,  60,  228
Hureira,  xvii  «.,  528
Ishak,  Ixxvi

Jahl,'liv,  42,  89,  90,  107,  133,  135

n., 137,  206,  218,  220,  223,

226,  228,  229,  232,  263  «.,

310,  355,  407

Jandal,  son  of  Suheil,  363,  364  n.

Keis,  poet,  117

Kobeis,  hill  of,  2,  3,  93,  388,  407
Kohafa,  father  of  Abu  Bekr,  141
?z.,  407,  408
Abu'l- 'Abbas,  xix  n.
Abu Lahab, Mohammad's uncle,
liv,  ex  «.,  5,  10,  34,  42,  58,  61
«.,  88,  93,  94,  96,  107,  172,217,
232,  236
Abul-'As,  Mohammad's  son-in-law,

33,  172,  344,  345
Abu'l-Bakhtari,  227
Abu'l-Bukeir,  135  tr.
Abulfeda (Abu'1-Fida), historian,

Ixxxvi
Abu'l- Kasim,  name  of  Mohammad,

25'  ...

Kasim  as-Suhaili,  Ixxix
Abu  Lubaba,  216,  315,  316
Ma'shar,  biographer,  Ixxvi
Na'ila,  247
'Obeida,  58,  260  «.,  262,  343,  359

«•,  397,  398,  406,  500
Rabi'a,  133
Rafi',  Mohammad's  servant,  172,

256  «.,  376  n.,  425,  526
Rafi',  the  Jew,  assassinated,  348,

349,  375
Rimtha,  529

Selama,  58,  275,  276,  289,  290
Selama,  the  jurisconsult,  347
Sufyan,  xxxvii,  liii,  Ivi,  Ivii,  ex  ;?.,

15,  33,  60,  206,  207,  214-218,


219  «.,  236,  237  «.,  243,  244,
253,  258,  263,  264,  275,  286,
287  «., 306, 308, 314. 344,
346  n.,  351,  356, 357,  368,
372,  383,  401,  404,  405,  406,
422,  451,  452,  453,  459  «.  ;
attempt  to  assassinate,  351
Abu  Sufyan  ibn  al-Harith,  403  n.
Talib,  son  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib,
ex  «.,  10,  II,  18,  20,  34,  42,
56,  61  «.,  68,  87,  93,  94,  104,
105,  106,  113,  121,  129,218,
227,  404,  411  «.,  517;  shi'b
of, 93, 94, 517; house  of,
121,  129  ;  tomb  of,  408
Torab,  208
YazTd. See  Suheil
Abwa,  A1-,  8,  206

Abyssinia,  Christianity  in,  xciii,  36,
45,  60,  118
first  emigration  to,  69
return  from,  80,  82,  86,  383
second  emigration  to,  86,  87,  91,

132  n.
embassy  of  Koreish  to,  92
Meccan  trade  with,  204,  211
Mohammad's projects concern-
ing, 366,  367
and  despatches  to  court  of,  372
its  cathedral,  490
Abyssinians,  xciii,  436
Acacia  Tree  {Pledge  of  the  Tree),

_ 358,  361,  416  «.,  513
'Ad,  200  ti.
Adam,  and  the  Breath  of  Life,  loi,

157

'Addas,  servant  of 'Otba,  no,  222

Aden,  xci  n.,  96  n.

Adhan  (Azan),  452

Adhri'at,  242

Adhruh,  443

'Adi,  son  of  Hatim  of  Tai,'  436
Bent,  218

Adultery,  302,  303

'Adwan,  Bent,  xciv

^lius  Gallus,  Ixxxix

Agra,  its  Motee  Masjid,  177

Ahmed  ibn  Hanbal,  Ixxviii

Ahmed,  title  of  Mohammad,  5,
157  «.,  495  n.

Aiman,  son  of 'Obeid,  416  n.

'A'ir,  Jebel. See  Jebel  'A'ir

'A'isha,  xxix,  xliv,  Iv  n.,  Ivi  n.,  Ixvi,
25,  57,  113,  141  n.,  142,  171,
172,  173,  176,  177,  178,  200  n.,
201,  233,  250,  291,  296,  298,
299-304,  308,  309  «.,  318,  331  «.,


INDEX


539


348,  371,  375  «•.  384,  402  «.,
403  71.,  426,  427,  428  n.,  482,
483,  484,  486,  487,  488,  491,
492,  493,  494,  495,  497,  499,
501,  504,  505  «.,  506,  5",  515,
524,  528,  530,  532,  533,  534

•Aiyash,  133,  134  fi.

Ajyad,  18

Akaba  or  Acaba,  the  modern  (or
Elath),  Ixxxix. See  Ayla

'Akaba,  A1-,  glen  near  Mina,  471  f.

'Akaba,  A1-,  129,  131  «.  ;  first  pledge
of,  118,  122  ;  second,  Ixxv,  130,
132  «.,  180,  199

Akabah,  E1-,  408  n.

'Aklk,  A1-,  166,  232,  253,  265

'AkTl,  son  of  Abu  Talib,  ex  n.,  34,
232  «.

Akra',  A1-,  chief  of TemTm,  422,

434  «•
'Ala  ibn  al-Hadrami,  A1-,  457
'All  Bey, 138  n.,  470  «., 471 n.,

472  }i.
All,  cousin  of  Mohammad,  xv  ;?.,
xxiii,  xxiv,  xxxvi,  xxxvii,  xl,
xli,  xliv,  Ivii,  ex  «.,  2,  34,  42,
49??.,  56,61  «.,  105,  135,  I37«.,
140,  142,  169,  174,  208,  220,
225,  227  n.,  250,  259,  260,  262,
282,  301,  304,  310,  311,  315,
319,  345  n.,  346,  348,  358,  375,
376,  383  «.,  390,  395,  396  n.,
401  «.,  402,  410,  411  «.,  413,
416  «.,  421,  436,440,451,  452,

464,  465, 469, 483 «., 484,

494  «•,  501,  503,  505  «•,  512,

.  533 .

'Alids,  xxiv,  xxxvii,  xxxviii,  Ixxxin,

505  n.
Alilat. See  Al-Lat
'Aliya, or Upper Medina. See

Upper  Medina
Allies. See  Ansar
Alms  (Zakat,  Sadakat),  79,  193  ;z.,

432  «.,  526
Amalekites,  xcix,  ciii,  114
Ambarlya,  425  n.
Ameer  (chief),  500
Amin,  Al-  (the Faithful), title of

Mohammad,  20,  29
Amina,  mother  of  Mohammad,  4,

6,  8,  58
Amir  al-Mu'minIn,  210
'Amir,  Beni,  246  «.,  278,  279,  281,

465,  466

ibn  al-Hadrami,  223

ibn  at-'iofail,  278,  279,  465,  466


*Amir  ibn Fuheira, 59, 140, 141,

279  n.
'Amman,  1 1
'Ammar,  67,  68
Amputation of feet and hands,

350  ff. _
'Amr  ibn  al-'As,  21777.,  258,  311,
390,  391,  397,  398, 412, 455,
457
ibn  al-Hadrami,  209,  217,  218
\hr\ 'Aui,  BcTti,  167, 168,  215  «,,

216  «.,  240
ibn  Jahsh,  Ixx  n.
ibn  Omeiya,  279,  351,  372
ibn  Thabit,  271  n.
Koreishite  chief,  310
the  'Odhrite,  Ixxiii  n.
Anas, or Anis, Mohammad's
servant,  202, 331 «., 378 «.,
526,  532
Ancyra,  Meccan  trade  with,  cxii
Angel  of  Death,  495  71.
Angels,  cvii^z.,  loi,  269,  314,  323  «.,

385  n.,  418  71.,  428
Ansar  {Helpers), 135  «.,  179, 180,

422  7t.
Antartus,  Kor'an  preserved  there,

xxii  71.
Antichrist,  Mohammadanism  and,

.448 .

Anticipations  of  Mohammad  and
Islam,  Ixii

Apostles  of  Christ,  148  «.

Arabia  before  the  time  of  Moham-
mad described,  Ixxxviii  ff.  ;  the
Prophet's  ambition  regarding
55  ;  expulsion  of  the  Jews  and
Christians  from,  381  ;  supreme
authority  over,  attained  by
Mohammad,  437  ;  his  death-
bed commands  concerning,
381  77.,  490
Felix,  Ixxxix,  xc
Petrjea,  xc

Arabs,  their  love  of  poetry,  xvi,  li,
lii,  Ixxiii  «.  ;  character  of,
xxxi,  xciv  ;  stone  worship,  ciii  ;
veneration  for  Mecca,  3

'Arafat,  Mount,  ci,  cii,  cvi,  cxi,
cxviii,  I,  2,  83,  108,  469,  470 ;
described,  470  «.

'Araka,  A1-,  son  of,  311

Architecture  of  the  Mosque  at
Medina,  177

Arls,  the  Well,  Ixviii

Arkam,  A1-,  house  of,  59,  60,  63,  64,
■  65,  66,  67,  89,  90,  91


540


INDEX


Armour  of  Mohammad,  532
Arwa,  65

Asad,  Beni^  275,  276,  289,  306,  477
As'ad, grandson of  Kosai,  ex  «.,

23
As'ad  ibn  Zurara, 117  «., 118  «„

119,  171,  199,  201  n.
Asbagh,  A1-,  a  Christian  chief,  347
Ascension  of  Jesus,  147,  148
Ash'ar,  Beni,  399  «.

Ash'ath,  A1-,  chief  of  Beni  Kinda,

462
Ashja'j  Beni^  306,  399  n.
Ashor, or "  Fast of the Tenth,"

191  n.
Asia  Minor,  struggles  in,  122,  368,

_ 509

'Asim,  259  7Z.,  277  n
Aslam,  Betti,  354  n.
Asma,  bint  Omeis,  390,  396,  489
daughter  of  Abu  Bekr,  140,  141
daughter  of  Al-Hosein,  534
daughter  of  Merwan,  239
Mohammad's  herdsman,  533
of  Temlm,  133  n.
Assassinatio7is  .-—of 'Asma, 239  ;
of  Abu 'Afak, 240 ; of Ka'b
ibn al-Ashraf, 248  ; of Ibn
Suneina,  249  ; of  Sufyan ibn
Khalid, 276; of Abu Rafi',
348  ; of  Oseir,  349  ; attempt
to  assassinate  Abu  Sufyan,  351
Asses,  their  flesh  forbidden  as  food,

381  ;  Mohammad's,  533
Asvvad,  A1-,  shepherd  of  Kheibar,

383

Koreish  warrior,  224

father  of  Zam'a,  237  n.

the  impostor,  Ixxxi,  478,  479,  492
'Atika,  217  71.

Atonement,  Fast  of  the,  191,  194
'Attab,  415,  424
Aus, the, 115, 116, 118, 119 «.,

120,  129, 130 «., 167, 168 72.,

180, 182  «.,  208,  215  «.,  222,
239,  246,  256,  257  «.,  258,  269
«.,  272,  281,  300,  309,  312,  315,
316,  318,  326  71.
ibn  Al-Khaula,  501  n.

Autas,  414,  415.417

'Auwam,  AI-,  ex  n.

Ayla,  xci,  441-443

Azan  (Adhan), or call to prayer,
195,  196  «.,  338  71.

Azdites,  xci,  461

'Aziz  (glorious),  467  ■

'Azzal,  319


Bab  AN-nisa  ('  women's porch '),

176
Bab  Rahma  (Gate  of  Mercy),  176
Babylon,  Meccan  trade  with,  244
Badhan, governor  of  the  Yemen,

371,476,478
Bahra,  Beni.,  394  n.
Bahran,  244
Bahrein,  A1-,  399  «.,  424,  438,  455,

479
Bajlla,  Be7ii,  461
Baki', al-Gharkad, burial-ground

at  Medina,  199,  232
Bakum,  a  Greek  captain,  architect

of  the  Ka'ba,  28
Ball,  Be7n,  394  «.,  397,  439
Ban  against  Mohammad,  104
Baptism,  148,  454  ;/.,  458
Bara,  A1-,  of  the  Khazraj,  129,  130
Bara'a  {the  Release),  452
Baraka. See  Um  Aiman
Barnabas,  Gospel  of,  155  n.
Barr  el-Munakhah,  173  7t.
Basra,  Ixxix  ; copy  of  the  Kor'an

at,  xxiii  71.
Bedawi  Arabs,  xci,  cv,  cviii,  5,  66,

122, 142, 207, 253,  295, 306,

312, 320, 321,  348,  350, 351,

356, 357, 360, 361, 374,  397,

406, 407,  413,  416, 420 71.,  422,

434,  439,  440,  446.  466,  477
Bedr,  xix,  lix,  Ixxxii,  58  71., 125  n.,
166,  207,  213,  216,  312
battle  of,  xxxiii,  60  «.,  65  7t.,  134
71., 174, 190, 214-237,  238,
239,  241,  243,  246,  250,  252,
253,  255,  260,  263,  276,  277,
278, 279, 289, 355,  358  71.,
365 ;/.  ; the second Bedr,
287  ; Mohammad's  conduct
at,  513
Beit-uUah  (Jhe  house  of  God),  32  «.
Bekr ibn 'Abdmanat, Be7ti, 218,
363,  400,  431  71.,  457
ibn  Wa'il,  BeTti,  394  n.
Belka,  the,  394,  439,  507,  508  n.
Be7tch,  men  of  the,  176,  177  7t.
Beni  Sheiba,  gate  of  Ka'ba. See

Sheiba
Benjamin, the Jew, maltreated,

248  71.,  249  71.

Ber  (wild  plum-tree),  81  7t.

Bilal,  Ivi  71.,  59,  67,  194,  196,  197,
227,  257,  266,  315,  377,  388,
409,  433,  442,  462,  470,  487 __

Biographies  of  Mohammad,  xxxiii,
xxxix,  xl,  Ixxv,  Ixxvi-lxxvii


INDEX


541


Bi'r  Ma'una,  massacre  at,  279,  281

306,  351  7/.,  465  ;  curse  against

perpetrators  of,  280,  467
Birth  of  Mohammad,  cxix,  5
Bishops. See  Clergy
Bishr,  son  of  Al-Bara,  379,  481
Black  Stone,  ci,  cii,  civ,  28,  29,  35,

112,  387,  40S
Bo'ath,  battle  of,  115, 116,  117  ??.,

242,  319
Booty,  revelation  as  to  division  of,

229  ;  fraudulent  appropriation

of,  382
Borak,  the  winged  horse,  122
Bosphorus,  122,  509
Bosra,  11,  21,  369,  393
Boundary  pillars  at  Mecca,  409
Bowat,  207

Brotherhood  at  Medina,  Ivii,  174
Budii'a,  fountain  of,  536
Budeil,  Khoza'ite chief, 356,  401,

404
Bukhari,  A1-,  traditionist,  xli,  xlii,

xliii,  Ixxviii,  Ixxxvi
Burial-grounds : at Medina, see

Baki'  al-Gharkad  ; at  Mecca,

see  Jannat  al-Maala
Burka'  (curtain of Ka'ba door),

31  «.
Byzantium,  122

Cain,  fable  concerning,  100

Cairo,  xxxii,  Ixxix,  31  7i.

Caliph (successor), xxxii, xxxvi,

Ixxxi,  501,  504
Camels  of  Mohammad, 533. See

also  Al-Kaswa
as sacrificial offerings. See
Sacrifice
Canna, commerce with Mecca,

xci  n.
Canons of  criticism  for  tradition,

xlix  ff.
Caravans,  Ixxxix ff., 20, 33, 134,

209, 211,  215,  217,  220, 245,

341,  344,  364
Casting  of  lots, by arrows, 115;

forbidden,  333
stones  at  Mina,  ci,  472
Catapults  used  at  siege  of  At-Ta'if,

418
Catholic  faith  of  Abraham,  17,  36,

152
Cave  of  Hira,  37-38

of  Thaur,  139
Chagan,  the,  368
Chastity,  73


Chosroes,  xcv,  33,  330  «.,  367,  36S,

369,  370,  431
Christian  Scriptures,  79, 103,  150-

153
tradition, Alford  on, li n.  ; in
Syria,  158

Christianity,  Ixii,  xcii,  xcv,  xcvi,
II,  35,  36,  37,  42,  59,  67,  79,
116,  122,  123,  143,  148,  161,
178,  249,  372,  436  7Z.,  458,  460,
461,  509,  522

Christians,  Ixiii,  Ixxii,  xciii,  11,  16,
17,  36,43,  72,  92  n.,gb  «.,  143,
147,149,  150,  152,  154-158,3^6,
432,  441,  453,  454,  456,  463,
490,  530 ;  and  the  eastward
position,  190  //.,  459

Circumcision,  191

Citizens  (of  Medina). See  Medina

Clergy,  Christian,  453,  458,  461  ?z.

Collectors  of  tradition,  xxxii,  xl,  xli,
xliii,  xliv,  xlvi,  Ixix,  Ixxv,  Ixxvii

Commander  of  the  Faithful,  Ixxviii,
211,459;?.

Commerce,  lines  of,  xc,  11,  20,  204,
206,  245

Commutation  of  holy  months,  ci  n.

Covipanions  of  Mohammad  (As-
hab),  xvii  ;z.,  xviii  ;z.,  xxx,  xxxi,
xxxiii,  xxxv,  xl,  xlii,  xliv,  xlix,
I,  Iv,  Ixvi,  Ixxxi,  Ixxxii,  1 76,  177,
283,  317,  387,  396  «.,  410,  440,
490

Constantine,  xcii

Constantinople,  xcv,  xcvi,  36,  66,
122,  171  «.,  368,  369^,,  437

Contests,  chivalrous,  Ixxiv  «.,  13,
16,  434,  435

Contributions  towards  war,  213

Cordova,  Mosque  of,  portions  of
Kor'an  at,  xxiii  n.

Creation,  Sura  on,  loi

Crown  lands  at  Kheibar,  380

Crucifixion  of  Christ,  146,  155
capital  sentence  of,  350

Cupping,  200,  379,  516,  530

Curtain  of  the  Ka'ba,  30-31

Custom. See  Sunna

Damascus,  xxxii,  Ixxx,  Ixxxii,
196  ;/.,  331  ;  copy  of  '0th-
man's  Kor'an  in,  xxiii  n.  ;
mosque  of,  Iv

Damdam  ibn  'Amr,  215,  217,  218

Darim,  Bc7ii^  434

Date-trees  burned  down  by  Mo-
hammad, 282


542


INDEX


Date-water,  pilgrim's  beverage,  474

Daus,  Beni,  399  «.,  418

David,  18,  100,  185,  326

Day  of  Atonement,  188  «.,  194,  195

Deputations to Mohammad,  438,

449-464
Descriptions of Mohammad, 27,

523,  524
Despatches  of  Mohammad,  367-373
Devil's Corner, 472. See also

Casting  stones
Dhakwan,  117  n.,  118  «.

Bent,  280
Dhat  ar-Rika',  Ixx  n.,  287

Atlah,  393
Dhu  Amar,  244

Kar,  battle  of,  431  n.
Karad,  343
Towa,  355,406
Dhubyan,  Bent,  398
Dhu'I-Jedr,  533,  534
Kassa,  343

Fikar,  Mohammad's  sword,  229
Huleifa,  253,  354
Karnein,  Ix  n.

Kholasa,  the Ka'ba of  Yemen,
461
Dihya, the Kelbite, 315 «., 346,

367  ft.,  369  ?i.
Disaffected,  the,  liv,  182,  238,  239,
264, 269, 271 «., 284, 293,
298  «.,  320,  323  «.,  324,  329,
330,444,445  n-,  447,448,  513
Ditch dug round Medina, 307  ;

battle  of  the,  Ixxv,  368,  376  n.
Divine  Commission  of  Mohammad,

46,  48,  72
Divorce,  333,  334-337,  521
Docetfe,  154

Door  of  Ka'ba,  cxiv,  cxvii,  32
Doreid  ibn  as-Simma,  415
Drunkenness,  333
Dudan,  Beni,  60  n.
Duldul, Mohammad's mule, 371,

533
Dumat  al-Jandal  (Duma),  ciii,  28S,

289,  295,  347,  394,  441,  443,  444

Eagle, Black, Mohammad's

standard,  375
Eclipse  of  the  sun,  430
Edessa,  369
Egypt,  Ixxxix,  xci,  xcv,  xcvi,  45,  122,

154,  366,  367,  368,371  ;  ;Oth-

man's Kor'an in, xxiii n.  ;

Arabian trade with, Ixxxix  ;

despatch  to  governor  of,  371


Elath,  naval  station,  Ixxxix
Elephant,  expedition  of,  cxvi,  355
Embassies,  value  of  written  details
of, Ixxii, Ixxiii ; to Medina,

431,455-467
Emigrants,  69,  133,  137,  179
Execution,  Oriental  mode  of,  127  «.,

230  71.

Ezekiel,  xc,  100
Ezra,  100,  147,  453

Fadak,  380,  392,  503,  536

Fadl,  A1-,  son  of  Al-'Abbas,  416  «,,
'  .430,  471,  492,  501

Falling  stars,  53  «.

Falsehood,  when  allowable,  Ixv,
68

Fars,  trade  with  Mecca,  cxi

Farwa,  Syrian  governor,  martyr-
dom of,  396,  533

Fasts,  193,  194,  524

Fath,  A1-,  213  «.

Fatiha,  A1-,  Sura,  38  n.

Fatima,  daughter  of  Mohammad,
23«-,  25,  34,  105,  142,  172,250,
251,  260,  264,  345,  402  n.,
41 1  «.,  425,  482  «.,  483  n.,  494,
503,  528
grand-daughter of Al-'Abbas,

532
wife  of  Sa'id,  60,  90
Fetra,  period  during  which  inspira-
tion was  suspended,  51
Fez,  copies  of  Kor'an  at,  xxiii  n.
Fezara, Bent,  289,  306, 312, 342,

347,  398,  420  «.,  421,  532
Fighting  commanded,  211,  212
Fijar, the, or Sacrilegious War,

13  ff.
Fish,  expedition  of  the,  398
Flood,  the,  cvii  «.,  102
Fornication,  punishment  for,  302  n.
Friday, Muslim day of  worship,

169, 177, 188, 198, 199, 255,

332
Fukeiha,  66

Gabriel,  xiv,  Iviii,  lix,  Ixx,  cvii  «.,
46,  50,  72,  80,  81,  121,  137  «.,
156,  175  n.,  189,  227,  231,
278  «.,  314,  315  «.,  384,  427,
494,  495  n.,  514,  519,  525,  527,
530,  532

Games  of  chance  forbidden,  333

Gates  of  Ka'ba,  28,  32,  469
of  the  Mosque  of  Medina,  176

Gaza,  cxii,  cxiii,  4,  22  n.,  204,  397  n.


INDEX


543


Genii, 48, 52, 53, 53 «•, 7i,  75.

96  n.,  100,  1 10,  III
Gerra,  xc
Ghaba,  A1-,  166  ;/.,  257,  267,  342,

350,  533
Ghanam,  Bern,  135  n.
Gharsh,  well  of,  536
Ghassan, Bent, 439 ; despatches

to  Prince  of,  370,  393
Ghassiinid  dynasty,  xcii,  xcv,  cxi,

21  n.,  33
Ghatafan,  Bent, Ixx  n., 243,  244,

287, 306, 312, 314,  343,  349,

374,  398
Ghazwa  (expedition),  206  «.
Ghiffir,  Bc77i^  376  n.
Girdle  of  Mohammad,  256
Gnostics,  154
Goats  of  Mohammad,  534
Gold,  ring  of. See  Rings
Gospel  history,  144  f.
Gospel,  in  Arabic,  36,  156
Gospels,  123  ;  apocryphal,  155  f.
Government, early form of, at

Mecca,  32  f.
Grave  of  Mohammad,  504  f.
Greek  ship  wrecked  in  Red  Sea,  28
Greeks,  123,  368

Habbar,  344,  345,  346,  410

Hada'ik,  242

Hadramaut,  xc,  xci,  xcii, ciii,  66,

'437,462,463,531
Hadrian,  1 14
Hafsa,  wife  of  Mohammad,  xv  n.,

xxi, xxii, 250, 426 7?., 427,

428  «.,  484,  515
Hagar,  xcix,  cvi,  3
Hajjaj,  Al-j  202  n.
Hakam  ibn  Keisiln,  A1-,  210
Hakim ibn Hizam, nephew of

Khadija,  34,  95,  218,  404,  422
Hakkari,  A1-,  Ixxxii  n.
Hafah,  wife  of  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  4
HalTma,  Mohammad's  nurse,  Ixix,

6,  7,  420
Hamdan,  457  «.,  476
Hamna,  sister  of  Zeinab,  300,  303
Hamra  al-Asad,  266,  267,  272
Hamza,  uncle  of  Mohammad,  Ivi  «.,

ex  «.,  4,  5, 10,  24,  65,  89,  90,

108, 205,  206,  208, 224, 225,

241, 253,  255, 259, 260,  261,

263, 264, 265 «., 266, 390,

411  «.
Hanlfa,  Beni,  xcvii,  373,  457,  458,

477


Hanzala,  son  of  Abu  'Amir,  181  «.,

265 «., 323  71.

Haram,  A1-,  ci,  194  n.

Haran,  xci  n.

Harb,  father  of  Abu  Sufyan,  ex  «.,

cxv,  10,  15,  60  «.,  112  n.
Harith  al-Ausi,  A1-,  216  «.,  237  //.,

260  7t.
Harith,  A1-,  Beni,  xcvii,  459,  464,
493  n.
ibn  'Abd  al-Muttalib,  ex  «.,  4,  10
ibn  Suweid,  executed,  272,  273
VII,  prince  of  the  Beni  Ghassan,
370,  456  7t.
Haritha,  535

Haritha,  father  of  Zeid,  34,  35
Harmala,  442  71.
Hasan,  A1-,  son  of  'All,  251,  402  7z.,

505  «.,  526
Hashim,  ex,  cxi,  cxii,  cxiii,  cxix,  3,
10,  15,  17,  93,  94,  112  71.,  117,

136,  231 71.

Hashimites,  cxii,  18,  88,  93,  94,  95,

104,  136,  225
Hassan  ibn  Thabit,  xxix,  Ixxv,  112,

116,  139,  300,  302  71.,  303,  304,
_  .342  n.,  343  «.,  371,  434
Hatib  ibn  abi  Belta'a,  402
Hatim  of  Tai',  436
Hattiib,  66

Haudha,  chief  of  Al-Jemama,  373
Haura,  A1-,  214
Hawazin,  ISeTii,  xciv,  6,  7,  14,  278,

414, 415,  416,  417,  424, 450,

465
Heart,  prejudice  against  eating  the,

466
Heavenly  journey  of  Mohammad,

33,  121  f.,  187
Hejer,  457
Hell,  cvn  «.,  46,  49,  71,  74,  75,  T],

79,  loi,  127,  159,272,319,  339,

382,  445,  454,466,  519
Heraclius,  xcii,  122,  368,  369,  370,

394  71., 508  71.

Herodotus,  cii

Hijaz, the, Ixxxviii, xci, cvi, 214,

379,  464

Hijr,  A1-,  II,  441

Hijr,  at  the  Ka'ba,  32  71.

Hijra,  the,  xxxiv,  xxxv,  xxxvi,  xxxix,
6,  60  «.,  62,  69,  70,  71  71.,  76  /?.,
87,  105,  141  71.,  152,  160,  162,
199,  275,  286,  325,  333,  340,
351,  369  ;/.,  386,  425,  433,  455,
459,  465,  478

Hilf  al-Fudul,  confederacy  of,  17  f.


544


INDEX


Hims,  369  «.,  439

Himyar  dynasty,  Ixxix,  ciii,  cxi,  431,

456
Himyarites,  xciii,  xcvi
Hind,  wife  of  Abu  Sufyan,  60  «.,
237,  253,  261,  263,  346  «.,  411
herdsman,  533
Jebel. See  Jebel  Hind
son  of  Abu  Hala  al-Oseiyid,  23  n.
Hira,  A1-,  xci,  xcii,  xcv,  xcvi,  c,  14,

45,  431
Hira,  hill  and  cave  of  (Jebel  Nur),

36,  37,  46,  49,  112,  138  }i.
Hisham,  brother  of  Al-Walld,  68
Hizam, golden band of Ka'ba,

31  n.
Hobab,  A1-,  221,  254,  375  n.
Hodeibiya,  A1-,  Ixxiv  n.,  9,  52  «.,

79«.,  341  «.,  353,355,  356,  358,

360, 363, 366,  369,  374, 380.

384,  400,  416  «.,  449,  5  J  3,  514
Hodheifa,  'Companion,'  xxi, xxx,

309
Holy  Spirit,  72,  86,  145,  156
Horns,  the,  cxviii,  160  7i.
Honein,  battle  of,  414-420, 431,  433,

447  n.,  450,  465
Horses  of  Mohammad,  532,  533
Hosein, A1-,  son  of  'All,  xxiv  n.,

18  n.,  251
'  Houries.' See  Hur
Houses  of  Mohammad, 176, 201,

534
Hubal,  cxiv,  32,  263,  275,  408
Hud,  Sura,  52  ;z.,  482
Hudheil,  Betii,  276,  412
Hur,  the,  75,  76,  383,  515
Husbands,  duties  of,  473
Huweirith,  A1-,  344,  410
Huweisa,  249
Huweitib  ibn  'Abd  al-'Ozza,  359  n.,

389,  422
Huyei,  chief  of  Betti  an-Nadir,  243,

283,  306,  308,  309,  313  ;?.,  319
Hypocrites,  the. See  Disaffected

Ibn  abi  Sarh. See  'Abdallah

az-Zubeir. See  'Abdallah

Batuta,  xxiii  n.

Hisham,  biographer,  xxix,  xl,
Ixx  n.,  Ixxiv  «.,  Ixxvi,  Ixxviii,
Ixxix,  Ixxx,  Ixxxiii,  50  ;/.,  80,
210,  351,  363,  396  ft.,  441  ?!.,
472  n.

Ishak  (Mohammad  ibn  Isliak),
first  biographer  of  Moham-
mad, xvii «.,  xxxix, Ixx  «.,


Ixxiv  «.,  Ixxvi,  Ixxvii,  Ixxviii,
Ixxix,  Ixxx,  civ,  182  n.
Ibn  Jubeir,  172  n.
Jud'an. See  'Abdallah
Kami'a wounds Mohammad,

261  f.
Koteiba,  172  n.
Mas'ud. See  'Abdallah
Rawaha. See  'Abdallah
Sa'd. See  Mohammad
Sarjis,  529
Suneina,  249
Suraka,  235  «.,  262  n.
Ibrahim,  son of  Mary the Copt,

426  f.
'Id  al-Adha,  194,  243

al-Fitr,  193
Idolatry,  xcv,  ciii,  civ,  36,  37,  74,

80  f.,  339,  518,  521
Idols,  destruction  of,  412,  451
Ihram,  assuming  pilgrim  garb,  ci,

472
'Ikrima,  son  of  Abu  Jahl,  226,  257,

258,  31C,  355,  390,407,411
Illiteracy  of  Mohammad,  50  «.,  512
hndm (leader of  prayer), xvi «.,
xvii n.,  xxxviii, 271, 463 «.,
492  «,,  504  _
Imania  (headship),  xli
'Imran,  497

Incantations,  384  f.,  481
Indian  commerce,  xc  f.
Inevitable,  Sura,  52  7t.,  482
Infanticide,  36,  466,  521
Inheritance,  law  of  female,  273  f.
Inquirers,  the  Four,  16  «.,  36,  43,

60,  372

Inspiration  of  Mohammad,  49-54,

61,  73,  127,  157  f.,  360,  519
Intercalation  of  the  year,  cii,  193  «.,

432,  473
'Irak,  A1-,  xxn,  cxi, 33, 234, 245,

459  n.,  460  n.,  509
'Is,  A1-,  344,  345
Ishmael,  xcix,  c,  cv,  cxiv,  3,  326
Islam,  E1-,  anticipations  of,  Ixii  ;  its

meaning, 79, 153, 521  ; 'the

twelve  'of,  118  ;  the  Prophet's

command concerning, 490 ;

war  its  normal  state,  521  f.
Isma'll,  Angel,  495  n.
Istibra  (interval  before  re-marriage

of  females),  377,  382  n.

Jabir,  287  n.

Jacob,  Ixxxix,  loo,  144,  301  «.,  325

Jacobites,  367


INDEX


545


Jadhlma,  Bevi,  a,\i
Ja'far,  Mohammad's  cousin,  ex  ;/.,
34,  92,'  383,  390,  393,  395,  396
Jahsh,  Be?n,  135  n.
Jandal,  A1-,  444  n.
Jannat al-Maala (Meccan ceme-
tery), 40S  n.
Jarba,  443
JarOd,  A1-,  461  7t.
Jauwanlya,  Al-,  533
Javan,  xc  n.
Jebel,  'A'ir,  167
Hind,  406,  408  71.
Kora,  I,  109
Nur. See  Hira,  hill  of
Sila,  308  n. See Sal'
Thor,  138  n. See  Thaur
Jebr,  66

Jeifar,  King  of 'Oman,  455
Jemma,  A1-,  533,  534
Jerash,  xci,  civ,  1 1
Jericho,  283

Jerusalem,  114,  121,  122,  369,  370;
the  Kibla  of  Islam,  121,
183,  189,  246;  Mohammad's
'journey'  to,  121  ;  Heraclius'
pilgrimage  to,  369
Jesus,  17,  2r,  72,  92  n.,  123,  130,
145,  146-157,  231  ??.,  249,  326,
369,  444  n.,  456,  522,  524
Jewish Scriptures, Ixiii, 98, 100,

loi,  117,  183,  184,  318

Jews,  Ixi,  Ixii,  Ixiii,  Ixxii,  cv,  16,  17,

36,  43, 72,  92 n.,  96  «., 100,

114,  115,147,  149,  150-152,  154-

160, 169, 187, 192, 19s,  3'o,

312,313,  314,  315,  316,  320  n.,

325, 326-328, 330, 34S, 349,

366, 374,  375,  376, 381, 383,

384,  432, 441, 453, 454,  456,

457,  463,  481,  490,  530

of  Medina,  Ixii, 16,  99,  114,  115,

117, 121, 150, 183-186, 188,

189,  190,  199,  238,  240,  241,

242,  245,  247,  249,  250,  252,

256,  268,  28 [,  282,  283,  309,

«•,  310,  313,  322,  348
Jidda,  2,  69  n.,  356  «.,  399  «.,  409

«.,  411  n.,  436
Jinn. See  Genii
Ji'rana,  A1-,  417,  419,  420,  424,  432,

433,  517
Jisr  Abi  'Obeid,  279  n.
Job,  xciii,  ciii
Jo'eil,  422
Jo'fi,  Bent,  466
Johfa,  A1-,  218,  220


John  the  Baptist,  92  «., 144,  145,
156
Prince of Ayla, 441  ; Mo-
hammad's treaty  with,  442

Joktan,  Ixii

Jonas,  son  of  Mattai,  no

Jorash,  capital  of  Beni  Azd,  461, 462

Joseph,  100,  301,  411  ;/.,  486

'Journey'  of  Mohammad  to  Jeru-
salem, and  Heaven,  187

Judaism,  Ixii,  xciii,  xcv,  xcvi,  37,
42,  59,  76«.,  79,  116,  119,  123,
148, 161, 178, 184, 188, 189,

190,  192,  328,  460,  461
Judgment,  temporal,  threatened  by

Mohammad,  jy,  125
Judham,  Bcni,  346,  394  n.,  399  «.,

439
Juheim,  443
Juheina,  Beni, 206,  214,  216,  243,

398
Julas  ibn  Suweid,  A1-,  182  ti.
Jurf,  A1-,  393,  480,  48  [,  489,  499,  507
Jurhumites,  c,  ciii,  cv,  cxiv,  3
Justinian,  court  of,  xciii
Juweiriya,  Mohammad's  wife,  298,

299

Ka'ba,  the,  Ixxiv  n.,  xcv,  xcvii,
xcix,  c,  ci,  cii,  ciii,  cvi,  cix,  ex,
cxi,  cxiv,  cxvi,  exvii,  cxviii,  2,  3,
5,  27,  30,  31,  32,  36,42,62,  63,
80,  83,  88,  89,  91,  93,  104,  105,
112, 117, 154 160, 189, 190,

191,  194, 197, 217, 275, 351,

353,  354,  358,  360,  387-389,
391,  405,  408,  409,  410,  412,
417,  421,  432,  453,  468-474;
becomes  the  Kibla  of  Islam,
189,  190,  195
of  the  Yemen,  461
Ka'b,  chief  of  Beni Koreiza,  309,

319
ibn  al-Ashraf,  245  ;  assassinated,
246,  247-249,  281,  316,  320  ^/.,
322,  348
ibn Malik, the poet, Ixxv,  262,

263,  446,  447
one  of  'The  Seventy,'  13 1  n.
ibn  Zuheir.  the  poet,  436,  437
Kadisiya,  A1-,  field  of,  xvi  fi.
Kafirin,  mcc.ning  of,  79,  151
Kahtan,  Ixii
Kainuka',  Beni,  115,  240,  242,  243,

285,  517,  535
Kamus,  Al-  (Kheibar),  375,  376,  380
Karada,  A1-,  245

2 M


546


INDEX


Karkarat  al-Kudr,  243,  244
Kasim,  A1-,  son  of  Mohammad,  25,

34

Kaswa,  A1-, Mohammad  s camel,
■  141, 169,  170, 171, 232, 354,
355,  387,  408,  468

Keidar,  Okaidir,  444  n.

Keila,  Beiii^  168

Keis,  clan,  Ivii,  461  n.

'  chief  of  the  Beni  Jo'fi,  466,  467
ibn  Sa'd,  407

Kelb,  Be?n,  307  «.,  347

Khabbab,  Ivi  /?.,  59,  68,  90

Khabt,  El,  134  71.

Khadlja,  Mohammad's  wife,  xv  ti  ,
ex  ;?.,  6,  7,  20,  23  fif.,  33,  34,  35>
42,45,  49«.,  5o>  51  «•,  55,  58
«.,  66,  76  /?.,  88,  95,  105,  106,
172,  218,  250,  289,  344,  404,
426,  512,  515  ;  her  tomb,  408

Khaithama,  169,  255  tt.

Khalid  ibn  Sa'id,  Ixvii

ibn  al-Walld,  260,  311,  314,  348,
355,  390,  395,  398  «.,  406,
407,  408,  4>i-4i3,  416,  439,
441,  443,  444,  464,  477

Khnnf,  457  ti.

Kharija  ibn  Zeid,  169,  493

Khattab,  A1-,  'Omar's  father,  16  ;/.,
64

Khatib,  A1-,  Abu  Bekr,  Ixxxii

Khaulan,  Beni,  461

Khawarij,  the,  xxxvii

Khazraj,  the,  cxiii,  114,  115-117,
118,  120,  129,  130  n.,  167,
168  77.,  169,  180,  181,  182  ;/.,
208,  216,  222,  241,  242,  252,
256,  257  77.,  258,  269  77.,  272,
300,  309,  312,  316,  326  ;?.,  348

Kheibar,  Ixxii,  cv,  87,  113  «.,  222  7t ,
283,  310  71.,  320  77.,  343,  348,

361 77., 374, 375-383, 386 7!.,

394,  399  «•,  419,  425,  481,  503,
513, 528, 536  ; conquest of,

374  ff.
KliirJca  Sha7-ifa,  437
Khobeib,  martyrdom  of,  277,  278  7i.
Khoneis,  250
Khoza'a, Be77i, c, cv, cxii, cxvi,

cxviii, 3, 295, 307, 363,  400,

401,  407,  409,  412
Khushain,  the  Be7ii,  399  71.
Khuweilid,  Khadlja's  father,  ex  rt.,

16  71.,  20,  34,  58  77.,  95
Kibla,  the, 121, 169  «., 176, 183,

195,  196
Kinana,  Be7ii,  cxviii,  14  7i.


Kinana,  brother  of  Abu'l-"As,  344,

345
chief  of  Beni  an-NadIr,  283,  375,

378,  379 ;  tortured  and
killed,  376,  377

Kinda,  BeTti,  459,  462

Koba,  133,  167,  168,  169,  199,
215  ".,  232,  272,  281,  350,  447.
See  also  Mosque  of  Koba

Koda'ite  tribe,  xci

Kodeid,  142,  412

Kor'an,  material  furnished  by,  for
this  biography,  xiv  ;  how  pre-
served, xiv-xvi  ;  order  of  parts,
xvi  ;  fragments  from  which
Kor'an  was  compiled,  xviii  ;
Zeid's  collection,  XX  ;  recension
by  'Othman,  xxi  ;  'Othman's
text  and  Zeid's  edition  con-
sidered,xxiii  ff. ;  passages  with-
drawn or  abrogated,  xxvii  ff.  ;
genuineness  of,  xxviii  ff. ;  com-
pared with  tradition,  xlvii  ;
early  fragments  of,  38  ;  early
Suras,  39  «.,  42;  'terrific'
Suras,  52;  'Word  of  God,'
55,  295  ;  as  revealed  before
the  first  emigration  to  Abys-
sinia, 70  ;  from  the  fifth  to  the
tenth  year  of  the  Prophet's
mission,  80  ff.  ;  the  audience
of  the  Genii,  iio-iii;  the
heavenly  journey,  121  ;  and
relations  with  Christians,  123,
144  ff.  ;  revelations  regarding
attitude  of  the  Prophet  towards
Mecca,  125  ;  reference  to  cave
of  Thaur,  138;  supersedes
Bible,  149  ;  during  last  three
years  at  Mecca,  158  ff.  ;  ex-
amples of  its  poetical  passages,
159,  340;  reference  to  Jews,
186,  325-328  ;  change  of  Kibla,
189  ;  clemency  shown  to
prisoners  taken  at  Bedr,  231  ;
passages  regarding  Ohod,
269  ff.  ;  exile  of  Beni  an- Nadir,
284  f.  ;  a  vehicle  of  general
orders,  288  ;  Mohammad's
marriage  with  Zeinab,  291  f.  ;
and  the  position  of  women,
292  ff.  ;  siege  of  Medina  and
massacre  of  Beni  Koreiza,
320  f.  ;  a  depository  of  secular
ordinances,  329-333  ;  its  war-
like spirit,  338  ;  mutilation  as
a punishment, 350 f.  ; the


INDEX


547


'victory'  of  Al-Hodeibiya,
360-362  ;  its  charm  against
spells,  384 ;  distribution  of
gifts,  423  f.  ;  affair  of  Mary  the
Copt,  428  ;  Beni  Temim  depu-
tation, 435  ;  rebuke  of  Dis-
affected, 445  ;  the  embassy
from  Nejran,  460 ;  and  the
abolition  of  the  intercalary
year,  473  f.

Koreiba,  wife  of  'Omar,  365  n.

Koreish,  xxii,  xxxviii,  Ixxiv  ;/.,  xcix,
c,  cv,  ex,  cxi,  cxiii,  cxiv,  cxv,
cxviii,  3,  7,  14,  15,  17,  27,  28,
32,  36,  41,  42,  56,  57,  59,  6r,
62,  65,  66,  67,  68,  69,  78,  79  «.,
80,  81-83,  85,  86,  87-89,  90-91,
92,  93,  94,  100,  104,  106,  107,
109,  no,  112,  115  «.,  117,  124,
128,  130,  131,  132,  136,  137  «.,
139  «•,  143,  165,  203-205,  206,
207,  209,  211,  215,  217,  220,
222,  223,  224,  226,  230,  232,
234,  235,  237,  238,  241,  243,
244,  245,  246,  252,  253,  254,
257,  258,  260,  261,  263,  266,
271  n.,  275,  276,  279,  286,  287,
295,  306,  308,  309^2.,  311,  313,
314,  321,  322,  328,  339,  342,
344,  351,  353-360,  362  71.,  363,
364,  365,  368,  372,  383  n.,  387,
389,  391,  400,  401,  404,  405,
415,  432,449,478,  514

Koreiza,  Betiiy  115,  168  «.,  282,  306,
507,  308,  309,  313,  314,  317,
320, 322, 323  ; massacre of,

318-323,  376  «., 399  71.

Kosai,  c,  cv,  cix,  ex,  cxix,  4,  17,  33
Koss,  Bishop  of  Nejran,  xcviii,  16
Kozman,  killed  at  Ohod,  271  71.
Kubbat  eth-Thenaya,  261  7t.
Kufa,  A1-,  xxxii,  202  «.,  234,  460  71.

mosque  of. Sec  Mosque
Kulthilm  ibn  Hidm,  169,  199
Kurz  ibn  Jabir,  207,  350  7t.

Larbeik,  112  «.,  354,387,  416,  471
Labid, the sorcerer, bewitches

Mohammad,  384,  385  7i.
the  poet,  465
Lahore,  xxiv
Lailat  al-Kadr,  72
Lakhm,  Be7ti.,  394  «.,  439
Lapse  of  Mohammad, Ixv, Ixxix,

80-84
Lat,  A1-,  an  idol,  cii,  81,  82,  84,  107,

IC9,  227  «.,  450


Leaders.,  the  twelve,  129,  130  7i.
Leadership  in  war,  c,  ex,  10,  256
Legend  and  the  life  of  Mohammad,

xiii,  xxxiii
Leith,  BeTii,  392
Libyan,  Bent.,  276,  277, 280, 341,

342,  349
Lto7t of God (Hamza), 91, 226,

264
Liwa,  white  ensign,  222  ;/.
Lokman,  117  7i.
Lord's  Supper,  146

Lot, 100, 428  71.

Lustration,  187,  454,  532

Maab. See  Muta

Ma  an,  394,  396

Ma'bad,  227  «.,  231  71.

Makna,  442  «.,  443

Mada'ini,  A1-,  biographer,  xl,  Ixxvi

Maghdzi.,  AI-,  Ixxxi

Magians,  457,  530

Mahra,  437,  455

Makhzum,  Be7ii,  68

Malik  ibn  'Auf,  Hawazinite  chief,
415,416,424,450

Ma'mun,  A1-,  xxxix,  xl,  Ixxxi

Manat,  A1-,  an  idol,  81,  82,  412

Mandaeans,  454  ;/.

Mansiir,  A1-,  Ixxviii

Ma'reb,  or  Mariaba,  Ixxxix,  476

Marhab,  375

Mariolatry,  367

Marr  az-Zahran,  277,  387,  403

Marriage  of  son  with  father's
widow,  custom  of,  161  ;  abol-
ished, 335  ;  rules  regarding
marriage,  333,  334

Martyrdom,  zeal  for,  255  71.  ;  of
Zeid  and  Khobeib,  277  f.  ;  of
Farwa,  396  ;  of  'Orvva,  449

Martyrs  of  Ohod,  264,  268

Mary  the  Copt,  335  7t ,  371,  425-
430,  515,  520
the  Virgm,  92  «., 144, I45-I47,
156, 157, 428 «., 442 «.,
.  444  7t.,  453,  483  7t.

Masjid  Mashrabat  Um  Ibrahim,
426,  536

Maz'un,  Be77i,  135  tz.

Mealbags,  affair  of  the,  243

Mecca,  xviii,  xix,  liv.  Ixv,  Ixx,
Ixxiv  71.,  Ixxxviii,  xc  ?/.,  xci,
xciii,  xcv,  xcvii,  xcix,  c,  ci,  cii,
civ,  cv,  cviii,  cxiii,  i,  2,  8,
14,  37,  59,  61,  62,  64,  66,  67,
80,  82,  86,  91,  92,  96,  101,  113,


548


INDEX


ii6,  117,  118,  123,  124,  125,
131,  132,  134,  135,  138,  141,
142,  143,  156,  159,  162,  165,
172,  173,  181,  187,  194,  199,
203  f.,  215,  217,  243,  295,  314,
468-475  ;  conquest  of,  179  «.,
181  71.

Meccan rites, ci, cxi, cxviii, 74-
i6of.,  359f.,  386ff.,  468ff.

Medina,  or  Yathrib,  Ixi,  Ixxxii,
Ixxxviii,  c,  cv,  cxii,  cxiii,  4,  8,
64,  67,  70,  87,  115,  116,  122,
124,  135,  138,  142,  143,  161,
162,  165,  166,  169,  170,  173,
194,  195,  199,  203  f.  ;  descrip-
tion of,  114  f.,  166-167;  Mo-
hammad's entry  into,  170;
climate,  173  ;  state  of  parties
at,  179;  treaty  of,  183-184;
siege  of,  306-314  ;  activity  at,
341-352  ;  embassies  to,  431-
438;  citizens  of,  1 17-120,  128-
134,  168,  174-176,  180,  207,
215,  216,  226,  254,  279,  296-
298,  317  «■,  354,  407,409,  410,
413,434,  485,486,  499,  500
Upper,  168  «.,  232,  240,  425

Mediterranean  Sea,  22  n.

Meimuna,  Mohammad's  wife,  389,
390  «.,  484,  489

Meisara,  20,  22,  24

Melchites,  367

Merwa,  A1-,  xcix,  ci,  cvi, cxv, 3,
191  «.,  388

Merwan,  governor  of  Medina,  239,
248  ti.

Meshhed  'AU,  Kor'an  in,  xxiv  n.

Messiah, 99, 117, 143, 148, 157,
158, 185, 325,  326  n.,  442  «.,

453
Michael,  lix,  226,  231  n.
Mikdad,  A1-,  230,  342,  343  n.
Mikraz  ibn  Hafs,  359  n.
Mina,  ci,  cii,  cvi,  cxi,  i,  3,  96, 114,

116, 118, 130, 131, 132, 194,

195,  199,  452,  469,  470  _  _
Miracles  of  Mohammad,  Iviii,  Ixiv,

Ixx,  139,  356,  441  «.,  463  n.
Mi^'raj (Mohammad's ascent to

Heaven),  Ixi,  121  f.
Mistah,  300,  303
Mo'adh  ibn  'Amr,  226

ibn  Jebel,  Ixvii,  415,  424,  457  «.,
463,  464  «.,  465
Mo'allakat,  suspended  poems,  13  «,

465  n.
Modar.  clan,  Ivii


MoghTra  ibn  Shu'ba,  A1-,  357,  450,
451,458  «.,  497,  505  «.

Mohammad  the  Prophet,  material
for  his  biography,  xiii-lxxvi  ;
his  forefathers,  c,  ex  «.-cxix  ;
his  birth,  4  ;  nursed,  5  ;  seized
vvith  a  fit,  6  ;  advantages  de-
rived from  residence  among
Bedawin,  7  ;  visits  Medina,  8  ;
adopted  by  'Abd  al-Muttalib,
9 ;  by  Abu  Talib,  10  ;  first
journey  to  Syria,  11  ;  youth  of,
13;  his  share  in  the  'Sacri-
legious War,'  15,  16;  attends
the  fair  at  'Okaz,  16 ;  as  a
shepherd,  18  ;  second  journey
to  Syria,  20  ;  and  Christianity,
21  ;  marriage,  24  ;  his  children,
25  ;  description  of  Mohammad,
25  f.  ;  assists  in  rebuilding  the
Ka'ba,  27,  28  ;  fixes  the  Black
Stone,  29,  30 ;  his  domestic
life,  33  f.  ;  solitary  contempla-
tion, 37  ;  spiritual  anxiety,  37  ;
first  dreams  of  inspiration,  39  ;
strivings  after  truth,  41  ;  neces-
sity of  divine  commission,  43  ;
depression,  44  ;  expectations
regarding  divine  mission,  45  ;
thoughts  of  suicide,  44  ;  recep-
tion of  a  divine  commission,
47  ;  Koranic  and  traditional
accounts  of  Mohammad's  in-
spiration, 49-52  ;  notions  re-
garding devils,  52  ;  early
converts,  58  ff.  ;  opposition  of
Meccan  citizens  to  his  teach-
ings, 62  ;  his  lapse,  80  fif.  ;
recovery  from  the  lapse,  84  ;
is  persecuted  by  Koreish  and
protected  by  Abu  Talib,  88  ;
subjected  to  personal  indig-
nities, 88  ;  retires  to  the
Shi'b  of  Abu  Talib,  93  ;  the
Jews  and  Mohammad,  96,
98  f.  ;  released,  104  ;  domestic
trials,  105  ;  journey  to  At-
Ta'if,  108-109;  returns  to
Mecca,  112;  marries  Sauda,
113;  betrothed  to  ' A'isha,  113;  J
meets  inquirers  from  Medina  "
(pledges  of  the  'Akaba),  113-
1 14  ;  journey  to  Heaven,  121  ;
interest  in  Persian  and  Roman
conflicts,  122  ;  relations  with
Christianity,  123  ;  confident
attitude at Mecca, 124  ; his


INDEX


!I49


threats  against  Mecca,  125  ;
his  sublime  position,  126;
authority  assumed  over  fol-
lowers, 126  ;  oaths,  127  ;
commands  his  followers  to
emigrate  to  Medina,  133  ;
designs  on  his  life,  136  ;  in
the  cave  of  Thaur,  138,  139;
flight,  141  ;  stays  at  Koba,
168  ;  enters  Medina,  170  f  ;
builds  the_  Mosque,  175  f .  ;
marries  'A'isha,  177  ;  his
treaty  with  the  Jews,  183,  184  ;
his  religious  institutions,  186-
197  ;  superstitions,  200  ;  tem-
perament, 200  ;  domestic  life,
201,  202,  291  ;  first  military
expedition,  207  ;  at  Bedr,  214  ;
his  dream  before  Ohod,  254  ;
wounded,  261  ;  picture  of,  at
the  weekly  service,  271  ;
revengeful  prayer  against
enemies,  280  ;  scandal  caused
by  marrying  Zeinab,  290  ;
released  from  obligation  to
consort  equally  with  wives,
295  ;  estranged  from  'A'isha,
300 ;  curses  the  Koreishite
army,  311;  distress  at  the
siege  of  Medina,  313  ;  fights
against  Beni  Koreiza,  315  ;
conduct  at  the  massacre  of
Beni  Koreiza,  318  ;  makes
Reihana  his  concubine,  319;
effect  of  the  massacre  on  his
position,  321  ;  and  the  death
of  Sa'd,  323 ;  simplicity  of
habits,  330-331  ;  exacts  rever-
ence, 332  ;  anxiety  to  visit
Mecca,  353  ;  his  vision  con-
cerning, 354  ;  sets  out  upon
the  Lesser  Pilgrimage,  354  ;
encampsat  Al-Hodeibiya,  355  ;
negotiations  with  Koreish,
356 ;  prospect  of  universal
supremacy,  366  ;  his  seal,  367  ;
despatches  to  sovereigns,
368  ff.  ;  attacks  Kheibar,
374  fif.  ;  marries  Saflya,  377  f  ;
poisoned,  379  ;  marries  Um
Hablba,  383  ;  bewitched  by
the  Jews,  383  f.  ;  performs  the
Lesser  Pilgrimage,  386  ff.  ;
enters  the  Ka'ba,  388  ;  mar-
riage with  Meimuna  and
return  to  Medina,  389  ;
affected  by  death  of  Zeid  and


Ja'far,  395  ;  reception  of  depu-
tations, 398  ;  conquers  Mecca,
400  ff.  ;  at  the  battle  of
Honein,  414  ff.  ;  and  siege  of
At-Ta'if,  418  fif.  ;  mobbed,  421  ;
affair  with  Mary,  427  ;  attains
supremacy  in  Arabia,  431  ;
farewell  pilgrimage,  469,  470  ;
speech  at  Mina,  473-474  ;
enters Ka'ba for last time,

474  ; despatch  to Museilima,

475  ;  decay  of  strength,  481  ;
visits  the  burial-ground,  483  ;
last  sickness,  484  ff.  ;  sayings
on  his  death-bed,  487  fif.  ;  last
appearance  in  the  Mosque,
492  f.  ;  death,  495  ;  burial,
504  f.  ;  character  and  personal
appearance,  510  fif.  ;  habits
and  simplicity  of  his  life,  511  ;
urbanity,  512  ;  friendship,  512  ;
moderation,  513  ;  cruelty,  513  ;
craft  and  artifice,  514;  poly-
gamy, 514  f .  ;  conviction  of
special  providence,  515  ;  moral
courage,  516  f  ;  his  incon-
sistencies, 522  ;  moral  declen-
sion at  Medina,  520  ;  supposed
description  in  the  Bible,  524  ;
traditions  regarding  habits
and  character,  524  fif.

Mohammad ibn Ishak. See Ibn
Ishak
ibn Maslama,  246,  248  «.,  256,
281, 316, 320  «., 343, 359
«.,  387,  440
ibn Sa'd, Wakidi's secretary,
Ixxvi, Ixxxi, Ixxxii, Ixxxiii,
367  n.,  465,  523
Mohammadanism,  its  benefits,  70,

161  f,  521
Monks. See  Clergy
Monothelites,  367
Montanism,  70,  157
Months,  the  four  holy,  ci,  cii
Moraisi',  A1-,  296,  297  «.,  517
Morocco,  the  Kor'an  in,  xxiii  n.
Moses,  18,  50,  84,  92  «.,  loi,  103  «.,
Ill, 149, 152, 157, 177, 185,
189, 191 n.,  231  n.,  282,  326,
456,  497
Mosque at  Agra  (Motee Masjid),
177
at  Koba (of  Godly Fear), 169,
190 7/.,  252, 272,  447; its
rival  destroyed,  447
at  the  'Akaba,  118


550


INDEX


Mosque at Upper Medina. See
Masjid
of  Al-Kufa,  XXX,  Iv
of  At-Ta'if,  418
of  Medina,  52  «.,  175,  177,  196  ff.,

266,  388
of 'Omar,  122
of  the  double  Kibla,  190  n.
'the  Friday,'  170
Mostahel,  337  n.
Mosul,  al-Mausil,  66
Mo'tazila,  the  rationalists  of  Islam,

xxxix
'  Mothers  of  the  Faithful,'  Moham-
mad's wives,  292,  294
Mount  of  Farewell,  393
Mu'awiya,  son  of  Al-Moghira,  267,

533
son  of  Abu  Sufyan,  xxxvi,  xxxvii,
xxxix,  xl,  Ivii,  ex  «., 18 «.,
365  «.,  372  n.,  422,  462

Muezzin  (Prayer  Crier),  59,  195  ;;.,
196

Muhajirin  (Refugees),  142  ??.,  174,
179,  215,  216,  222,  226,  254,
255,  256,  263,  266,  269  «.,  271,
279  n.,  283,  296  «.,  297,  317  «.,
354,  365  «•>  387,  406,  407,  413,
434,  446  «.,  486,  526

Muhassir,  valley  of,  471

Muheisa,  249

Mujedhdhar,  A1-,  272

Mukaukis,  governor  of  Egypt,  371,

"425,  533
Mukheirik,  the  Jew,  425  «.,  535
Muleika,  of  the  Beni  Jo'fi,  466
Mules,  Mohammad's,  371,  533
Mundhir,  A1-,  279  n.

chief  of  Al-Bahrein,  457
Murra,  Beni^  306,  392,  398
Musa  ibn  'Okba,  biographer,  Ixxvi
Mus'ab  ibn  'Omeir,  64,  65,  69,  119,

'128, 199,  222, 230, 256, 258,

261
Musalla,  or  place  of  prayer,  194
Museilima,  xx,  Ixxxi,  458,  477,  478,

492
Miishriktn,  79
Muslim,  traditionist,  xlii  «.,  Ixxxvi

ibn  'Akil,  ex
Musliniut,  79
Muslims,  the  first  of,  152
Mustalik,  Beni'l-,  295,  296,  298,  299,

■403';/.,  435,  445  «-,  447
Muta,  or  Maab,  battle  of, 381  n.,

392,  393,  394,  396,  397,  400  «.,
440,  480,  507


Mut'im,  A1-,  112

Mutilation  of  the  dead  abolished,
264  n.  ;  sanctioned  as  a  penal
measure  by  Islam,  350,  351

Muttalib,  A1-,  cix,  cxi,  cxiii,  cxix

Muzdelifa,  A1-,  ci,  470,  471

Muzeina,  403,  536

NabIDH,  beverage of  date-water,

475  n-
Nadir,  Beni Kn-^  Ixx  «.,  115,  168  n.,
'243,  245,  275,  281,  282,  283,  286,
316,  322,  333,  348,  425  «.,  5r4,

535
Nadr  ibn  al-Harith,  230
Najashi,  the,  or  Negus,  69,  80,  86,

92,  93«.,  118,  372,  383,  436  7z.
Najjar,  Befii  Kn-,  170,  199,  256
Nakha',  Beni  An-,  464,  465
Nakhla, no, 112, 208, 210, 217,

218,  220,  276,  412, 417, 418,

514
Namus  (Nomos),  50
Naufal  ibn  'Abd Menaf, ex, cxi,

cxiii,  112  ?t.
grandson of Al-Moghira, 210,

311
ibn  Khuweilld,  227  n.
son  of  Al-Harith,  232  n.
Nebuchadnezzar,  1 14
Nejd,  Ixxxviii,  xc, 134  n.,  137,  167,
243,  244, 278,  279, 282, 320,
.  343,  35.1,  386  «.,  398,  477
Nejran,  xciii,  xcvii  f.,  79,  92  «.,  145,
268  «.,  386  ;/., 458,  459,  464,
.  476,  479
Nejranlya,  460  n.
Nestorians,  22  n.^  367
Nestorius,  21
New  Testament,  Ixiii, xcvii. See

Scriptures
No'eim  ibn Mas'ud, 286, 287  ft.,

312,  313,  514
Nur,  /ebel. See  Jebel  Nur

Oath  of  the  Fudul,  18  n.

taken  at  the  'Akaba,  118
Oaths,  41  n.,  49,  65,  J},,  127
'Obada,  242,  243
Obei  ibn  Ka'b,  xv  ?t.,  xx  n.

ibn  Khalaf,  123  ti.
'Obeida,  son  of  Al-Harith,  xxx,  58,

206,  226,  289
'Obeidallah  ibn  Jahsh,  36,  60,  64,

372
Obna,  480
Obolla,  66


INDEX


55»


Odenathus,  or  'Odheina,  xcii

'Odhra,  Beni,  35  «.,  439

Ohod,  Ivi  «.,  167,  173  «.,  308,  314
battle  of,  58  «.,  65  «.,  91,  131  n.,
181  «.,  231  ;;.,  252-267,  275,
276,  286,  290,  306,  307,  390,

416,  499,  533,  535

'Okab,  the  Black  Eagle,  375  n.

'Okaz,  its  fair,  13,  14  f-,  96

'Okba,  execution  of,  230,  365  n.

Okeidir,  443,  444

'Okeil,  237  n.

Old  Testament. See  Scriptures

'Oman,  198,  424,438,  455

'Omar,  xv  «.,  xvii  n.^  xx,  xxv,  xxxiv,
xxxvi,  liv,  Ivi  «.,  Ixiv,  Ixvi,
Ixviii,  Ixxii,  52  «.,  63  «.,  64,  89,
90,  91,  108,  113  «.,  133,  134  n.,
202  7/.,  211,  218  71.,  219,  227  n.,
231,  234,  239,  250,  255,
260  «.,  263,  268,  283,  297  ;/.,
330  «.,  331,  357,  358,  359 ;?.,

361 7?., 363 «.j 365 «., 381,

386  «.,  387,  397,  401  71.,  404  «.,
416  «.,  421,  427,  459 «.,  463,
477, 481, 487 «•, 488, 490,
491  71.,  497,  498,  499,  500,  50  r,
505,  506,  507,  509,  513,  516
II.,  xxxni,  443 'z-,  534,  535
son  of  Abu  Selama,  290
'Omarah,  390
'Omeir  ibn  'Adi,  239
ibn  al-Humam,  226
ibn  Sa'd,  182  71.
ibn  Wahb,  222,  411  «.
Omeiya,  Ivi,  ex  «.,  cxii,  10
ibn  Khalaf,  207,  227,  228
Omeiyads, xxiv, xxxvi, xxxviii,
xxxix,  xliv,  Ixxvi,  cxii,  cxix, 58,
401  71.
'Omra, or Lesser  Pilgrimage,  ci,
169 71., 386, 469. See also
Pilgrimages
'Omra,  A1-,  409  7t.
'Orana,  276,  277,  470
'Orwa,  356,  357,  449  ;  his  martyr-
dom, 449,  450
the  traditionist,  Ixxvi
Osama,  son  of  Zeid,  35,  172,  233  «.,
301,  386  71.,  416  71.,  471, 480,
48 1, 484,  485,  487,  489,  493,
499,  501,  507,  508
Oseid  ibn  Hudeir,  119  «.,  257  7i.,

.300
Oseir  (or  Yuseir)  ibn Rizam,  the

Jew,  349
'Osfan,  141,  342,  355


'Osheira,  207,  208

'Otarid,  orator  of  the  Beni  Temlm,

434
'Olba  ibn  Ghazwan,  210

ibn Rabi'a, 60, no, 117 t/.,
118  71.,  135  «.,  218,  222,  223,
224,  226,  228,  237
son  of  Abu  Lahab,  34,  58
'Oteiba,  34
Otheil,  A1-,  230,  232
'Othman  ibn  Abi  Talha,  259
grandson  of  Al-Moghira,  210
ibn  'Affan,  xv  «.,  xxii,  xxiii,  xxiv,
xxvii,  xxxvi,  1  7i.,  Ixvi,  Ixviii,
58,  63  71.,  69,  86, 142, 172,
174,  176,  215,  230  «.,  232,  250,
267,  285, 320  71., 357,  358,
359 n., 421,  425,  440,  5'3,
536
ibn  al-Huweirith,  16  ;/.,  23,  32  «.,

33,  36
ibn  Maz'un,  59,  69
ibn  Talha,  306,  391,  409
'Oweim,  272,  273

'Oyeina, son of Hisn, chief of
Fezara,  289,  306,  312,  321,  342,
347,  398,  420  «.,  421,  422,  433
'Ozza,  A1-,  81,  82,  84,  227  71.,  263,
412

Palestine,  xc,  cvi

Palmyra,  xc,  xci,  xcii

Paraclete,  5,  157

Paradise,  74,  75,  76,  96,  loi,  168,
175  n.,  212,  226,  231,  255,  264,
268,  269,  272,  279  71.,  335  n.,
382,  383,  395  n.,  396  71.,  429,
453,  463,483,495,515,518,536

Pentateuch. See  Scriptures

Persecution  at  Mecca,  62  f ,  86,  88,
93  ff.,  107  f,  131,  132  «.,  5i7_

Persia,  her  connection  with  Arabia
and  Mohammad,  xciii,  xcv  f ,
cxi,  33,  45,  122,  204,  367,  370,
371,438

Petra,  xci,  civ,  11

Philadelphia,  xci,  civ

Phocas,  xcii

Pilgrimages,  lesser  and  greater,  to
Mecca,  ci,  cxviii,  191  «,,  354,
3S6  f ,  424,  45  r,  468,  469,  470
to  Al-Hodeibiya,  9,  354  ff.
the  Kor'an  on,  160  f.

Pilgrims,  giving  drink  and  food  to,
c,  ex,  cxiii,  cxix,  10,  409.  See
also  Sikaya

Pillar  of  Repentance,  316


552


INDEX


Pledge  of  the  Tree,  358,  361,  416,

513

Pleurisy,  481,  489

Poetn  of  the  Mantle,  437

Poet,  Mohammad  taunted  as  a,  48,
78,  127  ;  disliked  to  be  called
a,  17s  n.

Poetry,  Arab  love  of,  xvi,  li,  lii,
Ixxiii  n.,  14  ;  poetical  frag-
ments, 38,  39  ;  of  the  Kor'an,

39  «•)  41  n-
Polygamy,  178,  294  f.,  333  ff-,  52 1
Polytheism,  339,  367,  518
Pompey,  114
Post,  the  moaning,  198
Poverty  of  Mohammad, 113, 128,

330  f.,  528  "
Prayer, Mohammad  and, 73, 79,

119,  159,  187  f.,  195  f-
Prayers  of Mohammad, 38, no,

224,  280,  289  f.,  483,  490
Precepts  of  the  Kor'an,  160,  295  n.
Predestination,  73,  515  f.
Pretenders,  the  three,  458,  476-479
Priests. See  Clergy
Proscriptions  at  Mecca,  410
Pulpit, Mohammad's, 196  f.,  485,

493,  504,  531

Queen  of  Sheba,  Ixxxix,  100
of  the  women  of  Paradise,  483  n.

Rabi',  Ar-,  33

Rabigh,  206,  403  n.

RajT',  Ar-,  massacre  at,  277,  341,

351  ; curse against perpe-
trators of,  280
Rak'a (genuflexions at prayer),

xliii,  197  «.,  492
Ramadan, fast  of,  187  «., 191  n.,

192
Raya, black  ensign, 222 «. See

also  'Okab
Readers,  438,  455
Rebuilding  of  the  Ka'ba,  27  ff.
Red  Sea,  Ixxxix,  ciii, 165, 191 n.,

215,  288,436
Redemption,  148,  154
Refugees. See  Muhajirin
Reihana,  Mohammad's  concubine,

■316,  318, '319
Release,  the,  or  Discharge,  452
Resurrection,  71,  73,  78,  84,  97,  518
Rif,  Ar-,  457  n.

Rifa'a  ibn  'Abd  al-Mundhir,  133
Ri'l,  Bent,  280
Rings,  Mohammad's,  Ixvii,  531,  532


Robbery,  punishment  for,  346,  350

Rokeiya,  daughter  of  Mohammad,
25,  33,  58,  69,  86,  142,  172,
176,  215,  232,  250,  425

Rome,  connection  of,  with  Arabia,
Koreish,  and  Mohammad,
xci  f.,  xci  n.,  xcv,  cxi,  33,  122  f.,
346,  366  f.,  394,  431,  439

Rufeida,  316,  323

Ruha,  Ar-,  2 1 9

Ruma,  well  of,  536

Saba,  Ixxxix,  xci  n.,  454  n.
Sabeanism,  ciii,  civ,  454  ?t.
Sabians,  454  ft.
Sacrifice,  ci,  cv,  83,  160, 194,  357

U  359  f-,  388  ff.,  426,  469,  472
Sacrilegious  War,  14  fif.,  23
Sa'd, son of  Abu Wakkas (the
'first  who shed  blood  in  the
cause  of  Islam'),  58,  63,  206,
208,  210,  265,  359  n.
Bent,  li,  5  n.,  6,  306,  399  n.,  420
ibn  ar-Rabi',  174,  273  ;  his  widow
entertains  Mohammad,  273,
274
ibn  Khaithama,  169
ibn  Mo'adh,  lix  n.,  119  n.,  208,
219, 222, 231 n.,  234,  246,
252, 260  n., 309,  311, 312,
3t6,  317,  318,  321,  323,  324
ibn 'Obada, 132, 181 n., 208,
296 ft., 309, 312,  321,  342,
375 ft.,  406,  407, 422,  499,
502,  529
ibn  Zeid,  342  ft.,  343  ft.
Sadakat. See  Alms
Sadr  al-Kitab,  215  «.
Safa,  the,  xcix,  ci,  cvi,  cxv,  3,  61  ft.

63,  88,  89,  191  ft.,  388
Saflya,  aunt  of  Mohammad,  25,  58
264,  376,  494
Mohammad's  wife, 377,  378  ft.
382,  425  ;  her  vision,  378
Safra,  As-,  216,  226,  229,  266
Safwan ibn al-Mo'attal, his mis
adventure with 'A'isha, 299,

300,  303

ibn  Omeiya,  245,  407,  411,415
422
SaJiih,  the,  xlii,  xliii
Sa'ld  ibn  Zeid,  59,  60,  90
Sal',  308  ft.,  342
St  Maria,  church  of,  490
Sakran,  1 13
Salih,  Mohammad's  servant,  501  n.

prophet  of  the  Thamudites,  41  ft.


INDEX


553


Salim,  Bent,  169

Salman,  the  Persian,  307

San'a,  xci //., 476 ; cathedral at,

cxvi  ;  province  of,  476,  479
Sara,  a  singing  girl,  41 1
Saracenic  architecture,  177
Sarah,  Abraham's  wife,  100
Sarif,  389,  468

Sarlya  (night  attack),  206  7i.
Sauda,  IVIohammad's  wife,  113,  142,

171,172,176, 177,  ^y:>,  295,515

Scents,  Mohammad's  love  of,  331,
511,528

Scriptures  (Bible),  Ixii,  5,  36,  99,
loi,  116,  149,  150,  151,  153,
325,  326,  329,  333,  454,.  523,  530

Seal of  Mohammad, Ixvii, Ixviii,

367
of  prophecy,  529

Second  of  the  two  (Abu  Bekr),  139,
502

Secretary,  Mohammad's.  See  Zeid
ibn  Thabit

Seiyala,  266

Seiyids,  250

Seklnah  (^divine  peace),  139  «.,
361  n.

Selma, maid of  Safiya, Moham-
mad's aunt,  25,  291,  426
wife  of  Hashim,  cxii,  117,  170
widow  of  Hamza,  390

Seraphil,  lix.,  226

Servants  of  Mohammad,  534

Service  of  Danger^  2S8

Service,  the  Friday,  169,  188,  197  f,

254,  332
Seventy,  the,  100,  130

a  favourite  number,  279  n.
Shakran, Mohammad's servant,

501  n.
Shechi?ia. See  Seklna
Shehr,  son  of  Badhan,  476,  479
Sheiba,  Beni,  gate  of,  32,  469
son  of  Rabl'a,  no,  222,  223,  224,
226,  228
Sheikhain,  Esh-,  256
Sheima,  Mohammad's  foster-sister,

7,  420
Shepherd,  Mohammad  a,  18  f
Sht''a  tradition,  xxiii,  xxiv,  xl,  xliv
Shi''b,  or  quarter,  of  Abu  Talib,  93,

104  f.,  129,  517
Sho'eiba,  69

Shurahbil,  393,  394,  442  //.,  443
Siddlk,  As-  (Abu  Bekr),  57. See

Abu  Bekr
Siege  of  Medina,  306  ff.


Sikaya,  giving drink to  pilgrims,

cvi,  ex,  cxiv,  10
Silver,  rings  of. See  Rings
Sinai,  100,  103  n.
Sinan,  66
Sirin,  Coptic slave girl,  371,  425,

429-430
Siroes,  368,  370
Slander,  law  of,  304
Slaves,  converted,  59,  67  f.  ;  female

slaves  as  wives  and  concubines,

73,  334,  335,  381  f.,  421,  473
Smallpox,  Ixx,  cxvii
Sodom,  100,  loi

Soheib,  son  of  Sinan,  66,  67,  123
Solomon,  Ixxxix,  100,  189
Sonnets,  amatory,  246
Soothsayer,  applied  to  Mohammad,

48, 78  ; his dislike to be

considered  a,  50,  127
Special Providence,  Mohammad's

conviction  of  a,  515,  521
Spoil,  229,  380,  382
Stone-worship,  ciii,  civ
Striking  Siira,  52  «.,  482
Successors  of  the  Companions,  xxxi,

xxxiii,  Ixxxi,  177,  330
Sufyan ibn Khillid, assassinated,

276,  349
Suheil  ibn  'Amr,  Abu  Yazld,  233,

.  358,  359,  363,  389,  407,  422

Suicide  contemplated  by  Moham-
mad, 44,  50,  51

Sulafa,  259  «.,  277  n,

Sulalim,  380

Suleim,  Beni,  li,-},,  244,  278,  279,
306,  392,  398,  403,  415,416

Sunh,  the,  169,  177,  493,  497

Sun?ta,  or  custom  of  Mohammad,
xxxii,  191  n.,  302  ?t.

Sunni^  traditional,  xl

Superstition,  367,  521  ;  of  Mo-
hammad, 30,  200,  384,  516

Surad,  461

Suraka,  142

Saras,  xvi,  xvii,  xxiii,  Ixx,  38,  39,
40,  41,  43  n.,  44,  45,  46-52,  61
;?.,  66,  67  «.,  68  n.,  71,  72-79,
81,  84-86,  90,  95,  97-103,  107,
122,  123,  124-128,  134,  137,
139,  143-163,  190,200,211-213,
222  n.,  223  n.,  229,  231,  235,
268,  269,  270,  284  f.,  302,  305,
312,  321,  325  f.,  353,  408  «.,
418,  423,  435,  445,  448,  452,
460,  482  ;  the  Terrific,  52.  See
also  Kor'an


554


INDEX


Surat  al-Bakara,  xvii  ji.,  yi  //.,
416

Suwa',  an  image,  412

Suweid,  chief  of  the  Khazraj,  272
poet,  117  7t.

Swine,  flesh  of,  160

Sword  of  God,  name  of  Khalid,
413,  444  «■

Syria,  xci,  xcii,  xcv,  xcvi,  c,  cxi,  2,
33,  34,  45,  66,  116,  118,  122,
154,  155,  158,  165,  168  n.,  180,
197,  204,  207,  209,  211,  2  [6,
242,  283,  288,  342,  344,  346,
347,  364,  367,  368,  371,  374,
393,  436,  438,  439,  442,  447  n.,
459  n.,  484,  485,  500  n.,  502  n.,
509,  523  ;  Mohammad's  first
journey  to,  11  ;  second,  20

Tabari,  At-,  biographer,  xix  «.,
Ixviii  n.,  Ixxvi,  Ixxix,  Ixxx,
Ixxxiii,  Ixxxiv,  50  n.,  63  ?i.,  80,
132  n.,  136  n.,  502  «.

Taghiya,  an  idol. See  Al-Lat

Taghlib,  Beni,  458

Tai',  Beni,  xcvii,  436,  44 T  «.

Ta'if,  At-,  cxvi,  i,  7,  14,  108,  109, 1 10,
112,  113,  144,  181  ft.,  204,  209,
222,  253,  276,  356,  411  //.,  414,
417,  418,  420  n.,  424,  426,  448,

449,  450,451,  455,479,  5i7
Taj  Mehal,  177

Talha  ibn  'Obeidallah,  1  tz.,  58,
165,  172  n.,  261,  262,  266,  306

ibn  abi  Talha,  258,  259
Talib,  son  of  Abu  Talib,  34
Tan'lm,  At-,  277
Taurat,  the,  98,  150  ?t.

the.  Old  Testament. See  Scrip-
tures
Tebuk, expedition to, Ixiv, 441,
443,  447,  448, 450, 456, 480,

.  534
Teim,  Be/ii,  18
Teimii,  xcvii
Temlm,  Bent,  Ixxiv  fi.,  133  ;;.,  433,

434
Temple  of  Jerusalem,  121,  189
Testudo  used  at  At-Ta'if,  419
Thabit  ibn  Keis,  Ixxiv  n.,  319,  434
Thaklf,  Beni,  108,  109,  414,  420  n.
Tha'laba,  Beni,  399  ji.
Thamudites,  40,  41  71.,  440
Thaur,  Mount,  138,  139,  141
Theodorus,  394  n.
Theology,  Mohammad  and,  448
Theophanes,  394  n.


Thuweiba,  Mohammad's  nurse,
5,6

Tihama,  Ixxxviii,  cxvi,  cxvii

Tirmidhi,  At-,  traditionist,  Ixxxvi

Tithes,  432,  433,  438,  440,  444  n.,
452,  455,  456,  467,  526.  See
also  Alms

Titles  of  Mohammad,  5,  20,  25,  29,
514

Titus,  1 14

Tofeil,  At-,  chief  of  the  Beni  Daus,
418,419

Toleib  ibn  'Omeir,  65

Toleiha,  chief  of  the  Beni  Asad,
Ixxxi,  275,  276,  477,  492

Tomadir,  347

Toothpicks,  494,  532

Town  (or  Council)  hall  at  Mecca,
c,  31,  252

Tradition, as a source for the
biography  of  Mohammad,  xiv-
xxviii  ; on preservation of
Kor'an,  xvii  n.,  xxii  ?i.  ;  when
recorded,  xxxiii ; influence  of
faction on, xxxv-xl  ; its col-
lectors, xl-xlvi  ;  style  and  form
in  which  it  is  imparted,  xlvi
its  fragmentary  character,  xlvi
its liability to error, xlvi
tested by the Kor'an, xlvii
and  other canons,  xlvii-lxxv  ,
on the inspirations of Mo-
hammad, 49  {.,  72)  ;  and  other
matters,  passim

Treaties  of  Mohammad,  transcripts
of,  Ixxi  ;  treaty  with  Jews
(Medina),  183  f.,  241,  249  f,
322,  443  ;  with  an  Arab  tribe,
207  ;  with  Koreish,  359  ;  with
Prince  of  Ayla,  441  f.;  and
Okeidir,  443

Tree  of  fealty. See  Acacia

Trials  of  superiority,  cxii,  cxv  f

Tribute  (Kharaj),  432,  438,  443,
454,  457,  461

Trmity,  147,  156,  456

Truce  of  Al-Hodeibiya,  359,  360

Tyre,  xc

Uheib  (Wahb),  4
Um  Aiman  (Baraka),  4,  8,  35,  172,
301 n., 416 n., 499, 503  }i.,
534
Burda,  nurse  of  Ibrahim,  426, 430
Farwa,  sister  of  Abu  Bekr,  463
Hablba,  wife  of  Mohammad,  36
«•,  372,  383,  401  n.,  490


INDEX


555


Um  Hani',  daughter  of  Abu  Talili,
121,  411  n.
Kirfa,  aunt  of 'Oyeina,  barbar-
ously put  to  death,  347,  348 ;;.
KuUhum,  daughter  of  Abu  Bekr,
142,  172  ?;.,  230  ?^.,  232,  425
daughter of  Mohammad, 25,

34,  172,  250
daughter of 'Okba, 230 «.,
365  ;/.
Ruman,  5g  ;/.,  172
Selama,  Mohammad's  wife,  58  ;/.,
233,  289,  296,  308,  355,  374,
403,  418,  488,  489,  490,  505

'?•,  5 '5,  533,  534
Suleim,  378  ?/.,  425
Ziml, daughter of Um Kirfa,
348  n.
Um  el-  Weled^  335  ;/.
Ummi,  or  illiterate,  xiv  ?i.^  512
Uneisa,  8
Unity of God, 43, 73, 85, 159,

518
Usury,  333

Veil  prescribed,  292,  522
Victory  Sura,  360,  362,  363
Vineyards  of  At-Ta'if,  109,  419
Virtues  inculcated,  73,  162  f.
Visions  of  Gabriel,  Iviii,  lix,  46,  48,

72,  80,  121
Vizier,  6r  «.,  500

Wadan,  xci  tt.

Wadi  al-Kora,  cv,  242,  346,  347,
377  n.,  380,  382

Wadi  Fat i ma,  389  n.

Wahshi,  the  Ethiopian,  253,  261,
411  ft.

Wa'il,  Bem\  394  n.

ibn  Hojr,  chief  of  Beni  Kinda,
462

Wajj,  forest  of,  451

Wakidi,  A1-,  xv  «.,  xix  ;/.,  xl,  1  ;? ,
Ixvi  n.,  Ixx  7t.,  Ixxii,  Ixxiv  fi.,
Ixxvi,  Ixxviii,  Ixxix,  Ixxx,  Ixxxi,
Ixxxiii,  49,  80,  96  n.,  136  n.,
139  n.,  200,  237  n.,  250,  268  n ,
272  n.,  273  «.,  279  n.,  309  ?t.,
343  «•,  348  «.,  351,  396  ^z.,  417
«.,  441  «.,  443  n.,  444  «.,  503
71.,  506  ;;.  ;  his  secretary,  see
Mcihammad  ibn  Sa'd

Walld  ibn  al-MoghIra,  A1-,  27, 28,
65,  74,  81,  89  n.
ibn  'Otba,  224,  225
ibn  al-WalTd,  68


War,  an  ordinance  of  Islam,  212  ;

the  normal  state  of,  445
Waraka,  xv  ft.,  36,  42,  50,  56,  123,

156  ft.
Watih,  A1-,  (Kheibar),  380
Waseer. See  Vizier
Weepers,  the,  440
Wells  of  Mohammad,  536
Wine  forbidden,  333
Wives,  number  of, allowed,  334  ;

their position under Islam,

335-338  ;  duties  to,  473
of  Mohammad,  24,  113,  172,  176
f.  ;  250,  289  ff.,  298  ff,  372,

377  f.,  .383,  389  f,  514  f. ;

restrictions  placed  on,  292  f. ;

caution  to,  304  ; and  Mary

the  Copt,  425
Women,  as  slaves,  see  Slaves  ;
Muslim,  barren  at  Medina,  199,
200  ;  at  the  battle  of  Ohod,  253,
258  f.;  restrictions  on  believing
women,  293  ;  precepts  regard-
ing, 295  ;  degraded  by  Islam,
334  ft'.;  treatment  of,  under  the
truce  of  Al-Hodeibiya,  365
Word  of  God,  applied  to  Jesus,
442  ft.  ;  and  to  the  Scriptures,

.99,  149,  151,  305,  326
Writing,  early  practice  of,  common
at Mecca and Medina, xix,
130  «.,  234

Yahya  ibn  Ma'In,  Ixxviii
Sa'id  al-Kattan,  Ixxiii

Yajaj,  388

YasTn,  A1-,  450

Yazid,  son  of  Abu  Sufyan,  422

Yathrib. See  Medina

Year,  luni-solar.  See  Intercalation
of  Year

Yemama,  A1-,  xx,  xcvii,  279  fi.,  367,
457,  478  ;  Mohammad's  de-
spatch to  chief  of,  373  ;  em-
bassies from,  to Mohammad,

455,457

Yemen,  the,  Ixvii,  Ixxxix,  xci,  xciii,
xcv,  xcix,  cii,  civ,  cxi,  i,  2,  67,
92,  112  «.,  115,  204,  211,  371,
424,  437,  442,  449,  454  n.,  455,
456,  461,  465,  466,  469,  482  ;
Ka'ba  of,  461

Yenbo',  207,  214,  425  ft.

Yesar,  or  Abu  Fukeiha,  66

Zabir  ibn  Rata,  Az-,  the  Jew,  318
Zacharias,  46,  144


556


INDEX


ZakkOm,  tree  of,  77
Zakat. See  Alms
Zama'a  ibn  al-Aswad,  220,  237  n.
Zebba. See  Zenobia
Zeid  ibn  'Amr,  16  ;z.,  36,  37,  60
ibn ad-Dathinah, his martyr-
dom, 277,  278  n.
ibn  Thabit,  xv ;?.,  xx,  xxi,  xxii,

xxiii,  XXV,  285,  442  n.
son  of  Haritha,  34,  35,  42,  49  n.,
55,  108,  109,  112,  172,  208,
232,  245,  290,  292,  300,  310,
345,  346,  347,  390,  393,  395,
396, 480, 485, 512, 513,

515
Zeinab bint Khozeima, Moham-
mad's wife,  289,  390,  5 1 5
daughter  of  Jahsh,  Mohammad's
wife, 60  n.,  290,  291, 292,
300, 303, 308, 403, 418  ;
scandal  caused  by  the  mar-
riage, 427,  515,  520


Zeinab  bint  Khozeima,  daughter  of

Mohammad,  25,  33,  142,  172,

250,  344,  345,.  346,  410,  4:25

the  Jewess, administers poison

to  Mohammad,  379

Zemzem,  the  well,  xcix,  c,  civ,  cvi,

cxiv,  3,  10,  32,  409,  474
Zenobia,  or  Zebba,  xcii
Zibrikan,  bard  of  the  Beni  TemTm,

434
Zoroaster,  509

Zubeir, Az-,  son of  'Abd  al-Mut-
talib,  10,  15,  18
son  of  Al-'Auwam,  ex  «.,  32  «.,
58, 69, 194, 199,  260,  264,
283,  311,  376.  402,  403,  406,
408
Zuheir,  the  poet,  436,  437
Zuhia  ibn  Kilab,  4

Beni,  18,  218,  253
Zuhri, Az-, the traditionist, Ixix,
bcxvi,  Ixxviii,  362


Companion Volume  to  "  Life  of  Mohammad!^

THE CALIPHATE

ITS  RISE,  DECLINE,  AND  FALL

BY

Sir  WILLIAM MUIR,  K.C.S.I.,  D.C.L.

A NEW, REVISED, AND  ENLARGED EDITION

BY

T. H. WEIR, M.A., D.D.

The  history  of  the  Caliphs  from  the  death  of  Mohammad  in
632  A.D.  down  to  the  extinction  of  the  Caliphate  by  the
Mongols  in  the  year  1258.  An  impartial  and  complete
account  of  the  600  years  succeeding  Mohammad's  rule,
drawn  entirely  from  the  original  Arabic  sources,  and
dealing  in  full  not  only  with  their  conquests  in  Arabia,
Africa,  India,  and  Europe,  and  their  ultimate  check  in
Spain,  but  also  with  their  domestic  life,  civil  and
military  administration,  tribal  feuds,  literary  and
historical  works,  etc.

Illustrated  by  4  maps  and  plans.  Demy  8vo,  cloth.  Pp.
XX,  636.  Edinburgh,  1924

Ti I  !• 1 J , T^o  Postage  od.  extra.

Fubhshed at I CS. p„reig„  Postage, ,s.  3d.


15s,


Press  Notices

Literary  World. — "  This  work  has  a  special  claim  on  the  attention  of  all
students  of  history,  if  only  on  the  ground  that  it  opens  to  them  a  storehouse  of
facts  hitherto  inaccessible  to  any  except  the  few  Orientalists  who  have  time  and
inclination  to  explore  the  great  treasury  of  Arabian  tradition  represented  by  the
annals  of  Tabari,  of  Ibn  at  Athir,  the  writings  of  Beladzeri,  Ibdn  Khaldhun,  and
other  authorities."

The  Standard. — "  The  present  volume  is  quite  as  much  a  personal  history  of
the  first  four  Commanders  of  the  Faithful  as  a  history  of  the  rise  and  progress  of
the  Arab  Empire,  and  may  be  considered  as  a  continuation  of  the  former  work,
The  Life  of  Mahomet."

Bombay  Gazette. — "  Sir  William  Muir's  History  of  the  Caliphate  must  certainly
take  its  place  as  one  of  the  most  fascinating  and  instructive  contributions  to
Oriental  history."

JOHN GRANT, Publisher, EDINBURGH


A Giiide  to  a?id  Summary  of  Modern  Indian  History  and
Literature  ivhich  will  be  of  permanent  value  and  of  great  help
to  all  of  our  Eastern  Empire.

THE  CHRONOLOGY  OF
MODERN  INDIA(i494-i894)


JAMES BURGESS, LL.D.,  CLE.

Formerly  Editor  of  the  "Indian  Antiquary"  and  of  numerous  volumes  iji  the
'■'■  ArchcEological  Survey  of  India."

Covering  the  whole  four  hundred  years  of  active  European
interest  in  India,  from  the  discovery  of  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope  passage  and  the  beginning  of  European
trade  and  intercourse  to  the  Viceroyalty  of  Lord  Elgin.
An  invaluable  reference  book,  providing  a  succinct  yet
full  chronological  account  of  the  leading  facts  in  Indian
history,  including  everything  that  the  student  or  general
reader  can  desire  to  find  or  verify.

With  a  completely  detailed  Index  to  names  and  subjects
extending  to  fifty-three  pages,  which  forms  an  indispens-
able feature  of  any  such  work.  Attractively  printed  and
arranged  so  that  the  events  of  each  year  can  readily  be
found.

Demy  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  top. 492  pp.  Edinburgh,  19 13

X ^  C^  Home  Postage  pd.

'Published at 1 ^0» net. Foreign  Postage  is.  2d.

Athenceum. — "As  a  work  of  reference  it  will  prove  invaluable  to  students  of
Indian  history.  It  gives  in  a  concise  form  a  survey  of  the  chief  events  from  the
close  of  the  fifteenth  to  the  close  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  contains  in
chronological  order  the  prmcipal  '  Fasti '  of  Indian  history."

Scotsman. — "Dr  James  Burgess's  scholarly  volume  will  earn  the  unqualified
gratitude  of  every  one  who  makes  it  a  business  to  explore  the  history  of  India.
The  work  draws  a  strict  reckoning  of  dates  round  the  standard  histories,  and
arranges  in  their  right  sequence  \\iq  fasti  of  Indian  history."


JOHN GRANT,  Publisher,  EDINBURGH


Composition  and Style

By  R.  D.  BLACKMAN

A  Complete  Literary  Handbook  and  Manual  for  Students,  with  a  Guide
to  all  matters  connected  with  Printing  and  Publishing.  With
practical  hints  on  the  technical  and  business  aspects  of  composition
and  literature,  the  preparation  of  manuscripts,  &c.,  illustrated  from
the  outstanding  English  stylists  from  the  sixteenth  century  to  the
present  day,  Ninth  Edition.  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  leather  back  title,
pp.  xvi,  320  Edinburgh,  1923

Price 3s. Postage  5d.

"  Its  sterling  worth  will  at  once  be  recognised  by  '  all  sorts  and  conditions '
of  authors,  to  whom  it  will  be  a  welcome  friend  on  the  high  road  to  literary  fame."
— Literary  World.

The  Art  of  Versification  and  the
Technicalities  of  Poetry

By  R.  F.  BREWER

With  a  New  and  Complete  Rhyming  Dictionary.  An  Aid  to  the
intelligent  study  of  poetry  and  to  the  discriminating  imitation  of
the  great  poets,  comprising  a  complete  exposition  of  metrical
laws,  varieties  of  verse,  rhyme,  alliteration,  licenses,  structure,
and  arrangement,  &c.,  illustrated  by  examples,  with  an  extensive
dictionary  of  rhymes,  comprising  6000  words.  Large  crown  8vo,
cloth,  pp.  xvi,  376  Edinburgh,  1923

Price 4s. 6ci. Home  Postage  6d.;  Foreign  Postage  8d.

"  The  technicalities  of  composition  are  really  treated  with  ability,  and  the
author  shows  that  he  possesses  no  mean  literary  style  of  his  own.  We  have  no
hesitation  in  praising  this  book  and  giving  it  a  strong  recommendation  to  all  who
wish  to  write  correctly  and  gracefully,  and  to  understand  the  classic  forms  adopted
by  leading  poets." — Birmingham  Daily  Gazette.

Dictionary  of  Foreign  Phrases  and
Classical  Quotations

Edited by HUGH PERCY JONES, B.A.

Comprising  nearly  14,000  Extracts  from  the  Works  of  Great  Writers,
and  including  Idioms,  Proverbs,  Maxims,  Mottoes,  Technical
Words,  and  Terms,  and  Press  Allusions,  in  Latin,  Greek,  French,
German,  Italian,  Spanish,  Portuguese.  Alphabetically  arranged,
with  English  Translations  and  Equivalents,  Explanatory  Notes,
and  an  Index  of  Authors  cited.  Large  crown  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xx,  532.
Revised  and  Enlarged  Edition  Edinburgh,  1923

Price 6S. 6d. Home  Postage  9d.;  Foreign  Postage  Is.

"We  cannot  recall  any  dictionary  of  the  kind  that  has  utilised  the  wit  and
wisdom  of  so  many  languages.  It  has,  moreover,  one  undoubted  excellence — it
gives  a  translation  of  every  phrase  quoted,  and  in  many  cases,  a  brief  footnote
indicates  the  origin  of  the  saying." — Glasgow  Herald.


JOHN GRANT, Publisher, EDINBURGH


^


DATE  DUE

Oemco,  Inc.  38-293

NOR|H|ASTERN  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARIES DUPL

iiiiii"
