Prehistoric Britain (Robert Munro, 1913)
========================================
Munro's 1913 Home University Library survey — the compact statement of the British palaeolithic case. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (b24884741)


22501501


906


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2016


https://archive.org/details/b24884741


HOME  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY
OF  MODERN  KNOWLEDGE


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

By  ROBERT  MUNRO,  M.A.,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.E.


London

WILLIAMS  & NORGATE


HENRY  HOLT  & Co.,  New  York
Canada  : WM.  BRIGGS,  Toronto
India  : R.  & T.  WASHBOURNE,  Ltd,.


UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY

OF

MODERN  KNOWLEDGE


Editors  :

HERBERT  FISHER,  M.A.,  F.B.A.,  LL.D.

PROF.  GILBERT  MURRAY,  D.LlTT.,
LL.D.,  F.B.A.

PROF.  J.  ARTHUR  THOMSON,  M.A.,
LL.D.


Prof.  WILLIAM  T.  BREWSTER,  M.A.


u u u

. (Columbia  University,  U S.A.)  ,

J !,

jE  . .—L I1  •

NEW  YORK

HENRY  HOLT  AND  COMPANY

SrCro


BRITAIN


BY

ROBERT  MUNRO

M.A.,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.E.

AUTHOR  OF  “THE  LAKE  DWELLINGS  OF
EUROPE,"  “ARCHAEOLOGY  AND  FALSE
ANTIQUITIES,"  “PALAEOLITHIC  MAN  AND
TERRAMARA  SETTLEMENTS  IN  EUROPE,"
ETC.


LONDON

WILLIAMS  AND  NORGATE

— ' - - - - - L


Richard  Clay  &H5ons,  Limited,

BRUNSWICK  STREET,  STAMFORD  STREET,  S.E.
AND  BUNGAY,  SUFFOLK.


CONTENTS

CHAP.  PACK

I  INTRODUCTION — THE  LAND — FAUNA —

FLORA — ICE  AGE — MAN  ...  7

II  EVIDENTIAL  MATERIALS — EARLY  DIS-
COVERIES — lyell’s  “ANTIQUITY  OF
MAN  ” 23

III  EVIDENTIAL  MATERIALS  ( continued, )

FURTHER  DISCOVERIES  IN  BRITAIN,
BELGIUM,  AND  FRANCE  ...  44

IV  PALAEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN — THEIR

CULTURE  AND  CIVILIZATION  . . 68

V  THE  TRANSITION  FROM  PALAEOLITHIC
TO  NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  — THE
“ HIATUS  ” PROBLEM  AND  SUBMERG-
ENCE OF  THE  LAND  ....  LOO

VI  ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES  OF  THE  NEO-
LITHIC AND  BRONZE  AGES  . .134

Vn  EARLY  IRON  AGE  — HALLSTATT,  LA

T&NE,  AND  LATE  CELTIC  PERIODS  . 155


v


vi

CHAP.

vm


IX


x


CONTENTS

RELIGIOSITY  AND  COMMEMORATIVE
MONUMENTS — CROMLECHS,  DOLMENS,
BARROWS,  MENHIRS,  ALIGNMENTS,
ETC.

INHABITED  SITES  AND  PROTECTIVE
WORKS  — CAVES,  BEEHIVE  HOUSES,
HUT-CIRCLES,  DENEHOLES,  CAMPS,
FORTS,  LAKE-DWELLINGS,  ETC.

BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY — RIVER-BED  RACE
— NEOLITHIC  AND  BRONZE  AGE
PEOPLE— BRYTHONS — CONCLUSION  .

BIBLIOGRAPHY

INDEX


PAGE

178


205

228

253

254


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


CHAPTER  I

INTRODUCTION  —THE  LAND — FAUNA — FLORA —
ICE  AGE MAN

As  the  word  “ prehistoric  ” has  no  limita-
tion in  the  past  history  of  the  country,  it
logically  follows  that  a treatise  on  “ Prehistoric
Britain  ” would  have  an  equally  wide  range;
but  by  a judicious  discretion  we  limit  the
scope  of  this  book  to  the  period  during  which
man  was  an  inhabitant  of  Western  Europe,
prior  to  the  invention  of  written  records.  But
the  Britain  of  that  early  period  differed  widely
from  the  Britain  of  to-day  both  in  climate  and
geographical  area,  and  to  some  extent  in  its
flora  and  fauna.  Consequently  our  first  duty
is  to  describe  with  as  much  precision  as  modern
researches  will  admit  of,  but  very  briefly,  the
physical  conditions  which  obtained  in  pre-
historicBritainwhen  it  comes  within  the  above-
defined  scope  of  the  present  work.  From  this
standpoint  we  have  practically  to  discuss  the
entire  field  of  the  development  of  human
civilization,  as  disclosed  by  the  remains  of
Palaeolithic  and  Neolithic  races,  both  of  which

7


8


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


have  left  traces  of  their  existence  within  the
British  area.

On  the  other  hand,  the  pre-history  of  our
island,  outside  the  limitation  imposed  on  it
by  the  appearance  of  man  on  the  scene,  goes
back  to  the  dawn  of  life  on  the  globe ; and  it
is  largely  to  the  modifications  effected  under
the  influence  of  cosmic  agencies  during  this
infinitely  longer  period  that  the  country
became  a suitable  habitat  for  Homo  sapiens.
A few  preliminary  words  on  this  aspect  of  the
subject  will  not,  therefore,  be  considered  out
of  place,  as  thereby  the  true  starting-point  of
our  main  thesis  will  be  brought  into  clearer
relief.  As  we  cannot  endorse  the  opinion  long
held  as  a dogma  in  theological  cosmogonies,
that  the  multitudinous  phenomena  of  the
material  world — the  distribution  of  land  and
water,  the  evolution  of  plants  and  animals,
the  recurrence  of  seasons,  etc. — were  specially
designed  to  minister  to  the  welfare  of  man-
kind, we  are  bound  to  account  for  them  on
some  other  hypothesis.  On  this  point  all  we
affirm  is  that  they  were  the  outcome  of  the
fixed  laws  which  then  governed,  and  still
govern,  the  universe.  Evidence  in  support
of  this  conclusion  is  not  far  to  seek.  In  the
Geological  and  Palaeontological  records  we
have  ample  details  of  the  successive  changes
the  earth  has  undergone  since  it  cooled  down
sufficiently  to  admit  of  organic  life  on  its
surface.

Land. — As  to  the  actual  formation  of  land,
the  larger  portion  of  present-day  Britain  is


THE  LAND


9


composed  of  vast  beds  of  intermingled  sands,
gravels,  mud,  and  organic  debris,  brought
together  by  the  action  of  rivers,  sea-currents,
etc.,  and  rearranged  into  stratified  layers —
thus  proving  that  they  are  mostly  of  aqueous
origin.  The  reappearance  of  some  of  these
sedimentary  deposits  as  dry  land,  often  rising
to  the  height  of  mountains,  shows  that,  pari
passu  with  the  action  of  the  disintegrating
and  denuding  agencies,  oscillations  in  the
relative  level  of  sea  and  land  were  taking
place  in  several  localities.  The  causes  of
this  variableness  in  land-areas  so  affected  the
portion  of  Europe  now  known  as  Great  Britain
that,  from  time  to  time,  it  assumed  very
different  aspects,  now  forming  part  of  a Euro-
pean continent,  and  again  reduced  to  a mere
speck  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  These  disturbing
elements  extended  over  a geological  range  of
some  50,000,000  years,  and  during  all  that  time
the  British  area  was  a variable  quantity.  And
even  at  the  present  time  this  instability  has
not  altogether  ceased,  as  we  see  extensive
alterations  going  on  around  our  shores,  here
increasing  and  there  reducing  our  sea-board
lands.

The  statement  that  Britain  was  part  of  a
European  continent,  when  Palaeolithic  man
first  appeared  as  a naked  savage  among  its
woods  and  river-valleys,  is  not  a haphazard
assertion,  but  one  founded  on  indisputable
evidences.  The  numerous  animals,  many  of
them  now  extinct,  which  then  found  their  way
into  Britain,  such  as  the  mammoth,  rhinoceros.


10


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


hippopotamus,  Irish  elk,  cave-bear,  hyaena,
etc.,  could  not  have  done  so  had  the  English
Channel  been  then  in  existence.  Moreover,
the  bones  of  several  of  these  animals  have
been  repeatedly  dredged  up  in  fishermen’s
nets  from  the  bed  of  the  North  Sea,  under
conditions  which  show  that  they  found  the
means  of  living  in  the  submerged  localities  in
which  their  osseous  remains  are  now  found.
Not  less  convincing  is  the  fact  that  flint
implements  of  Palaeolithic  types  have  been
dug  up  from  the  valley  gravels  of  the  Thames
and  the  Somme,  considerably  lower  than  the
present  surfaces  of  these  estuaries.  The  dis-
covery of  the  bones  of  the  woolly-haired
rhinoceros,  reindeer,  horse,  etc.,  in  a recently
explored  cave  in  Jersey  can  only  be  explained
on  the  supposition  that  the  island  had  been
formerly  part  of  the  French  mainland.  The
same  argument  applies  to  the  finding  of
skeletons  of  the  great  Irish  elk  in  the  Isle  of
Man.  Also,  the  submerged  forests  and  raised
beaches,  described  in  geological  text-books  as
occurring  in  several  places  around  our  sea-
shores, testify  to  the  prevalence  of  land
oscillations  within  comparatively  recent  times.

Animals. — Concurrent  with  these  fluctua-
tions in  the  formation  and  distribution  of
continental  land-areas  the  organic  wrorld  was
pursuing  its  marvellous  course  on  the  lines  of
evolution,  producing,  with  unstinted  copious-
ness and  ever-changing  adaptations,  multi-
tudes of  living  organisms,  strange  and  some-
times fantastic-looking  objects,  whose  sole


FAUNA


11


life-purpose  seemed  to  be  to  propagate  their
kind,  after  which  their  functional  activities
began  to  wane  and  finally  ended  in  somatic
dissolution.  The  origin  of  life,  notwithstand-
ing much  discussion,  e.  g.  at  the  Dundee  meet-
ing of  the  British  Association  (1912),  is  still
a mystery,  but,  according  to  evidence  culled
from  the  geological  records  and  modern  biologi-
cal researches,  its  first  recognizable  garb  was
that  of  very  simple  single-celled  organisms —
simpler  even  than  most  of  the  Protozoa  of
to-day.  Such  single  cells  are  universally  re-
garded as  the  ultimate  units  in  all  the  complex
structural  combinations  of  the  organic  world.
By  a critical  study  of  these  ever-changing
morphological  productions,  we  are  enabled
to  trace  the  connecting  links  which  bind
living  things  into  one  united  whole,  with
man  as  their  crowning  achievement.  As  we
move  along  the  stream  of  time  the  number,
variety,  and  complexity  of  living  forms  become
bewildering.  The  quest  for  food,  protection
from  enemies,  and  sexual  impulses  seem  to
furnish  the  chief  motives  of  their  respective
life-activities;  and  hence  the  raison  d’etre  for
the  invention  and  differentiation  of  special
organs  to  carry  out  these  purposes.  The
policy  adopted  in  propagating  the  species
seems  to  be  to  flood  the  environment  with
their  young  progeny,  with  the  result  that
there  is  a perpetual  struggle  for  existence
which  always  ends  in  the  premature  death  of
the  vast  majority.  For,  of  the  multitudes
born,  there  is  room  for  only  a small  fraction


12


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


to  come  to  mature  life.  This  waste  of  creative
energy  can  only  be  defended  on  the  plea  that
the  survival  of  the  fittest  improves  the  future
status  of  the  successful  competitors.

Biologists  conversant  with  fossil  records
inform  us  that  the  life-histories  of  the  great
animal  groups  which  now  inhabit  the  earth
have  a wide  range  both  in  space  and  time.
Invertebrates,  of  course,  go  back  to  pre-Cam-
brian times,  but  the  Vertebrates  are  of  more
recent  date.  First,  in  ascending  order,  come
Fishes  (Silurian) ; then  amphibians  (Carboni-
ferous); then  Reptiles  (Permian);  then  Birds
and  Mammals  (Jurassic  and  Triassic  respec-
tively) ; but  not  till  towards  the  close  of  the
Tertiaries  have  we  clear  evidence  of  the
presence  of  Man  on  the  globe.  All  these
geological  formations,  with  their  character-
istic fossils,  are  to  be  found  within  the
confines  of  the  Britain  of  to-day.

Plants. — The  evolution  theory  applies
equally  to  the  Vegetable  Kingdom.  In  some
respects  the  consecutive  stages  in  the  geologi-
cal history  of  plants  may  be  paralleled  with
those  of  animals.  But  the  details  of  palaeo-
botany  are  more  difficult  to  decipher  (see
Evolution  of  Plants  by  D.  H.  Scott  in  this
Library),  and  wide  generalizations  have  hither-
to been  scanty.  For  our  present  purpose  it  is,
however,  enough  to  know  that  the  members
of  the  sub-Kingdom  of  the  Angiosperms,  or
Flowering  Plants,  are  not  only  the  most  recent
in  point  of  evolution,  but  the  most  numerous
in  the  vegetable  world  of  to-day.  They  em-


FLORA


13


brace  an  endless  variety  of  species  widely
different,  in  form,  size  and  structural  com-
plexity. They  exist  under  all  the  conditions
of  life,  from  the  dense  jungle  of  the  Tropics
to  the  home  of  eternal  snows.  In  the  ordinary
walks  of  life  we  meet  them  everywhere,
dominating  our  woodlands,  prairies,  meadows
and  ponds.  The  pedigree  of  a goodly  number,
including  many  dicotyledons  (oaks,  birches,
hollies,  etc.),  as  well  as  a few  monocotyledons
(palms,  etc.),  has  been  traced  as  far  back  as
the  Upper  Cretaceous  system.  Their  rapid
evolution  in  recent  geological  times  was
characterized  by  Darwin  as  an  “ abominable
mystery.”  But  it  is  now  suggested  that  their
close  relationship  with  insect  life  is  a probable
explanation  of  this  mystery.  In  support  of
this  idea  it  has  been  observed  that  the  principal
insects  concerned  in  the  fertilization  of  flowers
came  into  being  much  about  the  same  time,
i.e.  towards  the  end  of  the  Cretaceous  period.
But,  however  this  may  be,  the  world-wide
transformation,  caused  by  the  sudden  rise  and
rapid  evolution  of  the  Flowering  Plants,  had
a corresponding  depressive  influence  on  the
Gymnosperms,  Lycopods,  Ferns,  and  Equise-
tums,  which  previously  dominated  the  Plant
world.  Although  many  of  these  Cryptogams
have  still  representatives  within  British  lands,
they  occupy  a subordinate  position  in  com-
parison with  the  Angiosperms.  Among  Gym-
nosperms, the  Coniferse  are  the  most  interest-
ing and  conspicuous  survivals  to  our  day,
still  numbering  some  300  species.  They


14


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


include  the  pines,  firs,  yews,  cypresses,  arau-
carias, etc.  Among  them  are  to  be  found
some  of  the  largest  forest  trees,  for  instance
the  Mammoth  Tree  of  California  ( Wellingtonia
gigantea),  and  the  handsome  Japanese  Cedar
( Cryptomeria  japonica).  On  the  other  hand,
the  horsetails  have  dwindled  down  to  a few
insignificant  species,  although  their  forebears
were  great  forest  trees  with  wide-spreading
branches.  Also,  their  supposed  precursors,
the  calamites,  which  grew  in  large  groups  on
the  margins  of  lagoons  in  the  Carboniferous
Age,  and  possessed  huge  jointed-stems,  sup-
ported by  massive  rhizomes  and  far-spreading
roots,  appear  to  have  died  out  altogether  in
the  Permian  period.  Our  modern  ferns  are
also  diminutive  in  comparison  wdth  those  of
former  ages ; while  all  the  modern  Lyco-
podiacese  are  puny  representatives  of  the
great  tree-forms  which  flourished  during  the
Carboniferous  period,  and  which  are  now  so
largely  met  with  as  fossils  in  our  British
coal-fields.

Ice  Age. — Among  the  physical  phenomena
which  materially  helped  to  mould  Britain  into
its  present  shape  was  the  incoming  of  the
great  Ice  Age.  This  singular  episode  in  the
world’s  history  lasted  during  the  whole  of  the
Pleistocene  period,  but  not  as  one  continuous
span  of  advance  and  retreat  of  its  accom-
panying load  of  ice,  but  rather  as  a series  of
ice  ages  alternating  with  warm  intervals  of
long  duration.  At  the  time  of  maximum
glaciation  the  larger  portion  of  Britain  was


ICE  AGE


15


covered  with  a vast  mer  de  gldce,  causing  the
environment  to  be  in  a state  of  general  in-
stability. The  effect  of  moving  masses  of
ice  over  the  low-lying  lands  was  to  smooth
their  surface,  here  polishing  and  striating
protruding  rocks,  there  equalizing  irregularities
by  filling  up  the  hollows  with  the  disintegrated
materials.  The  gradual  change  from  a tropical
climate  to  one  of  Arctic  severity,  with  inter-
glacial warm  intervals,  led  to  the  incoming
into  Central  and  Western  Europe  of  different
faunas,  at  one  time  hailing  from  sub-tropical
and  at  another  from  sub-arctic  regions.  Here,
for  a time,  these  immigrants  found  a congenial
home,  but  ultimately  most  of  them  succumbed
to  the  extreme  change  of  climate  which  subse-
quently ensued,  and  the  consequent  severe
struggle  for  existence  to  which  they  were
subjected.

To  correlate  the  successive  land-areas  of
the  Pleistocene  period  with  the  contemporary
works  of  man  is  a somewhat  speculative  under-
taking in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge ;
the  most  feasible  hypothesis  is  that  which
makes  man’s  earliest  appearance  in  Britain
contemporary  with  the  inter-glacial  warm
period  which  immediately  followed  that  of
maximum  glaciation.  As  soon  as  the  increas-
ing ice  passed  its  meridian  and  the  environment
responded  to  a warmer  temperature,  torrential
rivers,  caused  by  the  melting  of  the  ice,  began
the  work  of  excavating  the  river  valleys  and
clearing  aw'ay  the  accumulated  deposits  caused
by  the  previous  state  of  submergence.  Con-


16


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


current  with  these  changes  a process  of
elevation  of  the  land  set  in  and  continued
until  a large  portion  of  Western  Europe  stood
so  high  as  to  convert  the  present  beds  of  the
Irish  Sea,  the  English  Channel  and  the  North
Sea  into  dry  land.  The  Thames  and  all
the  rivers  of  the  east  coast  united  with  the
Rhine  and  the  Elbe  to  form  what  must  have
been  a noble  river  flowing  northwards  and
ultimately  debouching  into  the  sea,  not  far
from  the  Faroe  Islands.  The  Seine  and  the
Somme  formed  a junction  in  the  English
Channel  and,  after  gathering  the  surplus
waters  of  the  south  of  England  and  the
north  of  France,  continued  their  course  as  a
fair-sized  river  to  the  Atlantic,  some  100
miles  farther  west.  The  Severn  received
some  streams  from  the  basin  of  the  Irish
Sea,  the  lowest  portion  of  which  was  then
occupied  by  a chain  of  fresh-water  lakes,  and
then  followed  a similar  course  to  the  Atlantic.
Thus  Great  Britain,  Ireland,  the  Isle  of  Man.
Jersey  and  other  islands  formed  part  of  the
inland  uplands  of  a European  continent.

While  these  far-reaching  changes  were  in
progress  under  a climate  becoming  more  and
more  ameliorated,  these  richly  wooded  and
well-watered  plains  (now  mostly  submerged)
became  attractive  feeding-ground  for  large
herds  of  grazing  animals,  followed  of  course
by  bears,  lions  and  hyaenas,  whose  natural
prey  they  were.  It  was,  in  all  probability,
during  the  stage  of  maximum  geniality  that
so  many  sub-tropical  animals,  such  as  the


MAN


17


two  earlier  elephants,  the  hippopotamus,  the
Rhinoceros  merckii,  sabre-toothed  tiger  ( Mach -
airodus),  cave-bear,  cave-lion,  etc.,  found  their
way  into  Britain.  But  these  animals  were
ultimately  caught  as  in  a trap  by  a subsequent
recrudescence  of  a cold  period,  the  consequence
of  which  was  that  most  of  them  became
extinct,  and  left  their  carcases  on  the  battle-
field, as  evidence  of  their  former  existence  in
these  regions.  It  is  also  during  this  inter-
glacial period  that  we  first  meet  with  evidence
that  Palaeolithic  man  was  an  inhabitant  of
Britain.

These  remarks  will  suffice  to  show  that
during  the  Pleistocene  Age  the  geography  of
Western  Europe  was  very  different  from  what
it  is  now.  Since  the  appearance  of  man  on
the  scene,  at  least  one  Ice  Age  has  occurred,
but  the  ice-fields  which  accompanied  it  did
not  spread  so  far  out  on  the  lower  grounds,
probably  in  consequence  of  a drier  state  of
the  atmosphere.  It  should  also  be  noted
that  contemporary  with  the  recrudescence  of
the  ice  there  was  again  a subsidence  of  the
land.  Whether  ice  pressure  and  land  sub-
mergence have  any  causal  connection  it  is
difficult  to  say,  but  the  affirmative  is  the
more  feasible  answer.

Man. — As  an  immigrant  into  Britain  Palaeo-
lithic man  had  been  subjected,  like  other
animals,  to  the  trials  and  discomforts  which
followed  the  changing  vicissitudes  of  climate,
but  he,  almost  alone,  survived  the  hardships
of  these  cosmic  persecutions.  How  he  suc-

B


18


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


ceeded  in  warding  off  the  fate  of  the  extinct
mammals  falls  to  be  described  in  subsequent
pages.  Meantime  we  have  to  consider  what
were  his  physical  and  mental  characteristics
when  he  first  comes  within  the  scope  of  our
researches.  Some  knowledge  of  his  forebears
and  previous  habits  are  indispensable  in  order
to  define,  with  some  degree  of  accuracy,  the
starting-point  of  the  story  of  his  future  career
on  the  British  area,  which  is  the  main  object
of  this  little  volume.

Although  Palaeolithic  man  was  not  the  same
as  man  of  to-day,  yet  he  was  already  in  pos-
session of  the  distinguishing  characteristics
of  humanity.  The  preliminary  problem  which
now  falls  to  be  considered  is  how  he  acquired
these  remarkable  and  unique  features.

The  races  of  mankind  now  living  are
differentiated  from  all  other  animals  by  the
erect  attitude,  bipedal  locomotion,  manipu-
lative hands,  and  a larger  and  more  highly
developed  brain.  All  these  characters  apply
to  Palaeolithic  man,  with  perhaps  the  exception
of  the  reasoning  faculty,  which,  however,
differed  from  that  of  civilized  man  only  in
degree.  For  a long  time  no  rational  explana-
tion of  how  these  human  characteristics  were
acquired  was  forthcoming,  and  even  now  their
origin  and  development  are  only  beginning  to
be  understood.

At  an  early  stage  in  the  evolution  of  animal
life  the  power  of  moving  from  one  locality  to
another  became  essential  to  the  individual
organism,  the  object  being  to  secure  a better


MAN


19


supply  of  food  than  was  possible  in  a fixed
position,  such  as  that  of  a plant.  Among
lower  organisms  movement  was  accomplished
in  various  ways — vibratile  filaments,  ciliary
organs,  pseudopodia,  etc. ; but  in  all  the
higher  vertebrates  locomotion  was  effected  by
means  of  four  movable  limbs,  capable  of
supporting  and  transporting  the  animal  at
will.  As  these  four-footed  animals  became
greatly  affected  by  the  struggle  for  life,  owing
to  the  rapid  multiplication  of  species  and
the  ever-varying  conditions  of  the  environ-
ment, it  followed  that  the  limbs  became  also
more  or  less  modified,  so  as  to  make  them
suitable,  not  only  for  increased  speed  in
altered  circumstances,  but  useful  to  the
animal  economy  in  other  ways.  Hence  they
became  adapted  for  diverse  purposes,  such  as
swimming,  flying,  climbing,  grasping,  scraping,
etc.  The  anterior  limbs,  owing  to  their
proximity  to  the  head,  were  more  frequently
selected  for  such  transformations,  as  may  be
seen  in  the  wings  of  birds  and  bats.  But
whatever  modifications  the  fore-limbs  may
have  undergone,  no  animal,  but  man,  has  ever
succeeded  in  divesting  them  of  their  primary
function  of  locomotion.  This  achievement
was  primarily  due  to  the  attainment  of  the
erect  attitude,  which  necessitated  a rearrange-
ment of  the  functions  of  the  limbs — the
anterior  being  henceforth  entirely  restricted
to  manipulative  and  prehensile  purposes,  and
the  posterior  to  locomotion.

The  maintenance  of  the  erect  attitude


20


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


involved  some  anatomical  alterations  in  the
structure  of  the  body.  Not  only  were  the
bones  of  the  limbs  adapted  to  perform  their
respective  functions  under  the  new  conditions,
but  the  spine  had  to  be  turned  by  a quarter
of  a circle,  so  as  to  be  in  the  vertical  direction,
i.e.  in  line  with  the  posterior  limbs.  The
skull,  which  was  formerly  supported  by  a
powerful  muscle  ( Ligamentum  nuchas),  moved
backwards  until  it  became  equipoised  on  the
top  of  the  vertebral  column.  The  upper  limbs,
now  relieved  from  having  any  share  in  the
locomotion  of  the  body,  assumed  great  freedom
in  the  various  movements  of  flexion,  prona-
tion, and  supination.  The  fingers  became
longer  and  could  be  opposed,  singly  or  in
groups,  to  the  thumb  so  as  to  form  a hook,
a clasp  or  a pair  of  pincers;  and  the  palm  of
the  hand  could  be  made  into  a cup-shaped
hollow  capable  of  grasping  a sphere.  In  fact,
the  hand  of  man  is  the  most  perfect  piece  of
mechanism  Nature  has  yet  produced.  But
these  morphological  changes  involved  no
obliteration  of  the  primary  homologies  common
to  the  rest  of  the  higher  vertebrates.  All  the
bones,  muscles,  nerves,  blood-vessels  and
sensory  organs  remained  much  the  same  as
those  of  the  anthropoid  apes,  which  are  the
nearest  of  kin  to  man.  But  if  the  races  of
mankind  are  so  closely  related  both  in  struc-
ture and  mode  of  development  to  the  anthro-
poid apes,  what,  it  may  be  asked,  are  the
essential  characters  which  differentiate  them
from  the  latter?  The  authors  of  Mammals


MAN  21

Living  and  Extinct  (p.  740)  thus  answer  the
question  :

“ The  distinctions  between  the  Hominidce
and  Simiidce  are  chiefly  relative,  being  greater
size  of  brain  and  of  brain-case  as  compared
with  the  facial  portion  of  the  skull,  smaller
development  of  the  canine  teeth  of  the  males,
complete  adaptation  of  the  structure  of  the
vertebral  column  to  the  vertical  position,
greater  length  of  the  lower  as  compared  with
the  upper  extremities,  and  greater  length  of
the  hallux  or  great  toe,  with  almost  complete
absence  of  the  power  of  bringing  it  in  opposi-
tion to  the  other  four  toes.  The  last  feature,
together  with  the  small  size  of  the  canine
teeth,  are  perhaps  the  most  marked  and  easily
defined  distinctions  that  can  be  drawn  between
the  two  groups.”

This  close  analogy  in  bodily  structure
between  man  and  the  lower  animals  is  strongly
suggested  by  the  facts  of  embryology,  as  all
the  homologous  organs  in  the  full-grown
animal,  such  as  the  flipper  of  a whale,  the  wing
of  a bird  and  the  hand  of  man,  are  developed
from  the  same  fundamental  parts  in  the
embryo.  On  similar  grounds  it  can  be  proved
that  the  human  hand  and  foot  had  been
developed  from  limbs  which  were  somewhat
similar  to  those  of  the  quadrumana,  which
are  specially  adapted  for  arboreal  life.  It  is
of  some  significance  to  note  that  the  great
grasping  power  of  the  fore-limbs  is  still


22


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


retained  at  birth,  as  shown  by  the  remarkably
tight  and  persistent  grasp  of  a newly-born
baby— a fact  which  is  well  known  to
accoucheurs.

The  theory  of  the  descent  of  man  from  the
lower  animals  is  also  strongly  supported  by
the  presence  in  the  human  body  of  a number
of  vestigial  organs,  which  are  now  useless  in
the  human  economy,  but  whose  homologues
in  other  animals  have  well-defined  functions.
Among  such  organs  are  the  coccyx,  intra-
and  supra-condyloid  foramina  of  the  humerus,
and  the  appendix  vermiformis.  But  indeed
the  detailed  structure  of  the  entire  human
body  is  utterly  inexplicable  on  any  other
hypothesis.  See  Dr.  Arthur  Keith’s  volume
on  The  Human  Body  in  this  Library.

But  of  all  the  problems  relating  to  the
origin  and  descent  of  Man  the  most  important
is  to  account  for  the  great  superiority  of  his
reasoning  powers.  The  hypothesis,  that  this
profound  distinction  is  primarily  due  to  his
being  in  possession  of  true  hands,  is  the  most
feasible  explanation  that  has  hitherto  been
advanced  on  the  subject.  By  means  of  hands
man  manufactured  tools  and  weapons,  and
utilized  them  to  such  an  extent  that  they
ultimately  superseded  his  natural  means  of
defence.  The  knowledge,  skill  and  experience
thus  acquired  gradually  led  to  an  increase
in  brain  substance — the  undoubted  organ  of
thought.  This  handicraft  skill  was  absolutely
a new  departure  in  the  history  of  organic
evolution,  as  no  other  animal  is,  or  ever  was,


EVIDENTIAL  MATERIALS


23


a tool-maker,  and  the  successful  application
of  this  discovery  to  practical  life  is  alone
sufficient  to  place  man  in  a category  by
himself.

Thus  with  bipedal  locomotion,  limbs  special-
ized into  hands  and  feet.  Homo  sapiens  started
on  his  human  career  as  a tool-maker.  Only
in  brain  capacity  and  a corresponding  de-
ficiency in  the  exercise  of  the  reasoning  faculty
was  he  below  civilized  man  of  to-day.  His
subsequent  career,  as  an  inhabitant  of  Britain,
falls  to  be  described  in  this  book;  and  then
we  shall  have  an  opportunity  of  correlating
the  products  of  his  mechanical  skill  with
development  of  his  brain.  Along  with  this
book  there  should  be  read  the  volumes  on
Anthropology  (Marett)  and  The  Dawn  of
History  (Myres)  in  this  Library.


CHAPTER  II

EVIDENTIAL  MATERIALS EARLY  DISCOVERIES

— LYELL’S  “ ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN  ”

From  the  remarks  made  in  the  previous
chapter  it  will  be  seen  that  the  evolution  of
man  has  passed  through  two  chronological
stages.  The  first  coincided  with  the  time
during  which  the  morphological  changes
involved  in  the  permanent  assumption  of  the
erect  attitude  were  being  effected.  The
second  ranges  contemporaneously  with  the


24


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


development  of  the  higher  mental  faculties,
consequent  on  the  stimulation  induced  by
the  manipulative  functions  of  the  hand,  as
exemplified  in  the  manufacture  of  tools  and
their  application  to  the  exigencies  of  human
life.  The  changes  produced  in  the  human
body  during  the  first  stage,  being  readily
accomplished  under  the  ordinary  laws  of
organic  morphology,  were  completed  in  a
comparatively  short  time.  Those  of  the
latter,  being  almost  co-extensive  with  the
life-history  of  men  on  the  globe,  have  occupied
a much  longer  time.  To  convert  the  small
increments  of  knowledge,  gathered  from  ex-
perience of  the  laws  of  nature,  and  the  working
of  a variety  of  novel  mechanical  contrivances,
into  brain  substance,  is  a process  of  slow
growth.  Nor  can  any  limitation  be  put  on
its  duration,  as  it  runs  on  parallel  lines  with
human  civilization,  and  is  as  applicable  to  the
modern  as  to  the  early  races  of  mankind.  As
evidence  of  the  progressiveness  of  brain
development,  which  went  on  from  generation
to  generation  during  this  long  stage  in  the
history  of  humanity,  we  have  a series  of  fossil
skulls  showing,  in  chronological  sequence,  a
gradual  abandonment  of  simian  characters,
and  a steady  approachment  to  the  cranial
characters  of  the  civilized  races  of  to-day.

Among  the  structural  changes  effected  in  the
course  of  this  brain  development  was  a retro-
cession or  contraction  of  the  facial  bones,
especially  the  jawbones,  towards  the  central
axis  of  the  spinal  column,  and  a backward


EVIDENTIAL  MATERIALS


25


shifting  of  the  cerebrum  over  the  cerebellum.
As  the  gradual  filling  up  of  the  cranial  cavity
progressed  necessarily  pari  passu  with  these
modifications,  we  have,  in  the  facial  angle  of
Camper,  a rough  mechanical  means  of  estimat-
ing the  advance  of  mental  development  during
the  period  of  man’s  existence  as  a human
being,  i.e.  since  he  attained  the  erect  attitude.

Among  the  minor  results  of  this  retrocession
of  the  facial  bones  was  a gradual  contraction
of  the  alveolar  borders  of  the  jaws,  thus
crowding  the  teeth  into  a smaller  space.  The
consequence  was  that  the  third  molar  teeth,
which  were  the  largest,  or  at  least  the  same
size  as  their  neighbours,  in  the  jaws  of  the
Palaeolithic  races,  became  gradually  smaller,
until  in  civilized  races  they  have  dwindled
into  almost  vestigial  organs.

Another  distinction  between  the  earlier
fossil  skeletons  and  those  of-  modern  civilized
races  is  that  the  latter  have  well-formed
chins,  forming  a striking  contrast  to  the
simian-like  mandibles  of  the  former,  as  shown
in  Fig.  1.  This  is  the  most  remarkable  feature
of  the  recently  discovered  Piltdown  mandible
in  Sussex  (see  Fig.  9).  Whatever  may  be  the
precise  cause  of  this  peculiarity,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  the  gradual  formation  of  the
human  chin  has  a remarkable  parallelism
with  the  progress  of  man’s  intellectuality,
ever  since  he  diverged  from  the  common  stem
line  from  which  he  and  the  anthropoid  apes
have  descended.

There  are  thus  two  distinct  lines  on  which


26


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


investigations  into  the  past  history  of  man-
kind may  be  profitably  conducted,  both  of
which  start  from  the  attainment  of  the  erect
attitude — one  dealing  with  the  fossil  remains
of  past  races,  and  the  other  with  their  handi-


1.  Chin  of  a modem  French-
man.


2.  That  of  a young  man
from  Grotte  dea  EnfarUa
Mentone  — JR  ace  de  Gri-
maldi.


3.  Lower  jaw  of  a fossil
monkey  ( Dryopitheeua ).


Fig.  1. — Profile  of  Lower  Jaws.  (After  Gaudry.)

craft  products.  The  evidential  materials  to
be  gathered  from  these  different  sources
consist,  in  the  one  case  of  some  fragments
of  a few  skeletons  of  former  races,  which,  by
some  fortuitous  circumstances,  have  to  this
day  resisted  the  disintegrating  forces  of  nature ;


EVIDENTIAL  MATERIALS


27


and,  in  the  other,  of  a number  of  specimens
of  man’s  handicraft  works,  which,  being  largely
made  of  such  endurable  substance  as  flint,
are  more  abundantly  met  w'ith.  The  succes-
sive modifications  which  these  respective
materials  have  undergone  during  a long  series
of  ages,  though  different  in  kind,  are  found  to
bear  a decided  ratio  to  the  progress  of  human
intelligence.  Thus,  taking  the  human  skull
at  the  starting-point  of  humanity  as  com-
parable to  that  of  one  of  the  higher  apes,  we
know,  as  a matter  of  fact,  that  during  the
onward  march  of  time  it  has  undergone  some
striking  changes,  both  in  form  and  capacity,
before  reaching  the  normal  type  of  modern
civilized  races — changes  which  can  be  largely
classified  in  chronological  sequence.  Simi-
larly, the  artificial  products  of  man’s  hands
show  a steady  improvement  in  type,  technique
and  efficiency,  commensurate  with  his  pro-
gressive knowledge  of  the  laws  of  nature  and
his  ability  in  applying  them  to  mechanical
and  utilitarian  purposes.  Indeed,  the  trail
of  humanity  along  its  entire  course  is  strewn
with  the  discarded  weapons  and  tools  which,
from  time  to  time,  had  to  give  way  to  others
of  greater  efficiency.  Such  obsolete  objects
are  now  only  collected  as  curiosities  to  be
preserved  in  archaeological  museums.

From  this  vast  field  of  anthropological  and
archaeological  materials  we  are  expected  to
convey  to  our  readers  some  general  idea  of
their  scientific  value,  in  illustrating  the  pro-
gressive advances  of  the  earliest  British


28


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


inhabitants  from  savagedom  to  the  goal  of
human  civilization.  It  must  also  be  borne
in  mind  that  in  this  and  the  following  chapter,
which  deals  with  Palaeolithic  remains,  no  dis-
tinction can  be  drawn  between  relics  found
in  Britain  and  the  adjacent  lands  of  Europe,
as  these  land-areas  were  then  united  into  one
great  continent.  Many  of  the  connecting-
links  are  probably  strewn  on  the  beds  of  the
English  Channel  and  the  North  Sea,  or  on
former  inhabited  sites  and  submerged  forests.

Early  Discoveries. — Prior  to  the  publica-
tion of  Sir  Charles  Lyell’s  work  on  The  Geo-
logical Evidences  of  the  Antiquity  of  Man,
isolated  discoveries  were  recorded  in  different
parts  of  Europe,  disclosing  anthropological
facts  which,  in  the  opinion  of  a few  savants,
could  only  be  accounted  for  by  assigning  to
man  a higher  antiquity  than  was  then  the
current  opinion  in  scientific  circles.  These
discoveries  consisted  of  the  fossil  remains  of
man  associated  with  flint  implements  and  the
bones  of  extinct  animals  in  undisturbed
deposits  of  the  Quaternary  period.  But  the
reception  given  to  this  class  of  evidence  was
most  discouraging,  as  may  be  judged  from  the
following  notes  on  a few  of  the  earlier  records.

About  1690  a flint  implement  of  excellent
workmanship  of  the  coup-de-poing  type  (Fig.  2),
was  found  along  with  the  tooth  of  a mammoth
in  a gravel  bed  at  Gray’s  Inn  Lane,  London,
and  presented  to  the  British  Museum.  Though
described  in  the  Sloane  Catalogue  and  ex-
posed to  public  view  ever  since,  it  lay  there,


EARLY  DISCOVERIES


29


as  an  object  of  no  significance,  until  1859,
when  Sir  A.  W.  Franks  recognized  its  close
similarity  to  the  flint  implements  discovered


Fig.  2. — Flint  implement  (coup-de-poing)  found  in
Gray’s  Inn  Lane  (£).

by  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes  in  the  gravels  of
the  Somme  valley.  A similar  fate  befell  a
later  discovery  (1797)  of  flint  implements,
associated  with  the  bones  of  extinct  animals,
at  Iloxne  in  Suffolk.


30


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


About  the  beginning  of  the  second  quarter
of  last  century  the  Rev.  J.  MacEnery  found
flint  implements,  associated  with  bones  and
teeth  of  extinct  animals,  below  a thick  con-
tinuous sheet  of  stalagmite  in  Kent’s  Cavern.
But  the  legitimate  inference  from  these  facts,
viz.  that  man  was  contemporary  with  these
animals  and  lived  before  the  stalagmite  was
deposited,  had  found  no  acceptance,  even
among  the  scientists  of  the  day.  Further
discoveries,  confirming  the  truth  of  Mac-
Enery’s statements,  were  made  in  Kent’s
Cavern  (1840)  and  described  at  a meeting  of
the  British  Association;  but  they  were  also
discredited.  It  was  not  till  1865  that  a
majority  of  the  Council  became  sufficiently
convinced  of  the  importance  of  the  archas-
ological  remains  found  in  Kent’s  Cavern  to
appoint  a committee,  with  a money  grant,  for
its  complete  excavation  on  scientific  principles.

In  1829  Dr.  Schmerling  commenced  his
memorable  researches  in  the  caverns  of  the
province  of  Liege.  The  evidence  of  man’s
antiquity  revealed  by  his  discoveries  con-
sisted of  flint  implements  and  remains  of
human  skeletons,  associated  with  bones  of  the
hyaena,  cave-bear,  cave-lion,  rhinoceros,  mam-
moth and  reindeer.  An  illustrated  account
of  his  discoveries  was  published  in  1833-4,
in  which  the  author,  in  the  most  unequivocal
language,  contended  for  the  contemporaneity
of  man  with  the  extinct  animals;  but  owing
chiefly  to  the  influence  of  the  celebrated
naturalist,  Cuvier,  his  opinions  did  not  re-


EARLY  DISCOVERIES


31


ceive  the  attention  they  merited.  Sir  Charles
Lyell  paid  a visit  to  Dr.  Schmerling  in  1833,
and  expressed  some  incredulity  respecting
the  alleged  antiquity  of  the  fossil  bones,  but
afterwards  he  changed  his  opinion  and  made
an  apology  for  his  former  scepticism.  The
apology  itself  is  of  little  consequence,  but  the
statements  therein  made  form  a most  interest-
ing account  of  the  difficulties  under  which
Dr.  Schmerling  carried  on  his  researches,  and
supply  evidence  of  the  enthusiasm  and
persistence  with  which  he  advocated  what  he
believed  to  be  truth  in  face  of  an  unbelieving
world.

The  discovery  by  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes
of  rude  flint  implements,  associated  with  bones
of  the  mammoth  and  other  extinct  animals,
in  the  ancient  river  gravels  of  the  valley  of
the  Somme,  at  various  heights  above  the
present  highest  flood-marks  of  the  river,
equally  failed  to  attract  public  attention.
An  account  of  his  discoveries,  under  the  title
Antiquites  celtiques  et  antediluviennes  was
published  in  1847,  but  for  upwards  of  ten
years  it  remained  a dead  letter.  At  last,
through  the  intervention  of  a few  English
savants,  his  novel  antiquities  were  rescued
from  obscurity.  The  first  English  convert  to
M.  de  Perthes’  opinions  was  Dr.  Hugh  Fal-
coner, F.R.S.,  who,  writing  in  November  1858,
thus  expressed  himself  on  the  subject  :

“ After  devoting  the  greater  part  of  a day
to  his  vast  collection,  I am  perfectly  satisfied


32


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


that  there  is  a great  deal  of  fair  presumptive
evidence  in  favour  of  many  of  his  speculations
regarding  the  remote  antiquity  of  these
industrial  objects  and  their  association  with
animals  now  extinct.”  ( Essays , etc.,  by  Lady
Prestwich,  1901,  p.  83.)

“ On  the  23rd  of  March,  1863,  some  four
years  after  a few  of  the  leading  archaeologists


Fig.  3. — Outline  of  the  Moulin- Quignon  Jaw  (£).  ( After

Quatrefages.)


of  France  and  England  had  come  to  recognize
the  truth  of  Dr.  Falconer’s  opinion,  a workman
engaged  in  digging  gravel  near  a windmill
called  Moulin-Quignon,  in  the  suburbs  of
Abbeville,  came  to  inform  M.  Boucher  de
Perthes  that  a small  portion  of  a bone  wras  to
be  seen  projecting  from  the  face  of  a cutting
then  in  progress.  He  and  a friend  (M.  Dim-
pre)  went  on  at  once  to  the  spot  and  witnessed
the  extraction  of  the  bone,  which  proved  to  be
a human  mandible  (Fig.  3).  It  was  embedded
in  a dark  sandy  ferruginous  seam,  almost  in


EARLY  DISCOVERIES


33


contact  with  the  underlying  chalk ; four  and
a half  metres  from  the  surface,  and  thirty
metres  above  the  level  of  the  Somme.  Associ-
ated with  this  bone  were  some  flint  imple-
ments of  the  usual  types,  which  were  then
unsuspiciously  accepted  as  genuine  relics.
The  news  of  this  discovery  caused  great
excitement  among  leading  anthropologists
on  both  sides  of  the  Channel,  and  many  of
them  at  once  visited  the  locality.

“ Meanwhile  doubts  as  to  the  authenticity
of  the  jaw  had  been  freely  expressed  by  some
of  the  English  visitors,  and  hence  a con-
troversy arose,  which  soon  reached  such  a
climax  that  the  disputants  arranged  to  hold
an  international  Congress  of  representative
men  to  inquire  into  the  whole  circumstances.
Accordingly,  this  Congress  was  opened  in
Paris  on  the  9th  of  May,  1863.  France  was
represented  by  MM.  Lartet,  Delisse,  De
Quatrefages,  Bourgeois,  Bateux,  Gaudry,
Desnoyers,  and  Milne-Edwards ; and  England
by  MM.  Falconer,  Prestwich,  Carpenter  and
Busk — Evans  had  also  been  nominated,  but
was  unable  to  attend.  M.  Milne-Edwards
presided,  and  in  the  name  of  his  French
colleagues  presented  a report  affirming  the
authenticity  of  the  jaw;  but  after  many
meetings,  much  discussion,  and  a visit  to
Abbeville,  the  English  representatives  re-
mained unconvinced,  and  so  the  Congress
dispersed,  leaving  the  jaw  as  much  as  ever  a
bone  of  contention.”  (From  Archeology  and
False  Antiquities,  p.  32.)
c


34


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Subsequently  it  became  mooted  that  the
jaw,  along  with  other  human  bones,  had  been
found  in  a prehistoric  grave  in  the  neighbour-
hood, and  secretly  deposited  in  the  gravel-pit
by  a workman.  There  was,  however,  this
difference  between  the  jaw  and  the  other
bones,  that  the  former  was  covered  with  the
dark  mud  of  the  gravel-pit,  while  the  latter
had  the  appearance  of  having  been  long  in
contact  with  a reddish  sandy  matrix.  But
in  sawing  through  a portion  of  the  jaw  its
interior  was  found  to  contain  a reddish
material  totally  different  from  that  on  its
external  surface.

Another  incident  which  raised  some  sus-
picion about  the  authenticity  of  the  jaw  was,
that  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes  had  offered  a
reward  of  200  francs  to  the  first  workman  who
would  discover  a human  bone  in  situ.  Eight
days  later,  according  to  G.  de  Mortillet,  he  was
informed  of  the  discovery  of  the  jaw  at  Moulin -
Quignon.

That  the  Moulin-Quignon  mandible  was  a
fraud  is  the  verdict  which  finds  general
acceptance  among  anthropologists  of  the
present  day.  But  at  the  time  M.  de  Perthes
unfortunately  looked  on  the  matter  as  a
question  of  personal  veracity.  It  was  taken
out  in  his  presence,- and,  therefore,  must  be
authentic.  Lady  Prestwich  ( loc . cit.,  p.  91)
tells  us  that  it  was  a bitter  disappointment  to
him  that  his  English  friends,  “ in  acknow-
ledging the  fact  of  the  human  jaw  having
been  truly  found  as  described,  yet  refused


EARLY  DISCOVERIES


35


to  admit  that  it  belonged  to  a remote
antiquity.”

Among  the  earlier  discovered  fossil  remains
of  man,  supposed  to  have  a high  antiquity,
may  be  noticed  “ the  fossil  man  of  Denise.”
The  find  consisted  of  fragments  of  several
human  bones  embedded  in  porous  lava  from
the  extinct  volcano  of  Denise,  near  Le  Puy
(Haute-Loire).  The  chief  interest  attached
to  the  discovery,  if  genuine,  was  that  it  made
man  contemporary  with  the  mammoth,  and
coeval  with  the  last  eruptions  of  the  Le  Puy
volcanoes.  Several  pieces  of  this  lava  con-
taining more  or  fewer  human  bones  were
found,  but  the  first  described  was  in  1844  by
M.  Aymard,  Conservator  of  Le  Puy  Museum.
This  specimen  was  found  by  a workman,  and
contained  within  its  substance  the  frontal
and  other  -parts  of  the  skull,  as  well  as  some
lumbar  vertebrae,  a radius  and  some  meta-
tarsal bones.  According  to  M.  E.  Sauvage
(Rev.  d' Anthropologie,  1872),  who  carefully
studied  the  matter,  the  skull-bones  presented
the  osteological  characters  of  the  Neanderthal-
Spy  race,  viz.  prominent  superciliary  ridges
and  glabella,  surmounted  by  a low,  retreating
forehead.  The  authenticity  of  this  fossil  was
generally  admitted  by  all  the  competent
authorities  who  examined  it,  among  them  being
Sir  Charles  Lyell.  But  this  conclusion  was
out  of  harmony  with  the  theological  beliefs
of  the  time,  and  so,  for  a time, , it  became
discredited,  and  like  other  discoveries  of  the
kind  failed  to  lead  to  further  results.


36


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


One  of  the  most  famous  discoveries  of  the
pre-Lyellian  period  was  the  human  skeleton
found  in  the  cave  of  Feldhofen,  situated  at
the  entrance  to  a small  ravine  called  Nean-
derthal, on  the  right  bank  of  the  river  Diissel.
The  opening  to  the  cave  was  from  a small
terrace  on  a steep  limestone  cliff,  about  60
feet  above  the  bed  of  the  river,  and  110  feet
below  the  surface  of  the  plateau  above.  The
cave  has  long  ago  been  quarried  away,  but
its  dimensions  are  reported  to  have  been  16
feet  in  length,  11  feet  in  breadth,  and  8 feet
in  height.  On  the  uneven  floor  of  the  cave
lay  a mass  of  consolidated  mud,  about  five
feet  in  depth,  sparingly  mixed  with  rounded
fragments  of  chert,  but  without  stalagmitic
deposits.  It  was  while  this  mud  was  being
removed  that  the  skeleton  was  encountered.
At  first  no  idea  was  entertained  by  the  work-
men of  the  bones  being  human,  and  it  was
not  till  several  weeks  after  their  discovery
that  they  were  recognized  as  such  by  Dr.
Fuhlrott.  By  this  time  many  of  the  bones
were  dispersed.  The  skull-cap  (Fig.  4),  and  a
few  other  bones  remained,  and  were  at  once
placed  in  security.  No  other  animal  remains,
with  the  exception  of  a bear’s  tooth,  were
found  in  the  cave.  Consequently  there  are
no  collateral  circumstances,  neither  archaeo-
logical, geological  nor  stratigraphical,  which
can  help  to  assign  a date  to  the  Neanderthal
skeleton,  so  that  its  antiquity  has  been  deter-
mined solely  from  the  osteological  characters
of  the  skull-cap.  These,  however,  were  found


EARLY  DISCOVERIES


37


to  be  so  remarkable  in  character  that,  when
first  exhibited  at  a scientific  meeting  at  Bonn,
doubts  were  expressed  by  several  naturalists
as  to  whether  they  were  really  human.  The
cranium  was  of  great  size  and  thickness,  and
had  a long  elliptical  form,  a low,  retreating
forehead,  excessive  development  of  the  frontal
sinuses,  and  a great  projection  of  the  occipital


Fig.  4. — Side  view  of  the  Neanderthal  skull-cap  (§).

( After  Huxley.)

region.  The  sutures  were  nearly  obliterated,
and  the  line  of  the  frontal  suture  was  marked
by  a slight  ridge.  The  principal  dimensions
of  the  skull  were  as  follows  :


mm.


Antero-posterior  diameter
Transverse  do.


200

144

106

122


Frontal  (min.)


Do.  (max.)


Horizontal  circumference


590  (571 ?)
72


Cephalic  index


38


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


With  regard  to  this  skull  Professor  Huxley,
writing  in  1863,  says  :

“ There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  as  Professor
Schaaffhausen  and  Mr.  Busk  have  stated,  the
skull  is  the  most  brutal  of  all  known  human
skulls,  resembling  those  of  the  apes  not  only
in  the  prodigious  development  of  the  super-
ciliary prominences  and  the  forward  extension
of  the  orbits,  but  still  more  in  the  depressed
form  of  the  brain-case,  in  the  straightness  of
the  squamosal  suture,  and  in  the  complete
retreat  of  the  occiput  forward  and  upward,
from  the  superior  occipital  ridges.”

The  above  rapid  sketch  of  a few  of  the
more  outstanding  discoveries,  bearing  on  the
antiquity  of  man,  shows  that  the  science  of
anthropology  had  as  yet  only  attained  a
footing  in  the  minds  of  a few  thoughtful
men,  who  had  been  able  to  divest  themselves
of  hereditary  prejudices.  Professor  Huxley,
writing  in  1894,  in  his  preface  to  the  re-publica-
tion of  Mans  Place  in  Nature,  thus  writes  :

“ Among  the  many  problems  which  came
under  my  consideration,  the  position  of  the
human  species  in  zoological  classification  was
one  of  the  most  serious.  Indeed,  at  that  time,
{circa  1857)  it  was  a burning  question  in  the
sense  that  those  who  touched  it  were  almost
certain  to  burn  their  fingers  severely.  It  was
not  so  very  long  since  my  kind  friend  Sir
William  Lawrence,  one  of  the  ablest  men  whom
I have  known,  had  been  well-nigh  ostracized


‘ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN 5


39


for  his  book  On  Man,  which  now  might  be
read  in  a Sunday-school  without  surprising
anybody;  it  was  only  a few  years  since  the
electors  to  the  chair  of  Natural  History  in  a
famous  northern  University  had  refused  to
invite  a very  distinguished  man  to  occupy  it
because  he  advocated  the  doctrine  of  the
diversity  of  species  of  mankind,  or  what  was
called  ‘ polygeny.’  Even  among  those  who
considered  man  from  the  point  of  view  not  of
vulgar  prejudice,  but  of  science,  opinions  lay
poles  asunder.  Linnaeus  had  taken  one  view,
Cuvier  another;  and,  among  my  senior  con-
temporaries, men  like  Lyell,  regarded  by  many
as  revolutionaries  of  the  deepest  dye,  were
strongly  opposed  to  anything  which  tended
to  break  down  the  barrier  between  man  and
the  rest  of  the  animal  world.”

This  was  the  state  of  matters  when  the
Origin  of  Species  appeared,  and  produced  a
profound  sensation  among  all  thinking  people.
In  this  work  Darwin  traced  the  origin  of  man
through  a series  of  intermediate  forms  back
to  protoplasm,  without  the  intervention  of
repeated  cataclysms  and  creative  dramas,
as  was  generally  held  by  the  earlier  geologists.
“ As  all  the  living  forms  of  life,”  he  writes,
“ are  the  lineal  descendants  of  those  which
lived  long  before  the  Cambrian  epoch,  we
may  feel  certain  that  the  ordinary  succession
of  generation  has  never  once  been  broken,  and
that  no  cataclysm  has  desolated  the  whole
world  ” ( loc . cit.,  p.  428).


40


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Another  work,  which  called  forth  almost
as  much  hostile  criticism  as  the  Origin  of
Species , was  Huxley’s  Man  s Place  in  Nature,
published  in  1863.  In  this  little  volume  the
author  finally  shattered  the  hypothesis  which
assigned  man’s  origin  and  civilization  to  a sui
generis  code  outside  the  ordinary  laws  of  the
organic  world.

It  was  not,  however,  till  after  the  publica-
tion of  Lyell’s  Antiquity  of  Man  (1863)  that
anthropology  took  its  place  among  the  great
departments  of  scientific  knowledge.

In  my  recent  lectures  on  Palceolithic  Man
in  Europe,  1912  (p.  101),  I thus  summed  up
the  immediate  results  which  followed  the
publication  of  Lyell’s  book  :

“ Henceforth  a new  impetus  was  given  to
the  study  of  the  science  of  anthropology  by
the  conviction  that  the  meanest  traces  of
man’s  early  career  were  actually  more  im-
portant materials  for  a history  of  humanity
than  all  the  treasures  that  had  been  collected
from  the  ruins  of  the  greatest  empires  of  the
historic  world.  The  wide  morphological  gap
between  man  and  the  other  animals  still
living  suggested  a correspondingly  long  period
for  man’s  development,  in  the  course  of  which
it  was  expected  that  some  evidence  of  the
stages  through  which  he  had  passed  might
have  become  stereotyped  in  the  geological
records.  Where  to  find  and  how  to  inter-
pret such  materials  were  now  the  chief
problems  at  issue;  and  to  their  solution  the


‘ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN’


41


savants  of  all  countries  braced  themselves
with  an  energy  that  augured  final  success.
Societies  were  founded  in  London,  Paris  and
other  centres  of  intellectuality,  for  the  express
purpose  of  following  up  the  new-found  trail
of  humanity ; and  to  popularize  and  dis-
seminate their  doctrines,  numerous  periodicals
and  special  works  were  published.  One
periodical  may  be  specially  mentioned,  viz.
Les  Math'iaux  pour  Vhistoire  primitive  et
naturelle  de  VHomrne — which,  since  it  was
started  by  G.  de  Mortillet,  had  been  the  means
of  giving  wide  publicity  to  the  new  doctrines.
In  the  year  1865,  at  a special  meeting  of  the
Italian  Society  of  Natural  Science  held  at
Spezzia,  was  founded  the  ‘ Congres  Inter-
national d’Anthropologie  et  d’Arch^ologie
prehistoriques,’  the  first  meeting  of  which
was  held  in  the  following  year  at  Neuchatel.
Subsequent  meetings  have  been  held  at  Paris
(1867),  London,  (Norwich)  (1868),  Copenhagen
(1869),  Bologna  (1871),  Brussels  (1872),  Stock-
holm (1874),  Buda-Pesth  (1876),  Lisbon  (1880),
Paris  (1889),  Moscow  (1892),  Paris  (1900),
Monaco  (1906),  and  Geneva  (1912).  The
published  proceedings  of  these  Congresses
contain  the  most  complete  records  of  the
progress  of  the  science,  especially  as  regards
Europe.  After  the  cloud  of  scepticism
which  enveloped  its  early  and  evolutionary
stages  had  been  swept  aside,  anthropology
found  a footing  at  the  British  Association
for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  at  first  as  a
sectional  department,  but  since  1884  it  be-


42


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


came  expedient  to  devote  a special  section  for
the  exclusive  consideration  of  its  doctrines.
At  the  same  time  it  cannot  be  denied,  that
the  negative  side  of  the  evolution  problem,
which  had  so  long  found  a refuge  among
religious  bodies  under  the  false  assumption
that  their  views  had  the  imprimatur  of  the
Biblical  narrative  of  creation,  had  still  its
advocates,  for  it  seems  that  no  amount  of
evidence  can  eradicate  the  rooted  objections
of  some  persons  to  the  doctrine  of  evolution.”

The  revolution  thus  effected  in  current
thought  with  regard  to  the  origin  of  man,
though  mainly  due  to  the  publication  of  the
works  of  the  eminent  writers  above  mentioned,
derived  a contributory  element  from  the
science  of  geology.  Early  in  last  century
geologists  were  rather  inclined  to  the  opinion
that  the  world  had  passed  through  a series  of
destructive  cataclysms,  each  of  which  had
been  succeeded  by  an  entirely  new  flora  and
fauna.  These  successive  world-revolutions
were  supposed  to  be  due  to  the  direct  inter-
position of  an  all-ruling  Providence ; and
hence,  for  a time,  these  geological  specula-
tions rather  strengthened  the  so-called  ortho-
dox opinion,  that  the  present  order  of  things
was  the  final  stage  of  the  imaginary  dramas  of
special  creations,  in  which  the  creation  of
Man  stood  forth  as  the  last  and  crowning
achievement.  But  a fuller  acquaintance  with
fossil  remains  soon  rendered  the  theory  of
cataclysms  untenable.  In  other  words,  the


‘ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN’


43


organic  continuity  of  life  throughout  the
successive  geological  periods  was  proved  and
accepted .

The  influence  of  this  drastic  clearance  of
antiquated  machinery  in  geology  soon  ex-
tended to  the  collateral  sciences,  and  the
first  to  benefit  from  the  improved  methods
was  archaeology.

The  discoveries  of  Kjekkenmeddings  (Kit-
chen-middens) in  Denmark  and  lake-dwellings
in  Switzerland,  with  the  vast  and  varied  wealths
of  prehistoric  materials  which  they  brought
to  light,  began  now,  also,  to  attract  universal
attention.  Owing  to  the  more  rigid  and
scientific  methods  adopted  in  collateral  re-
searches, archaeology  proper,  independent  of
its  new-born  palaeolithic  phase,  had  acquired
a wider  significance  than  formerly.  The
common  borderland  between  geology  and
anthropology  was  being  better  understood,
especially  as  regards  the  glacial  period . Above
all,  the  antiquarian  dilettantism  of  earlier
days  and  th?  unbending  attitude  of  so-called
orthodoxy  began  to  have  less  influence  on  the
philosophic  mind,  so  that  the  new  doctrine
fell  on  a somewhat  congenial  and  receptive
soil  in  which  it  soon  took  permanent  root.


44


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


CHAPTER  III

EVIDENTIAL  MATERIALS  ( continued, ) FURTHER

DISCOVERIES  IN  BRITAIN,  BELGIUM,  AND
FRANCE

Half  a century  has  now  passed  since  the
theory  of  organic  evolution  captured  the
philosophic  mind  of  the  day,  and  at  once
placed  the  science  of  anthropology  into  the
position  of  being  one  of  the  most  fascinating
of  intellectual  pursuits.  Our  object  in  the
present  chapter  is  to  give  some  idea  of  the
progress  that  has  been  made  during  this  long
interval,  in  investigating  the  history  of
humanity  and  civilization  from  the  new  stand-
point. To  condense  the  story  of  half  a
century’s  explorations  and  discoveries  over  a
wide  field  by  a crowd  of  eager  and  enthu-
siastic workers  who,  probably  then  for  the
first  time,  realized  the  grandeur  of  the  con-
ception of  the  uniformity  of  nature,  is  an
effort  which  calls  for  some  indulgence  on  the
part  of  the  reader.  We  will  begin  the  task
by  a rapid  survey  of  a few  of  the  principal
Palaeolithic  discoveries  made  in  Western
Europe  up  to  the  present  time — for  we  are
not  yet  in  a position  to  isolate  Britain  from
the  Palaeolithic  area  on  the  Continent.

Britain. — One  of  the  most  important
archaeological  achievements  in  Britain  was  the
complete  excavation  of  Kent’s  Cavern,  under
the  superintendence  of  Mr.  Pcngelly,  F.R.S.,


DISCOVERIES  IN  BRITAIN  45


and  a scientific  committee  appointed  by  the
British  Association.  The  work  was  begun  in
March  1865,  and  continued  without  inter-
ruption till  June  1880,  at  an  expense  of
£1963.

The  industrial  remains  found  in  Kent’s
Cavern,  below  the  bed  of  stalagmite,  calculated
to  throw  light  on  the  culture  and  civilization
of  its  inhabitants,  were  made  of  stone,  bone,
and  horn  (probably  that  of  the  reindeer),
and  may  be  thus  briefly  described.  Among
objects  made  of  stone  were  tongue-shaped,
oval  and  triangular  tools  of  flint  and  chert;
worked  flakes,  scrapers  and  cores  of  flint ; also
a few  hammer-stones,  one  of  which  was
shaped  like  a cheese.  Of  bone,  or  horn,  there
were  pins,  awls,  barbed  harpoons,  and  a neatly
formed  needle,  precisely  similar  to  analogous
objects  found  in  the  rock-shelter  of  La
Madeleine  (France).  From  the  style  of  work-
manship and  form  of  these  relics,  especially
the  harpoons  and  needle,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  their  original  owners  were  con-
temporary with  the  late  Palaeolithic  inhabi-
tants of  the  caves  of  the  Dordogne.  On  the
other  hand,  the  tongue-shaped  implements
( coup-de-poing ) were  found  in  a lower  stratum,
thus  indicating  an  earlier  date  of  occupancy,
probably  the  Mousterien  epoch.

Among  the  fauna  represented  in  Kent’s
Cavern  were  mammoth,  woolly-haired  rhi-
noceros, reindeer,  lion,  bear,  hyaena,  Irish  elk,
horse,  urus  (wild  ox),  etc.  But  perhaps  the
most  interesting  among  the  extinct  animals


46


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


was  the  large  sabre-toothed  tiger  ( Machairodus
latidens)  represented  by  a few  teeth.

A human  jaw,  said  to  have  been  found  below
the  sheet  of  stalagmite,  was  described  at  the
meeting  of  the  British  Association,  held  last
year  (1912)  at  Dundee.  It  seems  strange
that  such  an  important  human  bone  should
have  been  hitherto  overlooked.

Above  the  sheet  of  stalagmite  which  covered
the  Palaeolithic  deposits  containing  the  in-
dustrial remains  and  bones  of  extinct  animals
was  a layer  of  black  earth  or  mould,  inter-
spersed among  a mass  of  fallen  blocks  from
the  roof,  in  which  were  found  a number
of  objects  belonging  to  different  phases  of
the  later  periods.  Among  them  were  flint
flakes,  cores  and  chips,  spindle-whorls,  a
socketed  bronze  knife,  broken  weaving  combs,
pottery  (some  of  which  were  Roman),  etc.,
all  showing  that  the  cave  had  been  frequented
in  Neolithic  and  Proto-historic  times.  The
intervention  of  the  stalagmitic  layer  between
the  debris  of  the  two  civilizations,  the  deposi-
tion of  which  implies  a long,  though  somewhat
uncertain,  time,  renders  it  impossible  to  trace
any  evolutionary  connection  between  the
people  who  frequented  the  cave  before  and
after  its  occurrence.  Hence  to  find  a satis-
factory explanation  of  the  hiatus  in  human
civilization  thus  suggested  is  one  of  the  most
controverted  problems  of  the  day,  to  which
we  will  return  later  on.

About  the  year  1875  Professor  Boyd  Daw-
kins and  the  Rev.  J.  Magens  Hello  carried


DISCOVERIES  IN  BRITAIN  47


out  a series  of  investigations  in  the  Cresswell
caves,  Derbyshire,  which  showed  that  they
were  the  abodes  of  a colony  of  Palaeolithic
races  of  the  Magdalenien  epoch.  Among  the
industrial  remains  which  these  people  left
behind  them  were  the  following  objects —
well-formed  flint  flakes,  borers  and  engravers ;
chisels,  awls  and  a neatly-made  needle  of
bone ; a flat  piece  of  bone  ornamented  with  the
incised  head  of  a horse,  and  another  oval
piece  with  a serrated  edge.  These  relics
are  quite  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  Cresswell  caves  were  contemporary
with,  and  belonged  to,  the  same  race  as  the
later  Palaeolithic  men  of  Kent’s  Cavern.  It
may,  however,  be  noted  th^t  in  one  or  two
caves  a lower  stratum  of  cave-earth  contained
osseous  remains  of  the  hyaena,  bison,  hippo-
potamus and  the  small-nosed  rhinoceros- —
all  representatives  of  a warm  climate.  But
along  with  them  there  were  no  remains  of
man  or  his  works.

According  to  Dr.  Buckland  the  Hyaena
Den  of  Kirkdale  contained  bones  of  the
hyaena,  representing  some  300  individuals,
and  next  in  point  of  numbers  came  those  of
the  ox  and  deer,  but  there  was  no  evidence
of  the  presence  of  man  at  any  time  in  this
cave.

Several  caves  in  the  south-west  of  England
and  Wales  yielded  bones  of  nearly  all  the
extinct  mammalia  associated  with  flint  imple-
ments. In  Bosco’s  Den,  one  of  the  Gower
Peninsula  caves,  no  less  than  750  shed  antlers


48


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


of  reindeer  were  found.  In  another  (Long
Hole)  the  fossil  remains  included  Elephas
antiquus  and  E.  primigenius,  two  species  of
rhinoceros,  bear,  lion,  hyaena,  bison  and  rein-
deer, associated  with  well-formed  flint  flakes.
Similar  discoveries  wrere  made  in  the  famous
Hyaena  Den  of  Wookey  Hole,  where  the  fossil
remains  of  the  animals  of  the  period  were
counted  in  hundreds,  the  most  numerous  being
hyaena,  horse,  woolly  rhinoceros,  reindeer,
mammoth  and  Irish  elk.

No  fossil  remains  of  man  have  hitherto
been  found  in  caves  frequented  by  Palaeolithic
races  in  South  Britain,  with  the  exception
of  a female  skeleton  in  the  Paviland  cave,
described  by  Dr.  Buckland,  a molar  tooth  in
the  cave  of  Pont  Newydd  in  Wales,  and  the
hitherto  overlooked  jaw  from  Kent’s  Cavern.
In  France  and  other  parts  of  the  Continent
the  remains  of  fossil  cave-men  have,  been
frequently  met  with.

The  most  rational  explanation  that  can
now  be  given  for  the  presence  of  the  bones  of
extinct  animals  in  such  large  numbers  on
these  rocky  shores  of  the  west  of  England
and  Wales,  is  that  the  English  Channel  was
then  mostly  a well-watered  plain,  sufficiently
rich  in  vegetation  to  attract  herds  of  herbi-
vorous animals,  and  which  therefore  soon
became  the  happy  hunting-ground  for  the
great  extinct  carnivores.  Except  in  Kent’s
Cavern,  there  is  no  decided  evidence  that  man
was  a frequent  visitor  of  the  caves  during  the
inter-glacial  warm  period  which  followed  that


DISCOVERIES  IN  BRITAIN  49


of  maximum  glaciation.  The  early  Palaeo-
lithic nomads  appeared  to  have  confined
their  wanderings  to  the  river  valleys,  living
on  fruits,  roots  and  the  smaller  animals.

Although  some  of  the  Pleistocene  fauna,
including  the  mammoth,  reindeer  and  Irish
elk,  found  their  way  into  Ireland,  no  evidence
of  the  presence  of  Palaeolithic  man  in  that
island  has  yet  been  discovered.  This  may  be
accounted  for  by  alterations  in  the  relative
level  of  sea  and  land.  The  Irish  Channel
being  thirty-eight  fathoms  deep,  while  that
between  England  and  the  Continent  is  only
twenty  fathoms,  it  would  follow  that  the
former  would  become  sea,  during  a process  of
gradual  submergence,  long  before  the  latter.
When  the  British  Isles  stood  at  their  maximum
elevation  continental  mammals  could  roam
as  far  as  the  Atlantic  without  any  water
impediment,  but  as  the  gradual  submergence
progressed  the  Irish  Channel  would  be  first
blocked  against  them ; so  that  for  a con-
siderable interval  of  time  immigrants  could
still  come  to  Britain  but  not  to  Ireland.  A
similar  result  would  follow  on  the  occurrence
of  an  elevation  of  land  after  a state  of  sub-
mergence. From  researches  carried  on  some
time  ago  in  the  cave  of  Balynamintra,  County
Waterford,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  Irish
elk  was  contemporary  with  Neolithic  man  in
that  neighbourhood.

In  1883  parts  of  a human  skeleton  were
discovered,  while  excavating  the  Tilbury
Dock,  in  a sandy  stratum,  at  a depth  of

D


50


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


thirty-four  feet  from  the  present  surface  of  the
river  bank.  Professor  Owen  described  these
bones  as  those  of  a Palaeolithic  man,  in  a
brochure  entitled  Antiquity  of  Tilbury  Man.
But  his  opinion  has  been  questioned,  on  the


Fig.  5. — Profile  of  the  skull  of  Tilbury  man  (|).  ( After

Keith. )

ground  that  the  osseous  characters  of  the  skull
were  not  sufficiently  pronounced  to  assign
this  individual  to  any  phase  of  the  prehistoric
period  (Fig.  5).  In  these  circumstances  the
only  safe  conclusion  is  that  of  Mr.  Spurred,
who  relegates  it  to  a transition  period  between


DISCOVERIES  IN  BRITAIN  51


that  of  the  cave-men  and  Neolithic  races —
a conclusion  which  its  stratigraphical  position
justifies  (see  Chap.  X).

Another  human  skeleton  was  found  in
1888,  in  the  terrace  gravels  at  Galley  Hill,
Kent,  but  for  some  inscrutable  reason  it  was
not  reported  on,  or  submitted  to  expert
opinion,  till  1895.  The  bones  were  then
described  at  the  Geological  Society  of  London
by  Mr.  E.  T.  Newton,  F.R.S.,  as  those  of  an
individual  who  was  contemporary  with  the
people  who  used  the  flint  implements  dis-
interred from  the  terrace  gravels — imple-
ments which  undoubtedly  possess  the  usual
characters  of  “ palseolitlis.”  In  the  discus-
sion which  followed  Dr.  Newton’s  conclusion
was  questioned  on  the  ground  of  insufficient
evidence  to  prove  that  the  skeleton  had  not
been  a more  recent  burial.

Dr.  Garson  thus  summed  up  the  special
characters  of  the  skeleton  : “ The  short

stature,  the  very  dolichocephalic  skull,  the
prominent  glabella  and  superciliary  ridges,
and  the  well-marked  ridges  of  the  skull
generally,  the  absence  of  prominence  of  the
chin,  and  the  large  size  of  the  last  molar  tooth,
which  was  as  large  as,  if  not  larger  than,  the
first  molar  (Fig.  6).  The  large  size  of  the  head
of  the  femur  was  also  peculiar.”

Under  these  circumstances  it  is  manifest
that  no  important  deductions  can  be  founded
on  the  anatomical  characters  of  the  Galley
Hill  skull,  beyond  the  fact  that,  like  the
other  vrell-attested  Quaternary  skulls,  it  is


52


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


dolichocephalic,  and  shows  similar  peculiar-
ities, both  as  regards  the  receding  forehead
and  the  angular  prominence  of  the  occiput.
It  is,  however,  a more  highly  developed  skull
than  the  more  recently  discovered  specimens
of  the  Neanderthal-Spy  race,  such  as  those


Fig.  6. — Side  view  of  the  Galley  Hill  skull  (i).  (After
E.  T.  Newton.)


of  Chapelle-aux-Saints,  Moustier,  Krapina,  La
Quina,  etc.

The  discovery  of  a Palaeolithic  human
skull  and  mandible  in  flint-bearing  gravel
near  Piltdown  Common,  in  Sussex,  was  the
subject  of  a recent  communication  by  Mr.
C.  Dawson  and  Dr.  A.  Smith  Woodward  to  the
Geological  Society  of  London  on  December
18,  1912.


DISCOVERIES  IN  BRITAIN  53


The  skull  was  originally  found  by  workmen,
broken  up  by  them,  and  most  of  the  pieces
thrown  away  on  the  spot.  As  many  frag-
ments as  possible  were  subsequently  recovered
by  the  authors,  from  which  the  skull  was
restored.  Half  of  a human  mandible  was
found  in  a patch  of  undisturbed  gravel  by
Mr.  Dawson  close  to  the  place  where  the  skull
occurred.  From  the  abstract  in  the  Society’s
Proceedings  are  taken  the  following  descriptive
extracts  :

“ Two  broken  pieces  of  the  molar  of  a
Pliocene  type  of  elephant  and  a much-rolled
cusp  of  a molar  of  Mastodon  were  also
found,  besides  teeth  of  Hippopotamus,  Castor,
and  Eqmis,  and  a fragment  of  an  antler  of
Cervus  elaphus.  Like  the  human  skull  and
mandible,  all  these  fossils  are  well  mineralized
with  oxide  of  iron — many  of  the  water-worn
iron-stained  flints  closely  resemble  the
‘ eoliths  ’ from  the  North  Downs,  near
Ighthan.  Mingled  with  them  were  found  a
few  Palseolithic  implements  of  the  char-
acteristic Chellean  type.  The  gravel  at  Pilt-
down  rests  upon  a plateau  eighty  feet  above
the  river  Ouse,  and  at  a distance  of  less  than
a mile  to  the  north  of  the  existing  stream.

“ The  skull  (which  unfortunately  lacks  the
bones  of  the  face)  exhibits  all  the  essential
features  of  the  genus  Homo,  with  a brain
capacity  of  not  less  than  1070  c.c.,  but  possibly
a little  more.  It  measures  about  190  mm.
in  length  from  the  glabella  to  the  inion,  by
150  mm.  in  width  at  the  widest  part  of  the


54


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


parietal  region ; and  the  bones  are  remarkably
thick.  The  forehead  is  steeper  than  that  of
the  Neanderthal  type,  with  only  a feeble
brow-ridge ; and  the  conformation  of  the
occipital  bone  shows  that  the  tentorium  over
the  cerebellum  is  on  the  level  of  the  external
occipital  protuberance,  as  in  modern  man.
Seen  from  behind  the  skull  is  remarkably
low  and  broad,  and  the  mastoid  processes  are
relatively  small.  The  right  mandibular  ramus
is  nearly  complete  to  the  middle  of  the  sym-
physes, lacking  only  the  articular  condyle  and
the  upper  part  of  the  bone  in  advance  of  the
molars.  The  horizontal  ramus  is  slender,
and,  so  far  as  preserved,  resembles  in  shape
that  of  a young  chimpanzee  ( Anthropopithecu $
niger).  The  lower  symphysial  border  is  not
thickened  and  rounded,  as  in  man,  but  pro-
duced into  a thin  inwardly-curved  flange,  as
in  the  apes.  The  ascending  ramus  is  com-
paratively wide,  with  extensive  insertions
for  the  temporal  and  masseter  muscles,  and
a very  slight  sigmoid  notch  above.  Molars
1 and  2,  which  occur  in  their  sockets,  are
typically  human,  though  they  are  compara-
tively large  and  narrow,  each  bearing  a fifth
cusp.  The  socket  of  molar  3 indicates  an
equally  large  tooth,  placed  well  within  the
ascending  ramus  of  the  jaw.  The  two  molars
have  been  worn  perfectly  flat  by  mastication,
a circumstance  suggesting  that  the  canines
resembled  those  of  man  in  not  projecting
sensibly  above  the  level  of  the  other  teeth.
The  weakness  of  the  mandible,  the  slight


DISCOVERIES  IN  BRITAIN  55


prominence  of  the  brow-ridges,  the  small
backward  extent  of  the  origin  of  the  temporal
muscles,  and  the  reduction  of  the  mastoid
processes,  suggest  that  the  specimen  belongs
to  a female  individual,  and  it  may  be  regarded
as  representing  a hitherto  unknown  genus
and  species,  for  which  a new  name  is  proposed.

“ The  authors  conclude  that  the  Piltdown
gravel-bed  is  of  the  same  age  as  the  contained
Chellean  implements,  which  are  not  so  much
water-worn  as  most  of  the  associated  flints.
The  rolled  fragments  of  molars  of  the  Pliocene
elephant  and  Mastodon  are  considered  to  have
been  derived  with  the  flints  from  older  gravels ;
while  the  other  mammalian  remains  and  the
human  skull  and  mandible,  which  cannot  have
been  transported  far  by  water,  must  be  as-
signed to  the  period  of  the  deposition  of  the
gravel-bed  itself.  The  remoteness  of  that
period  is  indicated  by  the  subsequent  deepen-
ing of  the  valley  of  the  Ouse  to  the  amount  of
eighty  feet.”

The  above  conclusion  seems  to  the  present
writer  the  most  rational  deduction  from  the
facts,  notwithstanding  that  the  discussion
elicited  a conflict  of  opinion — some  regarding
the  skull  as  belonging  to  the  same  age  as  the
mammalian  remains,  which  were  admittedly
Pliocene.  As  an  undoubted  human  fossil  of
the  River  Drift  period  in  Britain,  the  im-
portance of  the  Piltdown  skeleton,  as  a link
in  the  evolution  of  humanity,  cannot  be
over-rated  (see  Chap.  IV,  p.  70).

No  other  researches  within  the  British  area


56


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


have  added  much  to  our  knowledge  of  Palaeo-
lithic civilization  since  the  exploration  of
Kent’s  Cavern.  Numerous  specimens  of  the
so-called  “ palaeoliths  ” are  being  collected
from  the  implement-bearing  gravel-pits  of
the  River  Drift  deposits  in  various  localities
throughout  the  south  of  England.  Also,  a
few  old  land-surfaces  have  been  discovered,
especially  within  the  Thames  valley,  showing
evidence  of  having  been  used  as  workshops
for  the  manufacture  of  flint  implements.

The  discoveries  of  Mr.  Worthington  G.  Smith
at  Caddington,  near  Luton,  have  disclosed  two
Palaeolithic  land-surfaces,  one  above  the  other,
with  implements  indicating  different  stages  of
culture,  from  the  coup-de-poing  type  down  to
late  Mousterien  instruments  and  tools.

Similar  evidence  is  supplied  by  another
“ floor,”  explored  by  Mr.  F.  C.  J.  Spurred
at  Crayford,  which  had  the  exceptional
feature  of  preserving  the  actual  flakes  that
were  struck  off  in  trimming  flint  nodules  into
shape.  In  one  instance  the  implement  was
accidentally  broken  before  it  was  finished,
and  Mr.  Spurred  recovered  the  two  broken
portions,  as  wed  as  the  discarded  flakes,  and
with  remarkable  ingenuity  he  has  replaced
the  whole  into  their  original  position.  These
interesting  relics  are  exhibited  in  the  Natural
History  Museum  at  Kensington.  The  “ work-
shop 5 5 was  formed  in  deposits  of  brick-earth
and  sand,  at  a height  of  seventy  feet  above
sea-level,  and  thirty-six  feet  from  the  present
surfaoe  of  the  river.


DISCOVERIES  IN  BELGIUM  57


Belgium. — Notwithstanding  the  extent  and
notoriety  of  Schmerling’s  early  researches,
it  was  not  till  the  latter  part  of  1863,  when
Lyell’s  Antiquity  of  Man  had  attracted
universal  attention,  that  the  Belgian  author-
ities became  alive  to  the  importance  of  their
caverns.  Some  of  the  leading  savants,  stung
with  reproach  for  having  left  it  to  foreigners
to  recognize  the  true  significance  of  their
famous  countryman’s  early  discoveries,  con-
ceived the  project  of  exploring  the  caverns
on  the  banks  of  the  Meuse,  especially  those
situated  along  its  tributaries,  the  Lesse  and
Molignee,  on  a scale  commensurate  with  the
acknowledged  importance  of  the  subject.
The  Government  readily  sanctioned  the  project
and  supplied  the  necessary  funds.  M.  E.
Dupont,  Director  of  the  Royal  Museum  of
Natural  History,  was  appointed  to  carry  out
the  investigations.  Active  operations  were
begun  in  1864  and  continued  for  upwards  of
seven  years,  during  which  some  sixty  caverns
were  more  or  less  explored.  Nearly  40,000
bones  were  examined  and  classified  under  the
various  species  of  animals  they  represented —
while  not  fewer  than  80,000  worked  flints
were  collected.  Judging  from  the  work  done
at  Furfooz  in  clearing  out  the  Grotte  des
Nutons  and  the  Trou  du  Frontal , on  the  bank
of  the  river  Lesse — the  only  two  stations
which  the  present  writer  had  an  opportunity
of  inspecting — the  labour  entailed  in  the
excavations  of  so  many  caverns  must  have
been  very  arduous.


58


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Dr.  Dupont  classified  all  the  relics  found
in  these  caves  as  follows  :

1.  Age  du  Mammoth. — The  principal  relics
associated  with  the  mammoth  were  spear-
points,  a doll-like  object  of  reindeer  horn
(suggesting  an  attempt  at  modelling  the
human  form),  a few  articles  showing  efforts
of  rudimentary  carving,  and  a baton  de  com-
mandement,  also  ornamented.  These  objects
were  found  to  be  lowest  in  the  cave  debris
and  coeval  with  the  time  when  the  swollen
rivers  occasionally  overflowed  into  the  caves
and  left  stratified  beds  of  gravel  or  mud  on
their  floors.

A

2.  Age  du  Renne. — The  reindeer  period
coincided  with  the  time  when  the  rivers,  by
excavating  their  valleys  more  deeply,  ceased
their  fluviatile  deposits  in  the  caverns,  and
so  left  their  floors  above  the  present  highest
flood-marks.  The  portion  of  their  contents
representing  this  age  was  characterized  by
angular  blocks  mixed  with  brick-earth.  Of
the  fauna  of  the  previous  age — mammoth,
woolly  rhinoceros,  Irish  elk,  hysena,  cave-lion
and  cave-bear— only  the  reindeer  still  sur-
vived. The  industrial  remains  consisted  of
a few  dart-points  of  horn,  a bone  needle,
some  perforated  shells,  perforated  stone  orna-
ments and  flint  flakes.  The  flint  relics  are
said  to  manifest  greater  skill  in  their  manu-
facture than  in  the  previous  age,  especially
in  the  process  of  secondary  chipping.

3.  j ttpoquc  actuelle. — The  superficial  blackish
debris — the  accumulated  dust  of  more  recent


DISCOVERIES  IN  BELGIUM  59


times — M.  Dupont  assigned  to  the  period
now  in  progress,  when  only  the  fauna  of
Neolithic  times  are  met  with,  the  reindeer
having  also  vanished  from  the  locality.  The
sepulchral  remains  of  an  extremely  brachy-
cephalic  race  were  found  in  the  Trou  du
Frontal,  and  associated  with  them  were
fragments  of  pottery,  both  of  which  must  be
assigned  to  Neolithic  races,  who  also  haunted
these  retreats  (see  Chap.  X,  p.  242).

In  addition  to  the  cave  relics  there  is  in
the  Brussels  Museum  another  collection  of
roughly  chipped  flints  from  Mesvin,  near
Mons.  These  were  found  in  a gravelly
stratum  resting  immediately  over  tertiary
deposits,  but  below  two  distinct  beds  of  mud
( limon ).  The  special  interest  attached  to
them  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  the  same  stratum
were  found  remains  of  the  following  Quaternary
fauna,  viz.  mammoth,  woolly  rhinoceros,
cave-bear,  cave-lion,  Irish  elk,  reindeer,  bison,
horse  and  snails  ( Helix  ericetorum).  Neither
of  the  two  earlier  elephants  nor  the  hippo-
potamus appears  to  have  been  represented
( Congres  d’Anthropologie  et  d’ Archeologie  pre-
historiques,  1872,  p.  265).

M.  A.  Rutot,  Conservator  of  the  Royal
Museum  of  Natural  History  in  Brussels,  a
distinguished  geologist  and  a militant  advo-
cate of  the  theory  that  “ eoliths  ” are  human
implements,  has  propounded  a new  system
of  classification  which  aims  at  proving,  by
various  sections,  especially  one  at  Helin  in  the
valley  of  the  Lys,  that  the  Chelleen  epoch  is


60


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


not  the  earliest  in  Europe  which  has  yielded
remains  of  human  industry.  In  his  classifica-
tion ( Lc  Prehistorique  dans  L’ Europe  Centrale)
he  tabulates  below  the  Chelleen,  deposits
called  Strepyien,  Mesvinien , Reutelo-Mesvinien
ou  Mafflien,  and  Reutelien.  The  Elephas  anti-
quus  is  made  to  be  contemporary  with  the  last
three  deposits,  and  the  mammoth  appears  on
the  scene  with  the  Strepyien.  Besides,  M.
Rutot  has  altered  de  Mortillet’s  well-known
classification  by  changing  the  nomenclature
without  almost  any  change  in  the  substance,
thus  bringing  unnecessary  confusion  into  the
subject.  He  founds  his  theory  upon  the
stratigraphical  position  of  the  objects  and  the
degree  of  rudeness  in  their  manufacture.

Among  the  human  remains  found  in  the
Belgian  caverns  are  two  finds  of  capital
importance,  viz.  the  Naulette  mandible  and
two  skeletons  known  as  Les  Homines  de  Spy.
The  former  (Fig.  7)  was  found  at  a depth  of
4‘50  metres  in  the  debris  of  the  Trou  de  la
Naulette,  near  Dinant,  and  though  only  a
fragment,  it  presents  certain  characters  which
differentiate  it  from  the  corresponding  bone
in  modern  races,  notably  in  the  absence  of
the  chin  and  the  size  of  the  socket  for  the
third  molar  tooth.  The  latter  will  be  discussed
in  the  next  chapter.

France. — On  entering  the  Dordogne  district
we  are  on  classic  ground  as  regards  the  home
of  Palaeolithic  man  in  France.  Here,  on  the
rocky  banks  of  the  Vezere,  are  some  thirty
caves  and  rock-shelters,  which  have  vielded


DISCOVERIES  IN  FRANCE


61


an  immense  assortment  of  handicraft  work
illustrating  his  industries,  occupations  and
amusements.  With  the  exception  of  a few
sporadic  finds,  referred  to  in  last  chapter,  but
which  had  little  effect  on  current  opinion,  it
was  from  the  discoveries  in  the  caves  of  this
romantic  valley  that  anthropologists  first


Fig.  7. — Two  views  oi  the  Naulette  Jaw  showing  absence
of  chin  and  large  socket  of  molar  3 (J).  ( After  Dupont.)

realized  the  significance  of  the  old-world
civilization  which  has  bequeathed  to  mankind
so  many  specimens  of  their  skill  in  engraving,
sculpture  and  painting.

Edward  Lartet,  an  ardent  palaeontologist,
who,  in  1861,  gave  publicity  to  the  fact  that,
in  the  cave  of  Aurignac,  human  bones  and
manufactured  objects  were  associated  with


62


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


a number  of  extinct  animals,  had  his  attention
directed  to  the  Dordogne  by  seeing,  in  the
hands  of  a friend  in  Paris,  a carbonized  bone
embedded  in  a piece  of  calcareous  breccia
which  had  been  found  in  that  locality.  This
was  in  1862,  and  almost  immediately  Lartet
went  to  see  the  spot  where  the  fossil  bone  had
been  discovered,  and  made  some  excavations
merely  to  gratify  his  own  curiosity.  Here  he
became  associated  with  Henry  Christy,  a
generous  Englishman  who  became  intensely
interested  in  such  discoveries.  These  two
explorers  arranged  investigations  on  a large
scale — Christy  paying  all  expenses.  They
began  operations  in  the  now  famous  station
of  Les  Eyzies,  the  spot  where  the  Paris
carbonized  bone  had  been  found,  and  pushed
on  the  work  with  such  activity  that  before
the  end  of  1863  the  whole  debris  was  cleared
out,  and  the  relics  scientifically  examined
and  classified.  Encouraged  by  their  success,
they  then  extended  their  explorations  to  the
caves  of  Le  Moustier,  Gorge  d’Enfer,  La
Madeleine,  Laugerie  Haute  and  Laugerie
Basse.  While  these  investigations  were  in
progress  Messrs.  Christy  and  Lartet  conceived
a scheme  for  the  exploration  and  description
of  the  antiquities  of  Aquitaine,  and  at  once
set  about  collecting  materials  for  a great  work
on  the  subject,  under  the  title  of  Reliquice
Aquitanicce.  But,  unfortunately,  just  after
the  first  fasciculus  had  been  placed  in  the
hands  of  the  printer,  Mr.  Christy  died  (May  4,
1865).  Henceforth  the  labour  of  editing  the


DISCOVERIES  IN  FRANCE


63


projected  work  fell  to  M.  Lartet,  and,  to
enable  him  to  do  so  effectually,  Mr.  Christy’s
trustees  supplied  the  funds.  But,  alas  ! in
January  1871,  M.  Lartet  also  died,  before
the  work  was  finished.  Ultimately  it  was
carried  out  and  published  in  1875,  by  a
number  of  Christy’s  friends,  under  the
editorship  of  Professor  Rupert  Jones.  Bcli-
quice  Aquitanicce  is  largely  made  up  of  essays
on  the  various  phases  of  the  culture  of  the
reindeer-hunters,  together  with  descriptions
of  the  customs  of  modern  savages,  supposed
to  throw  light  on  the  early  inhabitants  of
Aquitaine.  The  chief  value  of  this  magnifi-
cent work  now  lies  in  its  eighty-seven  plates
of  illustrations  drawn  on  a large  scale.  From
what  it  contains  we  can  imagine  how  much
archaeological  science  lost  by  the  premature
death  of  its  original  authors.

The  early  discoveries  of  Lartet  and  Christy
in  the  Dordogne  caves,  and  the  scientific
recognition  of  the  strange  flint  objects  found
by  M.  Boucher  de  Perthes  in  the  gravels  of
the  Somme  valley  as  the  genuine  tools  of  an
ancient  race  of  inhabitants,  coming  so  promin-
ently before  the  scientific  world  much  about
the  same  time  (1858-1863),  roused  a spirit
of  research  among  French  prehistorians,  which
has  ever  since  continued  at  an  accelerated
pace.  It  was  speedily  ascertained  that  their
country* was  exceptionally  rich  in  vestiges  of
the  old  Aquitainian  civilization,  brought  to
light  from  the  caves  and  rock-shelters  of
the  Vezere  valley.  In  1908  M.  Dechelette


64


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


estimated  the  number  of  analogous  stations,
discovered  and  described  in  France  up  to
date,  at  118;  but  their  number  has  consider-
ably increased  since  then.  In  addition  to
the  antiquarian  results  from  these  sheltered
habitations  must  be  reckoned  the  discoveries
in  the  implement-bearing  gravels,  which  are
scattered  so  profusely  throughout  the  alluvial
deposits  of  the  principal  river  basins  in  the
middle  and  southern  portions  of  France —
Seine,  Somme,  Loire,  Garonne,  Adair  and
Rhone.  The  assortment  of  objects  showing
human  workmanship,  in  the  form  of  imple-
ments, weapons  and  ornaments,  collected
from  these  inhabited  sites  and  alluvial  de-
posits, now  forms  a remarkable  feature  of  all
the  French  archaeological  museums,  especially
the  Museum  of  National  Antiquities  at  Saint-
Germain.  In  fact  this  splendid  museum  was
virtually  founded  for  the  special  purpose  of
giving  accommodation  to  the  relics  pouring
in  from  all  quarters,  as  a consequence  of
the  rise  of  the  new  science  of  anthropology
and  prehistoric  archaeology.  When  the  great
collections  of  the  Old  World  civilizations,
which  now  adorn  the  halls  of  the  Louvre,
Hotel  Cluny  and  the  Palais  des  Thermes,
were  organized,  prehistoric  archaeology  was
scarcely  known,  and  so  there  was  little  space
for  this  department  in  any  of  these  museums.
To  remedy  this  defect  the  old  Chateau  of
Saint-Germain  was  restored  and  fitted  up  as
a special  museum  for  the  prehistoric  antiquities
of  France.


DISCOVERIES  IN  FRANCE


65


Characteristic  remains  of  the  Palaeolithic
civilization  have  been  found  in  numerous
localities  throughout  Central  Europe,  among
which  the  following  may  be  noted  :

Chancelade,  Combe-Capelle,  La  Ferrassic,
La  Mouthe,  Combarelles,  Cap-Blanc  and  La
Micoque,  all  in  the  Dordogne  district.  La
Quina,  Petit  Puymoyen,  Placard  and  Mont-
gaudier  (Charente) ; Chapelle  - aux  - Saints
(Correze) ; Altamira  (north-east  of  Spain) ;
Niaux  (Ariegc) ; Marsoulas  (Haute-Garonne) ;
Lorthet  (Haute- Pyrenees) ; the  rock-shelter
of  Schweizersbild,  near  Schaaffhausen ; the
Grimaldi  caves  near  Mentone,  and  the  station
of  Krapina  (Croatia).

In  some  of  these  stations  a new  phase  in
the  culture  of  the  Palaeolithic  people  has  been
recently  brought  to  light,  viz.  the  habit  of
adorning  the  walls  of  the  caves  by  figures
of  animals  drawn,  sometimes  in  incised  lines,
or  painted  in  different  colours,  and  sometimes
sculptured  in  bas-relief.  Over  a score  of
these  wall-painted  caverns  are  now  on  record,
the  earliest,  that  of  Altamira,  having  been
discovered  in  1875,  but  for  upwards  of  ten
years  it  remained  under  a suspicion  that  the
drawings  were  not  of  the  Palaeolithic  period.
Ultimately  other  analogous  discoveries  came
to  light  in  the  caves  of  La  Mouthe,  Pair-non-
Pair,  Marsoulas,  Combarelles,  etc.,  which  soon
dispelled  the  doubt  raised  about  the  genuine-
ness of  the  Altamira  paintings.  Now  Alta-
mira holds  a pre-eminent  position  as  one  of
the  greatest  marvels  of  Palaeolithic  art.

E


66


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Among  the  river  deposits  which  have  yielded
relics  of  man’s  works  of  special  interest  are  the
stations  of  Chelles  and  Levallois,  near  Paris,
and  the  gravels  of  Mauer,  near  Heidelberg.

The  large  amount  of  archaeological  materials
recovered  from  these  and  other  stations,  too
numerous  to  be  here  mentioned,  represent
a vast  period  of  time  covering  at  least  one
inter-glacial  warm  period,  and  a subsequent
recrudescence  of  another  ice  age,  with  its
accompanying  Arctic  climate.  On  the  retreat
of  the  last  mer  de  glace  the  climate  became
gradually  ameliorated,  and  ultimately  merged
in  that  of  the  historic  period.  Coincident
with  these  changes  in  the  climate  and  physical
geography  of  Europe  since  man  appeared  on
the  scene,  the  flora  and  fauna  of  the  country,
which  are  so  dependent  on  a uniform  environ-
ment for  the  stability  of  their  racial  characters,
could  not  fail  to  have  been  greatly  modified.
The  result  was  the  bringing  together  into
Central  Europe  of  a number  of  species  of
animals  representing  faunas  so  widely  apart
as  those  of  subtropical  and  Arctic  regions.
But  this  intermingling  of  animals  from  different
quarters  did  not  take  place  in  a haphazard
manner,  but  was  effected  in  strict  accordance
with  the  exigencies  of  the  cosmic  environ-
ment. As  man  appeared  in  Western  Europe
during  a warm  inter-glacial  period  and  lived
on  through  a subsequent  climate  of  Arctic
severity,  we  have  evidence  to  show  that  a
succession  of  animals  adapted  for  such
climatal  changes  were  his  contemporaries.


DISCOVERIES  IN  FRANCE  67


Thus  in  the  lowest  deposits  at  Chelles  the
fauna  included  Elephas  antiquus,  E.  meridion-
alis,  Hippopotamus  major , Rhinoceros  merckii,
Trogontherium,  cave-bear  and  cave-hyaena.
These  animals  were  survivals  of  the  Pliocene
Age,  and  their  presence  in  any  locality  indicates
a warm  climate.

The  same  species  of  animals  have  also  been
found  in  the  lower  deposits  of  the  valleys  of
the  Somme  and  Thames.  When,  however,
we  examine  the  animal  remains  of  the  in-
habited caves  of  the  Mousterien  epoch,  we
find  that  the  first  five  of  the  above-named
animals  were  no  longer  represented,  but  in-
stead of  them  were  remains  of  the  mammoth,
woollv-haired  rhinoceros,  cave-bear  and  cave-
hyaena.

During  the  earlier  part  of  the  Magdalenien
epoch  the  fauna  was  chiefly  represented  by
the  mammoth  (sparingly),  reindeer,  horse,
wild  cattle,  etc.  But  the  mammoth  soon  left
the  neighbourhood,  retiring  to  Siberia,  doubt-
less with  the  hope  of  adapting  his  hereditary
modus  vivendi  to  Arctic  conditions  of  life.
The  experiment  was,  however,  unsuccessful,
as  he  soon  succumbed  to  the  severity  of  the
climate,  and,  sad  to  relate,  the  last  lingering
individuals  of  the  species  met  the  fate  of
extinction  by  being  frozen  in  ice,  where  their
carcases  are  still  to  be  found.  With  the  final
amelioration  of  the  climate  the  reindeer  also
disappeared  from  Central  Europe ; and  so
the  Palaeolithic  Age  and  its  unique  civilization
came  to  a close  in  Europe.


68


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


CHAPTER  IV

PALAEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN THEIR

CULTURE  AND  CIVILIZATION

Of  the  comparatively  large  number  of  the
fossil  remains  of  man  hitherto  discovered
and  reported  on  by  experts,  only  a few  are
of  capital  anthropological  value.  But,  after
eliminating  from  the  records  all  doubtful
or  incomplete  specimens,  there  remains  a
sufficient  number  to  show  that  there  were
five  or  six  human  types  living  in  Western
Europe  during  some  portion  of  the  Pleistocene
period,  without  counting  the  brachycephalic
people  who  are  supposed  to  have  commenced
to  immigrate  into  Europe,  during  or  about
the  close  of  the  last  phase  of  Palaeolithic
civilization.

1.  Man  of  the  River  Drift  Period. — Until
the  discovery  of  the  Piltdown  human  skull
and  mandible,  described  in  last  chapter,  the
few  osseous  remains  of  the  people  who  in-
habited Britain  and  other  parts  of  Europe
when  the  swollen  rivers  were  excavating  their
present  valleys  were  too  fragmentary  to  give
much  information  as  to  their  physical  char-
acters. Portion  of  a skull  was  found  in
brick-earth  at  Bury  St.  Edmunds,  and  figured
in  Man  the  Primeval  Savage,  but  all  that  could
be  affirmed  of  it  was  that  it  was  greatly
elongated  and  especially  developed  in  the
occipital  region.  The  flint  implements  associ-


PALAEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN  69


ated  with  it  were  Acheuleen,  or  early  Mous-
terien,  types.  Hence  that  individual,  without
straining  fair  presumptive  evidence,  might  be
assigned  to  the  Neanderthal-Spy  race.  Then
the  Galley  Hill  skeleton  must  be  set  aside
for  the  present,  as  it  still  lies  under  the  cloud
of  doubt  which  was  raised  against  the  hypo-
thesis that  it  was  contemporary  with  the
deposition  of  the  gravels  in  which  it  was  found.
Objections  on  various  grounds  have  been  raised
against  nearly  all  the  human  remains  found
in  alluvial  deposits  on  the  Continent,  such  as
those  of  Crenelle,  Clichy,  Truchere,  Olmo,
Eguisheim,  Brux,  Brunn,  Podbaba,  etc.

As  fabricators  of  the  coup-de-poing  type  of
implement,  these  River  Drift  men  roamed
along  the  river  valleys  and  primeval  forests
of  the  south  of  England  and  Central  Europe,
which  then  abounded  in  subtropical  animals
and  fruits  sufficient  to  supply  them  with
sustenance,  without  much  labour.

It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  Piltdown
specimen  of  humanity  is  to  be  assigned  to  an
earlier  date  than  Chelleen  (which  was  un-
doubtedly an  inter-glacial  epoch — the  second,
according  to  Professor  James  Geikie),  on
anatomical  or  geological  grounds,  both  of
which  are  at  present  undecided.

The  Chelleen  deposits  are,  of  course,  much
older  than  the  Mousterien  epoch — how  much
older  may  be  estimated  by  the  time  it  has
taken  for  a subtropical  climate  to  veer  round
to  one  of  Arctic  severity,  with  a corresponding
change  in  their  concomitant  faunas.


70


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Since  the  MS.  of  this  little  book  was  placed
in  the  hands  of  the  publishers  the  full  report
of  the  Piltdown  discovery  has  appeared
{Quart.  Journ.  Geolog.  Soc.,  Vol.  LXIX).  It
consists  of  a remarkably  precise  description,
with  copious  illustrations,  of  the  human  bones
and  their  associated  mammalian  remains  and


Fig.  8. — Side  view  of  Eoantliropus  dawsoni  (}).
( After  Smith  W oodward.)


flint  implements.  Owing  to  the  number  of
points  in  which  the  Piltdown  skull  differs
from  other  known  types  of  fossil  man,  Dr.
A.  Smith  Woodward  has  given  this  specimen
of  humanity  the  name  of  Eoanthropus  dazvsoni,
in  honour  of  the  discoverer.  By  the  kind
permission  of  Dr.  Woodward  I have  the
pleasure  of  representing  an  outline  of  the


PALAEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN  71


restored  skull,  the  position  of  the  absent
bones  of  the  face  being  shown  in  white  (Fig.  8).
Also,  for  comparison  with  a sketch  of  the
mandible  (Fig.  9 B),  there  is  one  of  a young
Chimpanzee  (A),  from  which  the  strong


Fig.  9. — Mandible  of  a young  Chimpanzee  (a)  and  of
the  Piltdown  Woman  (b)  ( |).  ( After  Smith  Woodward.)

resemblance  between  them  will  be  seen  at  a
glance.

As  to  the  flints,  I do  not  deny  the  possi-
bility of  their  being  of  pre-Chelleen  date,  as
undoubtedly  man  produced  ruder  implements
before  he  succeeded  in  manufacturing  the
highly  finished  tools  of  the  coup-de-poing


72


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Fig.  10. — Three  views  of  a Piltdown  worked  flint  (a),
compared  with  three  views  of  one  from  Le  Moustier  (i).


PALAEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN  73


type;  but  it  is  a remarkable  fact  that  the
three  specimens  figured  on  PL  XVI  may  be
claimed  as  characteristic  forms  of  the  Mous-
terien epoch.  On  Fig.  10  the  outline  of  one
of  the  Piltdown  series  (A)  is  placed  beside  one
(B)  from  the  cave  of  Le  Moustier  ( Reliq .
Aquitanicce,  A.  PI.  III).  The  operator  in
each  case  first  chipped  a portion  of  the  surface
of  a selected  nodule,  then  with  one  well-
directed  blow  he  struck  off  a large  flake,  having
one  surface  worked  and  the  other  flat.  This
method  was  invented  posterior  to  the  use  of
the  coup-de-poing,  and  the  resulting  tool
being  abundant  in  Le  Moustier,  it  has  been
regarded  as  characteristic  of  the  Mousterien
epoch.  As  a workable  tool  it  was  found  to
be  an  improvement  on  the  former,  having  a
sharp  cutting  edge  and  requiring  less  labour
in  its  manufacture.  Besides,  those  finely
chipped,  thin  and  oval  specimens,  prevalent
in  Acheuleen  stations,  were  more  easily
broken.  The  Mousterien  flake  is  known  to
French  archaeologists  as  le  grand  eclat  Levallois,
from  its  abundance  in  the  station  of  that  name
near  Paris.  During  the  Mousterien  epoch  its
usefulness  was  so  much  appreciated  that  it
almost  entirely  superseded  the  coup-de-poing ,
which  so  largely  dominated  the  flint  industry
of  the  Chelleen  and  Acheuleen  epochs.  In
opposition  to  the  late  G.  de  Mortillet,  M.
Rutot  holds  that  the  Levallois  flakes  are  to
be  found  in  all  deposits  containing  specimens
of  the  coup-de-poing  (Congres  de  Dinant,  Session
XVIII,  p.  150).


74


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


With  regard  to  the  geological  age  of  the
stratum  in  which  the  skull  was  found,  Mr.
Clement  Reid  writes  ( loc . cit.,  p.  150)  as
follows  :

“ The  deposits  are  not  pre-Glacial  or  even
early  Pleistocene — they  belong  to  an  epoch
long  after  the  first  cold  period  had  passed
away  : but  they  occur  at  the  very  base  of  the
great  implement-bearing  succession  of  Palaeo-
lithic deposits  in  the  south-east  of  England.”

One  noteworthy  feature  of  the  Piltdown
skull  is  that  it  has  a broad  and  flattened
appearance  with  a cephalic  index  of  about

79,  which  makes  it  an  exception  to  Palaeo-
lithic crania  hitherto  recorded.  The  only
other  instance,  known  to  me,  of  a brachy-
cephalic  skull  having  been  found  in  undoubted
Magdal6nien  deposits  is  that  of  Placard
(Charente),  which  had  a cephalic  index  of

80.  Curiously  enough,  like  the  Piltdown
specimen,  it  was  also  that  of  a female.  Ac-
cording to  M.  Herve  its  high  cephalic  index
was  partly  due  to  its  sex,  but  in  all  other
respects  it  possessed  characteristic  dolicho-
cephalic characters.  I wonder  if  pressure  had
anything  to  do  with  the  flattening  of  the
Piltdown  cranium.

2.  Neanderthal-Spy  race. — We  have  already
(Chap.  II,  p.  36)  described  the  circumstances
in  which  the  Neanderthal  skeleton  was  dis-
covered, from  which  it  will  be  seen  that  it
was  only  the  calvaria  that  was  recovered ;
and  consequently  there  is  no  evidence  as
regards  its  facial  characters  (see  Fig.  4).  One


PALAEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN  75


of  the  Spy  skulls  (Fig.  11),  had,  however,  the
mandible  associated  with  it,  and  we  can
therefore  form  a better  opinion  of  its  general
characters.  It  shows  a low,  retreating  fore-
head, prominent  eyebrows,  marked  prognath-
ism, no  chin  and  large  third  molar  teeth.


Fig.  11. — Side  view  of  Spy  skull  (No.  1)  (£).  ( After

Fraipont.)


The  Spy  skeletons  were  discovered  in  1886,
buried  12  J feet  in  fallen  debris  at  the  entrance
to  a grotto  in  the  province  of  Namur,  Belgium.
The  worked  flints  found  in  the  cave  were  of
the  Mousterien  types,  and  among  the  fauna
represented  were  Rhinoceros  tichorhinus,  cave-
bear,  mammoth,  hyaena,  etc.  No  works  of
art  were  among  the  relics,  so  that  the  Spy


76


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


troglodytes  are  justly  regarded  as  belonging
to  an  earlier  period  than  that  in  which  the
reindeer-hunters  and  artists  flourished.

The  osteological  characters  of  the  Spy
calvaria  correspond  in  a remarkable  degree
with  those  of  the  Neanderthal  specimen,
as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  tabular
statement  :


Spy.

| Neanderthal.

1

mm.

mm.

Antero -posterior  dia.  (max.)  .

200

200

Transverse  do.  . .

140

144

Frontal  (min.)

104

10G

Do.  (max.)

114

122

Horizontal  Circumference  .

580

i 590  (571  ?)

Cephalic  index

70

72

Fossil  bones,  showing  more  or  less  the
characteristics  of  the  Neanderthal-Sp3^  race,
have  been  found  in  the  Trou  de  la  Naulette,
near  Dinant,  the  caves  of  Malarnaud  (Ariege),
Chapelle-aux-Saints  (Correze),  Moustier  and
Ferrassic  (Dordogne),  the  rock-shelters  of
La  Quina  and  Petit-Puymoyen  (Charente),
Krapina  (Croatia),  Gibraltar,  etc.  Of  these,
the  three  most  instructive  remains  found  in
recent  times  are  those  of  Le  Moustier,  Chapelle
and  La  Quina.  These  have  been  respectively
described  by  MM.  Klaatsch,  Boule  and  Martin.
The  first  two  were  regarded  as  burials  of  the
Mousterien  Age,  and  their  skulls  show  all  the
osseous  peculiarities  of  the  Neanderthal-Spv
race  (Figs.  12  and  13).  In  both  the  facial


PALEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN  77


bones  were  strongly  prognathic,  and  the  chin
was  undeveloped.  M.  Boule  describes  the  man
of  Chapelle  as  having  a bestial  aspect,  and
places  him,  in  point  of  cranial  development,
half-way  between  Pithecanthropus  erectus  and
the  lowest  of  present-day  savages.


Fig.  12. — Side  view  of  the  skull  of  Homo  moustericnais
hauseri  (£).  (After  M.  Hauser.)


The  facts  with  regard  to  La  Quina  skeleton
are  so  recent  that  it  was  only  on  the  27th  of
June  of  last  year  (1912)  that  Dr.  Martin  was
able  to  lay  the  reconstructed  skull  and
mandible  before  the  members  of  the  Societe
Prehistorique  Franqaisc  (Fig.  14).  From  the
published  details  we  see  that  there  is  a remark-


78


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


able  parallelism  between  the  skulls  and  jaws  of
La  Quina,  Spy  (No.  1)  and  La  Chapelle.  Dr.
Martin  also  shows  by  the  superposition  of
profile  diagrams  of  three  calvaria  (La  Quina,
Pithecanthropus  and  a modern  Arab)  the
great  gulf  in  cranial  development  which


Fig.  13. — Side  view  of  the  skull  from  Chapelle-aux-
Saints  after  being  restored  by  M.  Boule  ( J).  (From
L’  Anthropologie. )


separates  modern  humanity  from  the
Mousterien  races  of  the  Palaeolithic  period.

The  physical  characters  of  the  race  may  be
thus  stated  :

Cranium  dolichocephalic  (cephalic  index
70-75) ; forehead  low  and  retreating  (platy-
cephalic) ; superciliary  ridges  very  prominent :


PALAEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN  79


chin  undeveloped,  sloping  backwards ; alveolar
prognathism  strongly  marked ; stature  small,
about  five  feet;  body  massive,  with  short
arms  and  bent  legs.

3.  Magdalenien  race. — The  next  people  of
whom  we  have  sufficient  osteological  data  to


Fig.  14. — Side  view  of  La  Quina  skull  (£).  ( After

Dr.  Henri  Martin.)


fix  their  chronological  horizon  are  the  reindeer-
hunters  of  France,  whose  works  of  art  have  so
greatly  astonished  the  modern  civilized  world.
They  are  represented  by  three  skeletons  found
at  the  stations  of  Laugerie  Basse,  Chancelade
and  Duruthy.  Their  special  characters  are
as  follows  : Crania  well  filled  and  dolicho-


80


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


cephalic  (cephalic  index  72-74);  forehead
full  and  lofty ; superciliary  ridges  moderately
prominent;  chin  well  formed;  orthognathic
profile;  stature  small,  5 feet  2 inches  to  5
feet  4 inches.

L’Homme  ecrase  of  Laugerie  Basse  lay  on
a Magdalenien  floor  in  the  attitude  of  sleep
underneath  a fallen  block  which  had  crushed
his  spine.  A number  of  shells  from  the
Mediterranean  were  scattered  about ’over  the


Fig.  15. — Side  views  of  the  skulls  of  Chancelade  (a),
and  Laugerie  Basse  (b).  (Greatly  reduced.)


body,  which  apparently  had  adorned  the
man’s  dress.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that
this  skeleton  belonged  to  a man  who  was
contemporary  with  the  culture  debris  over
which  he  reposed  (Fig.  15b).

The  Chancelade  skeleton  was  found  buried
in  a small  rock-shelter  beneath  several  layers
of  Magdalenien  debris.  The  body  was  in  a
bent-up  position,  and  around  it  were  streaks
of  peroxide  of  iron,  supposed  to  have  been
used  for  ritual  purposes  (Fig.  15a).


PALAEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN  81


The  Duruthy  skeleton  had  also  been
crushed  by  fallen  rocks,  which  damaged  the
skull  so  much  that  no  precise  measurements
could  be  taken  of  it.  It  was,  however,
clearly  dolichocephalic  and  in  all  respects
similar  to  the  skulls  of  Laugerie  Basse  and
Chancelade.  Near  it  was  found  a necklace
composed  of  fifty  canine  teeth  (three  of  lion
and  the  rest  of  bear),  most  of  them  having
been  adorned  by  various  devices — one  having
the  figure  of  a seal,  another  that  of  a pike,
and  a third  a form  which  looks  like  a glove
for  the  forearm.

The  Magdalenien  people  appear  to  have
been  the  direct  descendants  of  the  Neander-
thal-Spy race,  and  to  have  occupied  not
only  the  same  geographical  area,  but  a
considerable  extension  of  it,  as  shown  by  the
number  of  stations  discovered  within  regions
formerly  covered  by  glaciers.  Their  well-
filled  skulls  are  an  indication  of  the  intellectual
advancement  that  had  taken  place  since  their
nomadic  forefathers  entered  Europe.

4.  The  Cro-Magnon  race. — The  physical
characters  of  this  race  have  been  derived  from
one  specimen,  viz.  that  known  as  the  “ Old
Man  ” of  Cro-Magnon,  which  was  found,  along
with  portions  of  four  other  human  skeletons
(supposed  to  be  one  family),  on  the  surface
of  the  debris  at  the  back  part  of  the  Cro-
Magnon  cave.  The  characters  are  as  follows  :

Cranium  highly  developed  (cephalic  index
73-76) ; forehead  large,  lofty  and  well-
shaped ; superciliary  ridges  fairly  prominent ;

F


82


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


face  short  but  broad;  chin  well  formed;
orthognathic  profile ; stature  tall,  over  5 feet
10  inches  in  height.

The  Cro-Magnon  skull  (Fig.  16),  has,  in  point
of  osseous  development,  some  resemblance  to
those  of  the  Magdalenien  race,  and  hence  it  is


Cro-Magnon  (£).  ( From  Reliquice  Aquitanicce.)

sometimes  classified  as  belonging  to  the  latter.
But  the  great  size  of  all  the  Cro-Magnon
skeletons  is  sufficient  to  place  them  in  a
category  by  themselves.  The  geographical
distribution  of  the  race,  so  far  as  at  present
known  beyond  the  rock-shelter  of  Cro-Magnon,
is  almost  confined  to  the  caves  of  Grimaldi.


PALAEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN  83


Here,  out  of  about  a dozen  skeletons  suffici-
ently well  preserved  to  have  their  osteological
characters  determined,  all  have  been  recorded
as  belonging  to  the  Cro-Magnon  type,  with  the
exception  of  two  which  M.  Yerneau  describes
as  a new  race.  All  the  skeletons  of  the  Cro-
Magnon  type  found  in  the  Grimaldi  caves
were  ceremonial  interments  by  inhumation,
except  one  body  which  had  been  carbonized ;
but  as  ornaments  precisely  similar  to  those
found  with  the  inhumed  bodies  were  associated
with  the  carbonized  bones,  there  can  be  little
doubt  that  the  latter  also  belonged  to  the
Cro-Magnon  race.  The  bodies  at  the  time
of  burial  appear  to  have  been  covered  over
with  a layer  of  the  red  oxide  of  iron,  instances
of  which  have  been  recorded  from  other
widely  separated  localities,  such  as  the  inter-
ment known  as  the  Paviland  red  woman  in
the  Gower  Peninsula,  and  others  at  Chance-
lade,  Mas-d’Azil,  Briinn  (Moravia),  etc.

5.  Race  de  Grimaldi. — Of  this  race  two
skeletons  have  been  found  in  the  “ Grotte
des  Enfants,”  near  Mentone,  one  being  that
of  a young  man  and  the  other  that  of  an
aged  female.  They  lay  close  to  each  other
and  evidently  belonged  to  the  same  race,
with  a type  of  skull  which  Dr.  Verneau
describes  as  negroid,  and  disclosing  anatomical
characters  intermediate  between  those  of  the
Neanderthal  and  Cro-Magnon  skeletons  (Fig.
17).  Their  physical  characters  may  be  thus
stated  :

Cranium  elliptic,  cephalic  index  (male)


84


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


69-72  and  (female)  68-58;  forehead  fairly  well
developed ; face  strongly  prognathic ; chin
slightly  receding;  stature  small,  5 feet  to
5 feet  2 inches  in  height.

The  position  of  these  negroid  skeletons  in
the  cave  was  nearly  2|  feet  lower  than  that


of  another  skeleton  which  measured  6 feet
3 1 inches  from  head  to  foot.  This  veritable
giant  has  been  described  by  Dr.  Verneau  as
belonging  to  the  Cro-Magnon  race — thus
proving  the  existence  of  two  very  different,
races  in  the  same  locality,  and  almost  on  the
same  chronological  horizon.


PALAEOLITHIC  TYPES  OF  MAN  85


6.  Homo  heidelbergensis. — Professor  Schoe-
tcnsack  of  Heidelberg  has  lately  described
a human  mandible  found  at  a depth  of
twenty-four  metres  from  the  surface,  in
ancient  fluviatile  deposits  of  the  river
Neckar,  situated  at  a place  called  Mauer,
ten  kilometres  south-east  of  the  town  of
Heidelberg.  Along  with  it,  in  the  same  bed,
bones  of  the  following  animals  were  found  :


Fia.  18. — View  of  the  human  mandible  of  Heidelberg
(about  |).  ( After  Schoetensack.)


stag,  elk  ( Alces  latifrons),  cave-lion,  horse
(Equus  stenonis  ?),  Rhinoceros  etruscus,  and
Elephas  antiquus.  The  bones  of  the  last
named  were  very  abundant,  and  among  them
(quite  close  to  a mandible)  lay  the  human
jaw.  Shells  similar  to  those  of  the  Cromer
forest  beds  were  also  found  in  the  same
deposits.

The  Heidelberg  mandible  is  the  only  bone
of  this  skeleton  known,  and,  in  some  respects,
it  is  the  most  simian-like  hitherto  come  to


86


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


light,  especially  as  regards  the  enormous  size
of  the  ascending  ramus,  which  is  nearly  double
that  of  a modern  man  (Fig.  18).  The  absence
of  the  chin  is  also  a prominent  feature.  As
regards  the  arrangement  and  relative  size  of
the  teeth,  this  jaw  seems  to  come  nearer
modern  specimens  than  most  of  those  hitherto
recorded  as  Palaeolithic.  Some  palaeontolo-
gists profess  to  see  a parallelism  between  it
and  that  of  Australian  savages.

Culture  and  Civilization

In  the  absence  of  positive  chronology,
every  student  of  the  pre-history  of  man
will  recognize  the  necessity  of  having  some
convenient  method  of  tabulating  the  recorded
phenomena  in  their  order  of  succession,
as  geologists  have  so  successfully  done  by
collating  fossils,  and  other  organic  remains,
with  the  superposition  of  strata.  In  prehis-
toric archaeology  various  methods  have  been
suggested,  of  which  the  following  may  be  noted
as  applicable  to  the  Palaeolithic  period  :

In  1869  Gabriel  de  Mortillet  conceived  the
happy  idea  of  classifying  the  industrial
remains  of  the  Palaeolithic  people  in  chrono-
logical sequence,  according  to  the  degree  of
culture  disclosed  by  the  relics  found  on
certain  stations  which  he  regarded  as  typical.
His  mode  of  classification  (with  the  recent
addition  of  Aurignacien)  is  the  most  practical
that  has  hitherto  been  suggested,  and  is
therefore  adopted  in  this  work.  According


CULTURE  AND  CIVILIZATION  87


to  this  system  the  whole  range  of  Palaeolithic
civilization  is  divided  into  six  epochs,  viz.
Chelleen,  Acheuleen,  Mousterien,  Aurignacien,
Solutrten  and  Magdalenien.  All  these  so-called
epochs  are  but  mere  landmarks  on  the  high-
road of  advancing  civilization,  and  are  in-
tended to  represent,  as  nearly  as  possible,
the  successive  phases  of  Palaeolithic  culture.
Some  kind  of  nomenclature  is  absolutely
necessary,  as  otherwise  it  would  be  impossible
to  fix  attention  on  any  particular  fact  in  the
progressive  stream  of  civilization,  without
having  recourse  to  more  or  less  descriptive
details.  It  is  therefore  essential  to  have
precise  ideas  associated  with  these  milestones
by  the  way,  so  that  by  the  mention  of  a single
name  we  at  once  know  in  what  part  of  the
road  we  are  travelling.  The  attainment  of
this  object  will  be  best  accomplished  by  a
brief  description  of  the  typical  stations  on
which  the  nomenclature  is  founded,  and  of  a
few  of  their  most  characteristic  relics.

1.  Chelleen. — So  named  from  the  station  of
Chelles,  a small  plateau  of  alluvial  deposits,
eight  miles  east  of  Paris  and  eight  metres
above  the  bed  of  the  Marne,  from  which  it
is  distant  two  kilometres.  A section  shows
three  separate  layers,  within  a thickness  of
eight  metres,  resting  on  Tertiary  deposits.
The  lowest  layer  is  especially  interesting,  on
account  of  the  number  of  teeth  of  Elephas
antiquus  and  meridionalis  which  it  has  yielded,
associated  with  remains  of  Hippopotamus
major , Rhinoceros  merckii,  Trogontherium,


88


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


cave-bear  and  cave-hysena,  together  with
flint  implements  almost  exclusively  of  the
coup-de-poing  type.  These  animals  were
survivals  from  the  Pliocene  Age,  and  the
presence  of  their  bones  in  any  locality  indi-
cates a warm  climate.  The  middle  portion
of  the  deposits  was  cemented  by  calcareous
infiltrations,  and  according  to  G.  de  Mortillet
both  it  and  the  upper  sandy  gravels  were
later  formations,  and  contained  only  bones  of
the  mammoth,  together  with  those  of  the
northern  fauna  and  stone  implements  of
Mousterien  types.

2.  Acheuleen. — The  flint  implements  found
at  Saint  Acheul,  at  Amiens,  in  the  valley  of
the  Somme,  from  which  the  Acheuleen  epoch
derives  its  name,  are  not  very  different  from
those  of  Chelles.  The  former  have  a greater
variety  of  forms,  and  the  coup-de-poing
becomes  sensibly  thinner,  smaller,  and  more
delicately  chipped  at  the  edges.  The  more
pointed  of  the  Chelleen  forms  are  known  to
the  workmen  as  “ herons,”  while  the  almond-
shaped  specimens,  called  “ limandes,”  are
characteristic  of  Saint  Acheul.  Moreover,  the
two  earlier  elephants  and  the  Rhinoceros
merckii  have  been  found  in  the  alluvial  beds
at  Abbeville.  Human  bones,  with  perhaps
the  exception  of  the  Piltdown  skull  and
mandible,  have  not  been  found  in  these  river
gravels  sufficiently  well  preserved  to  inspire
confidence  in  drawing  precise  racial  conclu-
sions from  them ; but  the  flint  implements  are
valid  proof  that  man  lived  at  that  time  in


CULTURE  AND  CIVILIZATION  89


Central  Europe  as  far  west  as  England,  and
some  parts  of  the  Spanish  peninsula.  The
coup-de-poing,  which  was  the  chief  weapon
or  implement  used  by  him,  has  been  found
not  only  along  his  highways  and  by-ways  in
European  countries,  but  in  Algeria,  Egypt,
Sahara,  Congo,  the  Cape,  Palestine,  Persia
and  India.

3.  Mousterien. — This  term  is  derived  from
the  well-known  cave  of  Le  Moustier,  situated
on  the  right  bank  of  the  Vezere,  and  about
ninety  feet  above  it.  It  was  examined  by
Lartet  and  Christy  in  1863,  and  subse-
quently by  De  Vibraye,  Messenat,  and
others.  Besides  the  deposits  in  the  interior
of  the  cave,  there  was  an  outside  plateau
in  which  a human  skeleton  of  the  Neanderthal-
Spy  type  has  been  recently  found  (Fig.  12),  see
p.  181.  During  its  habitation  by  man  the
climate  appears  to  have  been  cold  and  damp,
and  among  the  contemporary  fauna  were  the
mammoth,  woolly-haired  rhinoceros,  cave-
bear,  and  musk-ox.  The  two  earlier  elephants,
hippopotamus  and  Rhinoceros  merckii  were
not  represented — thus  indicating  a cold
climate.

The  special  features  of  the  industrial
remains  found  in  Le  Moustier  were  the
scarcity  of  the  coup-de-poing,  and  the  splitting
up  of  flints  into  smaller  implements,  such  as
scrapers  and  large  flakes,  mostly  trimmed  on
one  side  only — the  Sclat  Levallois  of  French
writers.  This  multiplication  of  small  imple-
ments was  due  to  the  fact  that  man,  owing


90


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


to  the  coldness  of  the  climate,  was  obliged
to  seek  shelter  in  caves,  or  improvised  huts,
and  to  clothe  himself  with  skins,  the  prepara-
tion of  which  entailed  the  use  of  special  tools
and  instruments.  On  the  whole,  the  remains
of  man’s  handicraft  works  disclose  an  advance
on  those  of  the  Drift-men;  but  there  was  a
sufficient  sprinkling  of  the  coup-de-poing  types
to  show  that  both  people  were  of  the  same
race.

4.  Aurignacien. — Prior  to  1852  the  small
grotto  of  Aurignac  (Haute-Garonne)  was
concealed  by  a talus,  and  only  then  inciden-
tally discovered  by  a workman  in  pursuit  of
a rabbit.  The  entrance  was  closed  by  a stone
slab,  and  inside  were  the  remains  of  seventeen
human  skeletons,  which,  on  the  discovery
becoming  known,  were,  by  order  of  the  mayor
of  the  town,  removed  and  reburied  in  the
parish  cemetery.  Outside  the  flagstone  which
closed  the  entrance  to  the  cave  were  found,
along  with  ashes  and  a hearth  made  of  flat
stones,  a finger-marked  circular  hammer-stone
used  for  chipping  flints,  and  “ a great  variety
of  bones  and  implements ; amongst  the  latter
not  fewer  than  100  flint  articles — knives,
projectiles,  sling-stones  and  chips,  and  among
them  one  of  those  silicious  cores,  or  nuclei,
with  numerous  facets,  from  which  flakes  or
knives  had  been  struck  off.  . . . Among  the
bone  instruments  were  arrows  without  barbs
and  other  tools  made  of  reindeer  horn,  and  a
bodkin  formed  out  of  the  more  compact  horn
of  a roe-deer.”  ( Antiquity  of  Man,  p.  184.)


CULTURE  AND  CIVILIZATION  91

One  of  the  bone  objects,  pointed  at  one  end
and  having  a broad  split  base,  is  regarded
as  giving  the  station  its  special  character.
Scattered  through  the  earth  were  the  broken
bones  of  extinct  animals,  among  which  were
the  following  : hysena,  cave-bear,  cave-lion,
woolly  rhinoceros,  reindeer,  Irish  elk  and
mammoth.

Besides  the  characteristic  Aurignac  bone
point,  split  at  the  base  for  attachment  to  a
shaft,  there  were  various  objects  of  bone,  or
horn,  in  the  form  of  pins,  pointers  and  chisel-
like instruments  with  transverse  scratchings
(marques  de  chasse),  which,  according  to
Breuil,  are  characteristic  of  the  stations  of
this  epoch.  Great  progress  was  also  made  in
the  art  of  working  in  flint,  as  shown  by  the
number  of  new  and  extremely  varied  forms
of  flint  implements,  often  of  small  size,  which
were  then  in  use.

5.  Solutreen. — The  station  of  Solutre
(Saone-et-Loire)  was  an  open-air  encampment,
having  a fine  exposure  to  the  south,  and
sheltered  on  the  north  by  a steep  ridge.
The  climate  was  mild  and  dry,  the  glaciers
were  already  on  the  retreat,  and  the  rivers
less  torrential.  The  remains  of  the  settlement,
covering  an  area  of  some  10,000  square  metres,
are  situated  just  beyond  the  limits  of  the
cultivated  land,  and  within  a short  distance
of  a spring  of  excellent  water.

The  special  features  of  the  Solutreen  stage
of  culture  are  well  defined.  First  of  all  comes
a marked  advance  in  the  manufacture  of  flint


92


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


implements,  as  disclosed  by  the  beautiful
workmanship  on  the  so-called  laurel  and
willow-leaf  lance-heads,  which  show  flaking
almost  as  fine  and  delicate  as  that  on  the
sacrificial  knives  of  Egypt.  The  fine  chipping
on  these  weapons  could  not  be  produced  by
the  ordinary  method  of  hammering,  so  that
the  artists  of  the  period  had  already  experience
in  doing  this  work  by  pressure.  An  equally
characteristic  object  is  the  willow-leaf  point
(pointe  a cran),  which  has  one  side  of  the
stem,  or  hilt,  cut  away,  leaving  a tang-like
appendage.

Another  distinguishing  feature  of  this
station  was  the  predilection  of  its  inhabitants
for  horse-flesh,  as  shown  by  the  extraordinary
quantity  of  the  bones  of  this  animal  found
among  the  debris.  Although  the  reindeer  was
largely  represented  it  was  not,  in  point  of
numbers,  anything  like  the  horse — a pecu-
liarity which  was  reversed  in  the  succeeding
Magdalenien  epoch.

Sculpture  on  stone  was  practised,  as  show'll
by  the  finding  of  four  quadrupeds  carved  out
of  limestone  pebbles.  The  art  of  engraving
on  bone  was  also  known  but,  apparently,  little
practised.  From  the  lumps  of  pigment  and
ochre  occasionally  met  with  on  the  hearths,
it  is  supposed  that  painting  was  carried  on
to  some  extent.  Bone  needles  with  perforated
eyes  were  for  the  first  time  found  in  the  upper
strata.

6.  Magdalenien. — The  roek-shelter  of  La
Madeleine,  which  gives  name  to  the  Mag-


CULTURE  AND  CIVILIZATION  93


dalenien  epoch,  was  situated  on  the  right
bank  of  the  V6zere,  at  the  base  of  a limestone
escarpment  with  an  almost  vertical  face,  about
five  metres  from  the  river  and  only  six  metres
above  its  level.  It  was  completely  excavated
by  Messrs.  Lartet  and  Christy,  and  the
principal  relics  found  are  figured  in  Reliquice
Aquitanicce.  The  most  characteristic  animal
was  the  reindeer,  which  shows  that  the  climate
had  still  a sub-Arctic  character.  The  mam-
moth, though  abundant  at  the  commencement
of  the  epoch,  was  gradually  becoming  scarce,
and  towards  its  close  the  extinction  of  the  last
of  the  Palaeolithic  elephants  was  a fait  accompli
in  Central  Europe.

The  Magdalenien  people  started  life,  as  it
were,  with  a working  knowledge  of  the  dis-
coveries and  mechanical  inventions  of  their
predecessors ; and  hence  their  arts,  industries,
accomplishments,  etc.,  represent  the  final  out-
come of  Palaeolithic  culture  and  civilization.
In  the  debris  of  their  stations  are  to  be  found
the  perfected  results  of  the  application  of
mechanical  principles  to  the  improvement  of
the  tools  and  implements  requisite  for  the
accomplishment  of  their  daily  avocations.
Their  principal  occupation  was  the  chase,  the
produce  of  which  constituted  their  staple
food ; and  to  capture  the  big  game  of  the
neighbourhood  in  sufficient  quantity  entailed
the  use  of  a variety  of  new  and  improved
weapons.  One  characteristic  feature  of  the
age  was  the  practical  knowledge  that  bone,
ivory  and  reindeer-horn  were  better  materials


94


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


for  the  manufacture  of  piercing  implements
than  flint.  Hence,  the  rapid  disappearance
of  the  laurel-leaf  blades,  which  gave  place  to
a series  of  improved  weapons  made  of  bone
and  horn — daggers,  long  cylindrical  lance-
heads,  barbed  harpoons,  and  quite  a number
of  small  dart-points  to  be  affixed  to  light
wooden  shafts.  The  new  lance-heads  thus
requisitioned  consisted  of  flat  or  conical  rods,
pointed  at  the  distal  end,  and  adapted  at
the  other  for  attachment  to  the  shaft  by
several  mechanical  processes.  Sometimes  the
proximal  end  had  a wedge-shaped  slit  into
which  the  shaft  penetrated — an  enlarged
example  of  the  typical  Aurignacien  point.
This  process  was  sometimes  reversed  by
making  the  slit  in  the  shaft.  In  other  cases
the  attached  end  of  the  lance-head  terminated
in  a slanting  splay,  so  as  to  be  spliced  with
a corresponding  one  in  the  shaft.  Others
had  the  proximal  end  terminating  in  a blunt
cone,  so  as  to  form  a loose  joint — in  which
case  the  blunt  end  of  the  head  had  either  a
circular  ridge,  or  two  projecting  lobes,  or  a
small  perforation  placed  a little  above  the
cone,  which  served  for  the  attachment  of  a
string  when  the  head  of  the  spear  was  intended
to  remain  in  the  animal’s  body.  When  spear-
ing salmon  the  string  was  attached  to  a float
which  indicated  the  position  of  the  wounded
fish.  These  arrangements  were,  perhaps,  more
applicable  to  the  barbed  harpoons,  of  which
so  many  beautiful  specimens  were  found  by
Lartet  and  Christy  on  the  Magdalen ien  stations


CULTURE  AND  CIVILIZATION  95


of  the  Dordogne.  Some  of  these  weapons  are
so  small  as  to  be  sometimes  described  as
arrow-points ; but  there  is  no  evidence  to
show  that  the  bow  was  known  to  the
Palaeolithic  people.

Both  spears  and  harpoons  were  thrown  by
the  hand,  but  this  action  was  sometimes
assisted  by  an  apparatus  called  by  French
writers  propulseur , or  spear-thrower,  which
consisted  of  a stick  made  from  the  beam  of  a
reindeer-horn,  with  a notch  at  one  end  in
which  the  butt  end  of  the  lance  rested.  In
discharging  the  weapon  the  operator  mani-
pulated with  his  fingers  in  such  a way  as  to
give  a greater  impulse  and  a better  direction
to  the  lance  than  if  he  merely  threw  it  with
the  hand.  That  mysterious  but  often  highly
ornamented  object,  the  so-called  baton  de
commandement,  though  known  as  early  as  the
Solutreen  Age,  was  only  now  met  with  in
sufficient  numbers  to  be  regarded  as  an
object  of  utility.  With  regard  to  the  multi-
plicity of  manufactured  objects  requisite  for
the  management  of  domestic  affairs,  the
people  had  now  learned  to  make  a better
selection  of  the  raw  material  for  special
purposes.  For  this  reason  needles  were  always
made  from  a portion  of  the  surface  of  a long
bone,  the  cannon-bone  of  a horse’s  leg  being
generally  preferred  for  this  purpose,  on
account  of  its  hardness.  Long  slender  pieces
were  cut  out  of  the  bone  by  sharp  flint
implements.  The  eye  was  made  by  scraping
a small  hollow  near  one  end,  and  a similar


96


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


one  on  the  other  side  just  opposite  the  former,
and  worked  till  the  two  met.  The  perforation
thus  effected  had  the  characteristic  of  being
narrow  in  the  middle  and  opening  out  into  a
conical  expansion  on  both  sides.  Hence  a
needle  offered  for  sale  having  a bored  hole
would  be  at  once  recognized  as  a forgery.
Ivory  was  equally  good  for  the  making  of  a
needle,  but  latterly  this  was  becoming  a
scarce  commodity.  Spears  and  harpoons  were
made  of  reindeer-horn  because  of  its  solid
consistency — long  bones  being  unsuitable  on
account  of  being  hollow  in  the  centre.  Only
the  smaller  lance-heads  were  made  of  bone.

The  art  of  engraving  on  plaques  of  bone,
ivory  and  stone  now  became  so  common  that
there  was  hardly  a manufactured  tool  but
was  adorned  with  figures  of  the  contemporary
fauna,  especially  the  animals  hunted  for
food— horse,  reindeer,  aurochs,  goat,  mammoth,
etc.  Into  this  category  comes  the  famous
relic  in  the  form  of  a piece  of  ivory  from  the
outside  layer  of  the  tusk,  having  incised  on
it  the  outline  of  a hairy  elephant.

The  domain  of  art,  sculpture,  engraving  and
painting  assumed  a wider  range,  embracing
not  only  the  small  plaques  with  miniature
figures,  but  the  decoration  of  the  Avails  of
inhabited  caves  with  sculptured  friezes  and
life-size  paintings  of  animals.

In  domestic  economy  there  is  evidence
that  the  kitchen  menage  was  well  looked
after.  They  roasted  the  flesh  of  the  captured
animals  and  utilized  their  skins  as  garments.


CULTURE  AND  CIVILIZATION  97

Possibly  some  round  pebbles,  abundantly  met
with  in  the  debris  around  the  hearths,  might
have  been  used  as  “ pot-boilers.”  A few  stone
mortars  and  pestles  which  occasionally  turned
up  would  appear  to  have  been  used  only  for
mixing  colouring  matter  to  paint  either  their
bodies  or  the  walls  of  the  caverns  they  fre-
quented. Two  small  flasks  or  tubes  made  out
of  the  cannon-bones  of  reindeer,  which  con-
tained traces  of  ochre,  are  supposed  to  have
been  an  artist’s  paint-box.  Tailoring  was
extensively  practised,  and  the  needles,  pins,
buttons,  etc.,  as  well  as  the  small  flint  im-
plements used  for  such  fine  work,  were
abundantly  met  with.  Their  ornaments  con-
sisted of  perforated  teeth,  shells  and  pendants,
made  of  various  materials.

The  caverns  adorned  with  wall  pictures  in
the  form  of  engravings,  sculptures  and  paint-
ings in  various  colours  number  about  thirty,
nearly  all  of  which  are  situated  in  the  south-
west of  France,  the  Pyrenees,  and  the  north
of  Spain.  They  all  belong  to  one  phase  of
art  which  appears  to  have  been  practised  for
a long  time.  Although  there  are  indications
that  the  dawn  of  painting  dates  as  far  back
as  the  Aurignacien  Age,  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  polychrome  painting  was  the  last  phase
in  the  evolution  of  Palaeolithic  art.  M.  Breuil
has  shown  that  in  caverns  with  pictures  of  long
standing  a chronological  sequence  in  the
progressive  stages  of  art  can  be  established,
by  observing  the  superposition  of  one  figure
above  another.  But  however  this  may  be,

G


98  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

it  is  now  generally  admitted  that  ultimately
engraving  on  cavern  walls  became  subservient
to  painting  in  colours  and  free-hand  drawing.

Among  the  fauna  depicted  on  the  walls  of
Altamira  and  Marsoulas  neither  the  reindeei
nor  any  of  the  extinct  animals  are  to  be  found.
Though  distant  from  the  principal  centre  of
the  painted  caverns  of  Perigord,  they  are
regarded  by  MM.  Cartailhac  and  Bieuil  as
having  passed  through  the  same  phases  of
evolutionary  art.  The  usual  animals  in  these
caves  are  bison,  horse,  goat  and  stag.  Besides
animal  forms,  there  are  groups  of  enigmatical
signs,  graffiti  and  a sort  of  pictographic  ar-
rangement of  coloured  dots  and  lines,  struc-
tures of  a tectiform  character  supposed  to
represent  wooden  enclosures,  etc.  Man  is  also
represented  by  about  a dozen  incomplete
designs,  badly  drawn,  grotesque  in  charactei,
and  altogether  inferior  in  execution  to  the
animal  figures.  But  this  peculiarity  need  not
cause  surprise,  as  it  is  a feature  of  Palaeolithic
art,  in  general;  for  no  human  representation
hitherto  known  of  this  kind,  whether  engraved
or  painted,  goes  beyond  the  artistic  efforts  of
children.

An  exception,  however,  may  be  made  to  this
sweeping  generalization  in  deference  to  the
opinion  of  the  late  M.  Piette,  who  entertained
the  theory  that  Palaeolithic  man  first  acquired
the  art  of  sculpturing  animals,  and  that,  after
practising  high  and  low  relief,  he  learned
ultimately  to  draw  incised  figures  on  the
flat.  This  theory  was  based  on  the  discovery


CULTURE  AND  CIVILIZATION  99

of  a few  small  human  figurines,  sculptured  in
ivory,  showing  great  artistic  merits,  under
stratigraphical  conditions,  which  he  regarded
as  pre-Solutreen,  and  in  which  no  drawings
were  found — the  latter  having  appeared  only
in  later  strata.

Perhaps  the  most  novel  discovery  was  that
in  the  cave  of  Niaux  (Ari6ge)  animal  figures,
similar  in  design  to  those  on  the  walls,  had
been  traced  on  the  now  hardened  mud  of  the
floor.  Such  figures  were  observed  in  several
places  in  the  inner  recesses  of  the  cave,  espe-
cially under  low  overhanging  rocks  where
visitors  could  not  walk;  and,  singular  to  relate,
they  remained  as  clear  and  distinct  as  if  they
had  been  recently  executed.  Among  them
the  following  animals  are  represented,  viz.
bison,  ox,  horse,  trout,  and  man,  but  of  the
last  only  a footprint — surely  one  of  the  most
marvellous  of  footprints  on  “ the  sands  of
time.”

The  system  of  human  economy  founded  in
these  early  days  was  the  outcome  of  the  free
play  of  natural  laws  little  affected  by  the
principles  of  religion  or  ethics.  The  reflec-
tions of  these  Palaeolithic  folk  had  probably
for  the  most  part  to  do  with  the  habits  of  the
animals  they  hunted,  and  the  strategic  means
by  which  they  could  be  waylaid  and  captured.
Of  agriculture,  the  rearing  of  domestic  animals,
the  arts  of  spinning  and  weaving,  and  the
manufacture  of  pottery  they  appear  to  have
been  absolutely  ignorant.  But  yet,  in  an
environment  of  such  primitive  resources  and


100


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


limited  culture  associations,  these  wild  hunters
developed  a genuine  taste  for  art,  and  culti-
vated its  principles  so  effectually  that  they
have  bequeathed  to  us  an  art  gallery  of  some
four  or  five  hundred  specimens  of  engravings,
sculptures,  and  even  paintings  in  colour,
many  of  them  being  so  true  to  their  models
that  they  bear  a favourable  comparison  with
analogous  works  of  the  present  day.


CHAPTER  V

THE  TRANSITION  FROM  PALAEOLITHIC  TO
NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION— THE  HIATUS
PROBLEM  AND  LAND  SUBMERGENCE

In  the  last  chapter  we  had  a passing  glimpse
of  the  Palaeolithic  races  of  Western  Europe —
then*  physical  attributes,  social  industries
and  artistic  attainments — as  disclosed  by
their  tools,  weapons,  ornaments  and  works
of  art.  In  moving  down  the  stream  of  time,
still  keeping  as  far  as  possible  within  the  same
geographical  area,  we  find  the  land  inhabited
by  other  races  whose  social  organizations
and  general  methods  of  living  appear  to  have
been  totally  different  from  those  of  the  former.
Here  we  pause  for  a little,  in  order  to  take
a preliminary  glance  at  the  characteristic
features  and  landmarks  of  their  civilization.
The  stage  in  European  history  we  are  thus
called  upon  to  inspect  is  known  by  the  name


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  101


Neolithic  Age,  so-called  because  a new  and
improved  mechanical  principle  then  came  into
general  use,  viz.  the  art  of  polishing  stone
implements  by  rubbing  them  with  some  hard
material,  so  as  to  give  them  a sharper  cutting
edge  than  was  possible  by  the  old  process  of
chipping.  How  far  we  have  travelled  in  time
to  reach  this  phase  of  culture  we  cannot
say  in  so  many  years,  or  centuries,  or  even
millenniums.

In  our  survey  of  the  geography  of  Western
Europe  during  the  Palaeolithic  period,  Britain
was  part  of  the  European  continent  whose
westward  sea-board  extended  far  into  the
Atlantic  Ocean.  The  beds  of  the  larger  portion
of  the  German  Ocean,  the  English  Channel
and  the  Irish  Sea  were  raised  above  the  level
of  the  Atlantic  and  formed  the  happy  hunting-
ground  of  our  early  forefathers.  But  from
the  earliest  dawn  of  Neolithic  times  nearly
the  whole  of  these  extensive  plains  and  river
valleys  were  transformed  into  great  inland  seas.
Nothing  was  to  be  seen  of  their  former  condi-
tion but  the  roots  of  a few  submerged  forests
cropping  up  here  and  there,  at  low-water
mark.  The  last  of  the  extinct  mammals
had  already  died  out  or  disappeared  from
the  British  area,  with  the  exception  of  a few
stray  specimens  of  the  Irish  elk,  the  reindeer
and  the  wild  bull  ( Bos  primigenius),  which
lingered  in  a few  isolated  localities  down  to
proto-historic  times.  In  short,  the  fauna
and  flora  characteristic  of  sub-Arctic  regions
had  given  place  to  those  of  a temperate  climate.


102


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


But  the  most  astounding  change  in  regard  to
animal  life  was  the  domestication  of  a number
of  animals  (dog,  ox,  horse,  pig,  sheep  and
goat),  some  of  which  were  reared  as  pets,
others  for  food,  and  others  for  their  milk.
Another  innovation  of  far-reaching  conse-
quence to  humanity  appeared  to  have  been
practised  at  a very  early  date,  viz.  the  culti-
vation of  a number  of  cereals  (wheat,  barley
and  millet),  fruits  and  a few  plants.  In  addi-
tion to  such  changes  in  the  physical  environ-
ment, these  Neolithic  folk  were  in  possession
of  equally  novel  methods  in  their  domestic
economy.  They  were  skilled  in  the  ceramic
art,  and  in  the  manufacture  of  cloth  by  spin-
ning and  weaving  wool  and  fibrous  textures.
In  hunting  the  forest  fauna  they  used,  in
addition  to  spears,  lances  and  daggers,  the
bow  and  arrow.  They  built  houses  both  for
the  dead  and  the  living — thus  showing  that
religion  had  become  a governing  principle
in  their  social  economy.  But  of  the  artistic
taste  of  their  Palseolithic  predecessors  they
possessed  not  a vestige,  and  whatever  they
did  by  way  of  ornament  consisted  of  a few
incised  scratches  arranged  in  simple  geomet-
rical patterns.

It  is  quite  evident  that  such  radical  changes,
embracing  nearly  all  departments  of  social
life,  were  not  adopted  en  bloc,  nor  in  a short
space  of  time.  Alterations  in  the  relative
level  of  sea  and  land,  on  so  large  a scale
as  the  submergence  of  half  a continent,  are
generally  the  result  of  slow  cosmical  processes.


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  103


The  same  may  be  said  of  climate,  floras  and
faunas.  The  inventive  skill  that  leads  to
mechanical  improvements  in  social  industries,
and  the  rise  of  pastoral  and  agricultural
occupations,  are  essentially  the  outcome  of
long  experience  under  the  unprogressive
influences  inherent  in  mankind.  In  fact,
the  fundamental  principles  of  the  two  civil-
izations are  so  divergent  that  the  Neolithic
can  hardly  be  regarded  as  a local  development
of  that  of  the  Palaeolithic  period.  It  was  the
striking  difference  between  the  practical  ele-
ments of  the  two  civilizations  that  gave  rise
to  the  theory  that  after  the  close  of  the
Palaeolithic  period  there  was  a break,  or
hiatus,  in  the  continuity  of  human  existence
in  Western  Europe.  Hence  arose  an  animated
controversy  which  divided  archaeologists  into
two  opposing  camps — one  contending  that  the
Quaternary  population  followed  the  retreating
ice  and  its  associated  fauna  northwards,  leaving
behind  them  a desert  land ; the  other  maintain-
ing that  they  became  amalgamated  with  new
races  from  Eastern  lands,  and  that  their  blood
still  permeates  the  veins  of  the  modern  inhabi-
tants of  Europe.  In  earlier  days  the  former  doc-
trine was  advocated  by  some  of  the  foremost
authorities,  such  as  Ed.  Lartet,  G.  de  Mortillet
and  others,  but  it  is  now  largely  discarded.
On  the  other  hand,  Paul  Broca  and  a few
other  distinguished  archaeologists  maintained
from  the  very  outset  that  the  flint  tools  of
the  later  Palaeolithic  stations  and  those  of
Neolithic  times  were  not  so  dissimilar  as  to


104


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


justify  the  idea  that  there  had  been  any  break
in  the  continuity  of  the  flint  industry  in
Europe.  And  further,  that  there  was  valid
evidence  to  show  that  the  extremely  dolicho-
cephalic skulls  found  in  the  sepulchral  caverns
of  the  Lozere  (Baumes-Chaudes,  L’Homme-
Mort,  etc.),  were  those  of  the  descendants  of
the  cavemen.

At  the  meeting  of  the  Congress  of  Anthro-
pology and  Prehistoric  Archaeology  held  at
Stockholm  in  1874,  M.  Cazalis  de  Fondouce
reviewed  the  Hiatus  theory  in  all  its  aspects,
in  a masterly  paper,  in  which  he  combated
it  on  every  point.  His  general  conclusions
were  that  the  transition  from  the  one  civil-
ization to  the  other  was  slow,  but  without
interruption  since  the  commencement  of  the
Palaeolithic  period  down  to  the  present  day ;
that  towards  the  close  of  that  period  two
or  more  different  races  had  combined  and
developed  the  primary  elements  of  Neolithic
civilization ; that  the  ameliorated  climate
attracted,  from  time  to  time,  new  immigrants
who  imported  improved  elements  into  the
arts  and  industries ; and  lastly,  that  the
incoming  tribes  gradually  absorbed  the  in-
digenous people  of  the  old  Stone  Age,  thus
accounting  for  the  persistence  of  the  marked
ethnic  peculiarities  of  the  Palaeolithic  races
still  to  be  traced  in  the  populations  of  Europe.

If  the  opinion  of  M.  de  Fondouce  with
regard  to  the  ultimate  fate  of  the  Palaeolithic
folk  be  correct,  as  I believe  it  is,  there  must
have  been  a transition  period  of  considerable


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  105


duration,  during  which  the  characteristic
features  of  the  full-blown  Neolithic  culture
can  be  shown  to  have  been  acquired  by  slow
degrees.  Stations,  such  as  caves  and  rock-
shelters,  shell-heaps,  huts,  camps  and  various
sedimentary  deposits,  yielding  relics  which
prove  continuous  habitation  from  Palaeolithic
to  Neolithic  times,  have  been  discovered
within  recent  years  in  many  localities  through-
out Central  and  Western  Europe.

A rambling  discussion  over  such  a wide
field  of  research  as  the  transition  period  is
manifestly  beyond  the  limits  of  this  book,  but
the  subject  is  too  important  to  be  altogether
ignored.  The  best  way  of  bringing  the  gist
of  the  subject  before  readers  is  to  give  a
brief  account  of  the  arguments  derived  from
one  or  two  characteristic  sites.

The  late  Edward  Piette  was  one  of  the  most
strenuous  advocates  of  the  existence  of  a
transition  period,  evidence  of  which  he  had
obtained  in  several  caves  and  rock-shelters
situated  among  the  rocky  regions  to  the  north
of  the  Pyrenees,  the  most  important  of  which
is  the  cavern  of  Mas-d’Azil  (Ari£ge).  This
is  a vast  subterranean  gallery,  about  400
metres  in  length,  at  the  bottom  of  which  foams
the  turbulent  waters  of  the  Arise.  During
the  construction  of  a road  along  the  stream  the
relic-bearing  deposits,  on  which  M.  Piette
founds  his  arguments,  were  discovered.  A
resumS  of  his  researches  on  this  site  was  brought
before  the  Congress  of  Anthropology  and  Pre-
historic Archaeology  held  in  Paris  in  1889,


106


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


with  the  result  that  there  was  a consensus  of
opinion  among  the  members  that  his  discoveries
proved  that  the  interval  between  the  two
civilizations,  in  that  locality,  had  been  of
short  duration.  The  precise  data  are  as
follows  :

Above  a stratum  containing  relics  character-
istic of  the  Reindeer  Age,  but  beneath  deposits
with  relics  equally  characteristic  of  the
Neolithic  period,  Piette  describes  two  beds,
the  combined  depth  of  which  amounted  to
four  feet,  which  yielded  the  relics  supposed
to  indicate  a transition  period.  The  lower
of  these  two  beds  was  composed  chiefly  of
ashes  and  wood-charcoal  intermingled  with
some  fallen  rocks.  The  thickness  of  this  bed
was  25 1 inches,  and  among  its  contents  the
following  worked  objects  were  found  : flint
knives  and  scrapers,  a number  of  perforated
deer  teeth,  arranged  as  if  they  had  formed  a
necklet,  also  perforated  teeth  of  various
other  animals;  pins,  polished  pointers,  and
spatulse  of  bone;  barbed  harpoons  made  of
stag-horn,  some  being  perforated  at  the  butt-
end  with  an  oval  or  round  hole,  and  others
with  barbs  on  one  side  only;  also  a large
number  of  pebbles  of  quartz  or  schist — such
as  could  be  picked  from  the  bed  of  the  river —
some  “ round-nosed  ” and  pestle-shaped,  show-
ing usage  markings  at  one  end,  and  others,
flat  and  oblong,  having  various  devices  painted
on  them  with  peroxide  of  iron  (Fig.  19).
The  fauna  was  represented  by  bones  of  the
stag,  roebuck,  chamois,  ox,  horse,  com-


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION


107


mon  bear,  wild-boar,  badger,  wolf,  beaver,
rat,  and  some  birds  and  fishes.  Grains  of
wheat  and  a variety  of  fruit-stones  and  seeds
were  also  identified.  The  larger  bones  of
two  human  skeletons,  which  appeared  to  have


Fig.  19. — Mas-d’Azu,.  Harpoons  of  stag-horn  (1,  2,  3);
objects  of  bone  (7,  8,  9,  10) ; round-nosed  pebble  worked
at  one  end  (4) ; flint  object  (6) ; horn  worked  at  one  end(5) ;
tooth  of  a bear  (11).  (All  4).  ( After  Piette.)

been  buried  after  the  flesh  had  been  removed,
had  also  been  marked  with  red  patches  of
peroxide  of  iron.  Super-imposed  on  this  bed,
but  passing  into  it  almost  insensibly,  were
deposits  of  wood  ashes  23|  inches  thick,
streaked  with  bands  of  grey,  white  and  red,


108


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


in  which  were  embedded  quantities  of  land
shells  ( Helix  nemoralis ),  evidently  the  remains
of  repasts.  These  shell-heaps  were  inter-
calated between  the  layers  of  ashes,  and  ex-
tended over  several  yards,  with  a maximum
depth  of  about  one  foot.  In  this  bed  were
also  found  harpoons  and  other  relics  similar  to
those  in  the  bed  of  coloured  pebbles;  but
in  addition  to  these  there  were  portions  of
small  chisel-like  implements  of  stone  with
sloping  and  abraded  ends  (Fig.  19,  No.  6),  but
no  regular  stone  axes.  Only  in  the  super-
incumbent layers  were  the  latter  found,  where,
still  higher  up,  came  objects  of  bronze  and
iron.

According  to  M.  Piette  there  were  changes
in  the  external  environment  which  could  be
correlated  with  these  successive  deposits  of
human  occupancy.  As  the  Reindeer  period
passed  away,  the  climate  became  ameliorated
but  humid,  as  inferred  from  the  presence  of
fruit-trees  and  the  cultivation  of  grain.  The
people  appeared  to  have  lost  their  artistic
taste  for  carving  on  bones,  as  they  now  manu-
factured harpoons  of  red-deer  horn  without
a trace  of  ornament.  They  also  painted
selected  pebbles  with  quaint  devices  of  lines
and  round  spots,  and  practised  some  obscure
sepulchral  rites  in  which  the  spreading  of
ochre  on  the  desiccated  bones  seemed  to  play
a part.

But  the  chief  interest  in  the  discoveries  at
Mas-d’Azil  lies  in  the  harpoons  of  red-deer
horn,  the  real  significance  of  which  had  then


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  109


for  the  first  time  been  recognized,  although  a
few  specimens  had  already  been  found  in  other
stations.  Since  attention  has  been  directed
to  them  they  have  been  discovered  in  con-
siderable numbers  in  various  and  widely  separ-
ated localities,  and  are  regarded  as  typical
relics  of  the  transition  period.

Among  other  cave-dwellings  which  have
yielded  flat  harpoons  made  of  red-deer  horn
one  of  the  most  interesting  is  the  Grotte  de
Reilhac  (Lot),  described  by  MM.  Cartailhac
and  Boule  in  1889.  On  Fig.  20  are  shown
four  worked  objects  from  this  station,  viz.
portion  of  a harpoon  typical  of  the  Magda-
lenien  epoch  (4),  two  harpoons  of  the  Azilian
type  (5,  6),  and  a deer-horn  holder  for  a stone
axe  so  commonly  met  with  among  lake-dwell-
ing relics  (7).  The  presence  of  these  relics,
so  characteristic  of  the  successive  cultural
stages,  conclusively  proves  that  the  Grotte  de
Reilhac  was  inhabited  from  the  Reindeer
period  down  to  Neolithic  times.

In  face  of  these  and  other  rapidly  accumu-
lating facts,  proving  the  existence  of  deposits
of  human  debris  containing  relics  strati-
graphically  proved  to  be  later  than  those  of
the  Reindeer  period,  but  older  than  those
of  the  polished  stone  age,  Mortillet  aban-
doned the  Hiatus  theory  and  filled  up  the  gap
by  adding  a new  epoch  to  his  previous  classi-
fication, which  he  called  Tourassien,  after
the  Grotte  de  la  Tourasse  (Haute-Garonne).
This  station  yielded,  along  with  a few  other
bone  relics  of  intermediary  forms,  no  less


110


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


than  a dozen  harpoons  of  the  kind  now  under
review.  Here  the  reindeer  was  almost  entirely
supplanted  by  the  red-deer,  as  it  contained


Fig.  20. — Harpoons,  etc. . from  various  localities.  No.  1.
Victoria  Cave;  (2)  the  bed  of  the  Dee  (Kirkcudbright);
(3)  near  Newcastle;  (4—7)  Orotte  de  Reilhac  (France);
(8)  Swiss  Lake- dwelling  (Collection  Gross);  (9)  Laugerie
Basse.  (All  except  4 and  7 = §.)


only  two  teeth  of  the  former,  whereas  those
of  the  latter  amounted  to  500.  The  deposits
in  which  they  were  found  lay  beneath  a
series  of  Neolithic  burials.


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION


111


It  may  be  observed  that  the  flatness  which
is  characteristic  of  these  harpoons  is  due  to
the  fact  that  the  texture  of  red-deer  horn
is  spongy  in  the  interior,  and  consequently
it  is  only  the  outside  of  the  horn  that  can  be
used  in  their  manufacture.  On  the  other  hand,
the  harpoons  of  the  Palaeolithic  period  have
round  stems  and  conical  butts,  with  two  pro-
jecting knobs  close  to  the  butt-end  for  keeping
the  string  from  falling  away  when  the  har-
poon becomes  detached  from  the  handle.

Similar  evidence  is  derived  from  a study
of  the  post-glacial  deposits  of  the  rock-shelter
of  the  Schweizersbild,  which  have  yielded
to  Dr.  Nuesch  not  only  relics  of  the  hunters
who  frequented  this  shelter,  but  remains
of  the  animals  on  which  they  feasted,  in
sufficient  abundance  to  enable  experts  to
make  out  a complete  list  of  the  ordinary
fauna  of  the  period.  It  has  been  shown  that,
during  the  occupancy  of  this  rock-shelter  bv
man,  there  had  been  a gradual  transition  from
an  Arctic  to  a temperate  climate.  The  con-
tents of  these  deposits  indicate  that  the  locality
had  been  a constant  rendezvous  for  bands
of  roving  hunters  from  the  Palaeolithic  period
down  to  the  Bronze  Age.

Among  inhabited  sites  which  fall  into  the
category  of  transition  stations  are  the  famous
Kj0kkenm0ddings  of  Denmark,  and  the
recently  discovered  lacustrine  settlement  in
the  peat-bog  of  Maglemose  (formerly  the  bed
of  a lake)  in  the  island  of  Zeeland.  The
industrial  remains  on  both  these  stations


112  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

consist  of  objects  made  of  flint  and  horn,
but  no  polished  ones  (Fig.  21).  Among  the  flint
implements  there  is  one  of  a special  type  which
is  regarded  as  characteristic  of  the  period,  viz.
the  tranchet  (No.  1),  a kind  of  hatchet  having
the  cutting  edge  on  one  side  formed  by  a large
facet.  No.  3 is  a fragment  of  an  Azilian  har-
poon, and  Nos.  4 and  5 are  bone  combs.


Fig.  21. — Objects  from  Danish  Kjokkenmtiddings  (1,  3-5),
and  Hut-dwelling  of  Campigny  (2).  (All  h)


Except  the  dog,  none  of  the  ordinary  domestic
animals  has  been  found  on  these  stations,  nor
any  of  the  cultivated  cereals.

The  tranchet  is  also  the  most  characteristic
implement  in  the  hut  settlement  of  Campigny
( Seine-Inf  erieure)  (No.  2).  A workshop  for  the
manufacture  of  this  implement  has  been  de-
scribed at  Coudraie,  near  Montevilliers  (Seine-
Inf6rieure).  According  to  M.  Salmon  (Diet.


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  113


des  Sc.  Anth.,  p.  807)  the  tranchet  is  to  be  found
in  great  numbers  in  the  plateau  stations  of
the  departments  of  the  Aube,  Calvados,  Ni&vre,
Oise,  Saone-et-Loire,  Yonne  and  others.  The
industrial  remains  of  these  stations  scarcely
advanced  to  the  degree  of  using  the  polished
stone  axes,  which  are  sparingly  met  with.

Of  the  less  known  of  the  early  haunts  of
man  during  the  transition  period,  one  of  the
most  instructive  is  a series  of  shell-mounds,
discovered  in  1863,  in  the  valley  of  the  Tagus,
near  the  villages  of  Salvaterra  and  Mugem.
The  mounds  are  grouped  on  the  left  bank  of
the  Tagus  at  from  twenty-five  to  thirty  metres
above  sea-level,  and  distant  some  thirty  miles
from  the  maritime  shores  of  the  present  em-
bouchure of  the  river.  The  shells  are  of
marine  origin,  and  when  they  were  gathered
and  used  as  food,  it  is  supposed  that  the  sea
extended  up  the  valley  as  far  as  the  shell-
mounds  which  suggests  that  the  land  must
have  since  risen  considerably.  The  industrial
remains  disclosed  by  excavations  are  of  a very
rude  character,  consisting  of  primitive  imple-
ments made  of  flint,  quartzite,  bone  and  horn.
Among  the  flints  are  a few  knife  flakes,  and
some  small  cutting  implements  of  rhomboidal
forms.  There  are  also  some  large  flat  stones,
used  for  grinding  purposes,  together  with  the
small  hand  rubbers.  Horn  and  bone  were
utilized  as  chisels,  pointers,  spatulse,  etc.  No
polished  axes,  nor  pottery,  nor  any  indications
of  domestic  animals  have  been  found  in  these
Portuguese  settlements.

H


114  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

The  most  interesting  feature  of  the  investi-
gations was  the  discovery  of  upwards  of  a
hundred  interments  at  various  depths  in
the  shell-mounds ; but  it  does  not  appear  that
any  grave-goods  had  been  associated  with
the  bodies.  The  osseous  remains  were  much
decayed  and  the  skulls  distorted,  probably
by  the  pressure  of  the  debris.  Enough,  how-
ever, remained  to  show  that  they  represented
two  races — one  dolichocephalic  and  the  othei
brachycephalic.  Of  the  latter  only  two  speci-
mens were  in  the  series  (the  cephalic  index
of  one  being  86-90),  while  all  the  others  were
dolichocephalic,  with  cephalic  indices  of  71  11
to  75-56.  A reasonable  inference  from  these
archaeological  data  is  that  the  constructors
of  the  shell-mounds  were  a mixed  community,
the  great  majority  of  which  belonged  to  the
old  Palaeolithic  people  of  Europe;  while  the
minority  formed  part  of  the  advanced  immi-
grants of  the  Neolithic  races  into  Euiope.

Turning  now  to  Britain,  we  shall  see  there
is  also  within  its  borders  similar  evidence  of
a transition  period  during  which  it  was  inhab-
ited by  a primitive  population  who  may  have
been  descendants  of  its  original  Palaeolithic
people.

The  Mac  Arthur  cave  was  discovered  m 1S94
by  quarrymen  while  removing  stones  lor
building  purposes  from  a cliff  facing  the  bay
of  Oban,  and  long  regarded  as  marking  the
line  of  an  old  sea-beach.  The  contents  of  the
cave  consisted  (1)  of  a superficial  lajer  oi
black  earth  in  which  human  remains  were


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  115


found,  including  two  dolichocephalic  skulls,
thus  indicating  that  the  final  purpose  of  the
cave  was  a burial-place;  and  (2)  a food  refuse-
heap  comprised  of  shells  of  various  kinds
and  the  remains  of  animals,  partly  super-
imposed on,  and  partly  intercalated  with,
sea  gravel.  It  would  appear  that  during  a
storm,  subsequent  to  the  time  when  the  cave
had  become  a place  of  resort  to  man,  the
waves  were  forced  into  the  cave,  carrying
with  them  a certain  amount  of  shingle,  which,
after  the  abatement  of  the  storm,  had  become
the  habitable  floor  of  the  cave,  and  over  which
the  cave-dwellers  again  took  up  their  abode.

If  this  deduction  be  correct,  the  importance
of  the  Oban  discovery  cannot  be  over-rated,
as  it  proves  that  man  was  an  inhabitant  of
the  district  when  the  entrance  to  the  cave
was  on  the  sea-beach,  and  sufficiently  near  the
water  to  permit  of  the  waves  to  enter  it  during
a storm.  The  beach  of  to-day  is,  however,
a hundred  yards  distant,  and  the  lower  shell-
bed  lay  fully  thirty  feet  above  present  high-
water  mark;  so  that  a change  in  the  relative
level  of  sea  and  land  must  have  taken  place
in  that  part  of  Scotland  to  the  extent  of  some
twenty-five  or  thirty  feet,  since  the  troglodyte
hunters  of  Oban  feasted  on  the  marine  and
land  animals  of  the  district.  These  it  may
be  observed  were  unquestionably  Neolithic  in
character.

All  the  implements  recovered  from  the
debris  in  the  cave  were  made  of  bone  or  deer-
horn,  with  the  exception  of  three  hammer-


116  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

stones  and  twenty  flints,  mostly  flakes  and
chips.  The  bone  and  horn  implements  were
as  follows  : three  pins,  three  borers,  and  a few
bone  implements  of  a nondescript  character,
being  merely  pointed  or  flattened  at  one  end ;


Fig.  22. — Skull  and  Relics  from  the  MacArthur  Cave,
Oban.  (All  i,  except  6,  8 and  9 = |,  and  skull  greatly
reduced.)


one  hundred  and  forty  “ round-nosed,”  chisel-
ended  implements,  having  an  extraordinary
likeness  to  each  other;  and  seven  harpoons
(two  being  entire)  made  of  deer-horn  (Fig.  22).
The  larger  of  the  entire  harpoons  is  six  inches
long,  has  four  barbs  on  each  side,  and  an  oval
perforation  at  the  butt-end.  The  other  differs


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  117


from  the  former  only  in  being  smaller  and
having  no  perforation.  A mere  glance  at
these  bone  implements,  especially  the  harpoons,
shows  their  striking  similarity  to  those  from
Mas-d’Azil  and  other  Azilian  stations  on  the
Continent.  No  archseologist  can  fail  to  be
astonished  at  so  remarkable  a coincidence  as
that  a group  of  human  relics,  from  such  widely
distant  localities  as  Oban  and  France,  should
be  so  similar.  The  harpoons  agree  not  only
in  the  material  of  which  they  were  made,  but
also  in  the  shape  of  the  stem,  the  method  of
cutting  the  barbs,  and  the  occasional  presence
of  an  aperture  on  the  butt-end.

Similar  remains,  including  a few  harpoons,
were  subsequently  found  in  a shelter  situated
at  the  base  of  a steep  rock  called  Druimvargie,
overlooking  a marsh  in  which,  some  years
ago,  the  remains  of  a supposed  lake-dwelling
were  dug  up.  As  the  lowest  portion  of  this
marsh  is  only  a few  feet  above  high-water
mark,  it  would  have  been  an  inland  bay  when
the  sea  stood  so  high  as  to  wash  the  entrance
to  the  MacArthur  cave,  so  that  the  two
stations  would  then  have  been  on  opposite
sides  of  a small  bay,  probably  frequented  by
the  same  body  of  hunters.  Fig.  23  shows
a selection  of  the  worked  objects  found  at
Druimvargie  from  which  their  similarity  to
those  from  the  MacArthur  cave  will  be  at  once
seen.

Another  locality  which  has  yielded  the  same
class  of  industrial  remains  is  a shell-heap
called  Caisteal-nan-Gillean  in  the  island  of


118


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Oronsay.  The  shell -heap  formed  an  isolated
mound  between  a range  of  sand-dunes  and
the  sea,  measuring  about  150  feet  in  diameter
and  on  an  average  25  feet  in  height.  Its
surface  was  covered  with  grassy  turf,  having
blown  sand  underneath  to  a depth  of  one  to
five  feet.  Below  this  covering  was  an  accumu-


Fig.  23. — Portions  of  harpoons  and  round-nosed  chisels
of  bone  and  horn  from  the  Rock-shelter  of  Druimvargie.
(A  11  h)


lation  of  shells  and  bones,  mingled  with  sand
and  ashes  for  a depth  of  about  eight  feet.
Underneath  this  refuse-heap  the  substance
of  the  mound  was  composed  of  a series  of
layers  of  blown  sand  and  a dark  mould,  with
a few  sea  and  land  shells,  but  no  implements.

The  implements  of  bone  and  horn  found
in  Caisteal-nan-Gillean  consisted  of  eleven
harpoons,  three  awls  and  150  “ round-nosed  ’


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  119


chisels,  similar  to  those  of  the  Oban  cave*
The  stone  implements,  numbering  over  200,
were  elongated  water-worn  pebbles,  worked
at  one  end  and  supposed  to  have  been  used
as  limpet -hammers  (Fig.  24).

Besides  the  above-named  objects  there  were
eight  fragments  of  perforated  implements
made  of  deer-horn,  and  others  roughly  cut


Fig.  24. — Caisteal-nan-Qillean  Shell-Heap,
Harpoons  and  objects  of  bone,  horn  and  stone.


Oronsay.

(All  h)


round  the  circumference  and  then  broken
across;  also  two  small  anvils  and  some  flint
chips,  but  none  that  could  be  called  an  imple-
ment. With  the  exception  of  bones  of  the
greak  auk,  the  organic  remains  were  those
of  the  existing  fauna  of  the  west  coast,  among
which  were  red-deer,  otter,  wi.d-boar,  marten,
grey  and  common  seal,  cetaceans,  limpet,
pecten,  oyster,  cockle,  crab — all  evidently
used  for  edible  purposes.

Two  other  shell -heaps  on  the  island  ol


120


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Oronsay  have  yielded  relics  and  organic
remains  precisely  similar  to  those  of  Caisteal-
nan-Gillean,  one  called  Crock  Sligach  (shelly
mound),  and  the  other  Crock  Riach  (grey
mound).

These  remarkable  discoveries  in  the  caves
of  Oban  and  shell-mounds  of  Oronsay  were
first  described  by  Dr.  Joseph  Anderson  and
published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society
of  Antiquaries  of  Scotland  (Vols.  XXIX  and
XXXII).

The  Oronsay  shell-mounds  were  explored
by  Mr.  William  Galloway  some  time  before
1884,  but  the  results  were  not  published  till
Mr.  Galloway’s  collection  had  been  acquired
by  the  Scottish  National  Museum  of  Anti-
quities, and  thus  came  under  the  notice  of
Dr.  Anderson.

Implements  of  bone  and  deer-horn  of  the
blunt,  chisel-ended  type  were  found  in  a shell-
heap  on  Inchkeith,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  a careful  search  would  result  in  the  dis-
covery of  other  primitive  inhabited  sites  in
North  Britain  yielding  remains  of  the  tran-
sition period.  In  Prehistoric  Remains  in
Caithness,  published  in  1886  (Williams  and
Norgate),  Mr.  Samuel  Laing,  joint  author
with  Professor  Huxley,  describes  a number  of
shell-heaps  which  he  assigned  to  “ the  earliest
race  of  human  inhabitants  of  Britain,”  and
regarded  their  relics  and  associated  fauna  as
contemporary  with  the  Ivjekkenmeddings  of
Denmark.

Stray  examples  of  the  characteristic  har-


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  121


poons  of  Oban  and  Mas-d’Azil  have  also
been  discovered  in  several  other  localities  in
North  Britain.  One  was  found  in  the  bed  of
the  Dee,  near  Kirkcudbright  (Fig.  20,  No.  2);
another  in  the  Victoria  cave,  near  Settle  (No.
1) ; and  a third  in  the  vicinity  of  Newcastle,  now
preserved  in  the  Archaeological  Museum  of  that
town  (No.  3).  Specimens  have  also  been  re-
corded from  some  of  the  earlier  Swiss  lake-
dwellings  (No.  8)  and  turbaries  (peaf-dogs)  of
North  Italy.  Number  9 on  the  same  figure  is
from  Laugerie  Basse  (Dordogne).

Nor  is  the  above  the  only  line  of  evidence  to
show  that  Scotland  was  inhabited  by  a race  of
primitive  people  who  manufactured  implement  s
of  deer-horn,  and  lived  on  shell -fish  and  such
marine  animals  as  chance  or  strategy  brought
within  their  reach,  prior  to  the  last  land
elevation  of  the  country.  Implements  of
deer-horn  associated  with  the  skeletons  of
stranded  whales  have  been  found  in  various
parts  of  the  valley  of  the  Forth,  localities
which  at  the  present  time  are  the  most  highly
cultivated  in  Scotland.  One  such  implement
(Fig.  25),  unique  of  its  kind,  is  preserved  in
the  Anatomical  Museum  of  the  University  of
Edinburgh.  It  was  described  by  Sir  W.
Turner  in  1889,  at  a meeting  of  the  British
Association  then  held  at  Newcastle-on-Tync.
It  is  made  of  a piece  of  stag-horn,  11
inches  long  and  6|  inches  in  its  greatest  girth ;
truncated  at  one  end  and  bevelled  into  a
cutting  edge  at  the  other,  with  a perforation
not  in  the  middle  but  a couple  of  inches  nearer


122  , PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

the  truncated  end.  It  was  discovered  in
1877,  resting  on  the  skull  of  a Balsenoptera
whale,  in  the  course  of  drainage  operations
on  the  estate  of  Meiklewood,  a lew  miles  west
of  Stirling,  and  when  exposed  there  was  a
portion  of  a wooden  handle  still  in  the  hole.
Shell -heaps  have  been  noted  along  the  ancient
but  now  vanished  shores  of  this  valley.

But  here  a new  problem  crops  up.  We  have
already  seen  that  Palaeolithic  races  inhabited
the  south  of  England  up  to  the  Magdalenien


Fig.  25. — Perforated  implement  of  stag-horn  found
associated  with  the  skeleton  of  a whale  in  the  Casse  of
Stirling.  (11  inches  in  length.)

epoch,  but  apparently  there  is  no  evidence
to  show  that  then  descendants  continued  to
live  in  these  regions  up  to  early  Neolithic  times.
No  stranded  whales  associated  with  deer-horn
axes,  no  shell-middens,  or  raised  beaches
with  Azilian  harpoons,  such  as  we  have  de-
scribed in  Scotland,  are  to  be  found  in  South
Britain.  As  a solution  of  this  problem  I
have  elsewhere  advanced  the  hypothesis
{Arch.  Journal,  Yol.  LV,  pp.  259-85)  that
nearly  all  the  evidence  on  this  point  is  now


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  123


practically  obliterated  by  a submergence  of
the  land  of  South  Britain  and  the  opposite
coast  of  Brittany.

But  this  submergence  ought  not  to  be
confounded  with  the  extensive  subsidence
which  commenced  during  the  glacial  epoch
and  embraced  the  whole  of  Western  Europe.
That  with  which  we  have  now  to  deal  was
comparatively  recent,  and  probably  contem-
porary with  the  opposite  movement  which
caused  the  last  raised  beaches  in  Scotland.
It  was  a wave-like  undulation  which  upheaved
the  north  and  depressed  the  south  of  Britain.
At  any  rate  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  a
submergence  of  the  land  has  taken  place  in
the  south  of  England  since  man  inhabited
it  in  proto -Neolithic  times.  The  evidence  in
support  of  this  statement  consists  of  sub-
merged forests  and  old  inhabited  land-surfaces,
associated  with  edible  shells,  and  bones  of
the  stag,  hog,  horse  and  Bos  longifrons,
together  with  rude  implements  of  horn  and
flint,  which  are  occasionally  to  be  seen  at
low-water  mark  in  many  localities.  Such
remains  have  been  incidentally  described  on
the  coast  of  Somerset,  at  Barnstaple  in  North
Devon,  at  Torbay,  St.  Bride’s  Bay,  the  coasts
of  Cheshire,  Lancashire  and  Hampshire,  the
valley  of  the  Thames,  and  along  the  shores
of  Essex  and  east  coast  as  far  north  as
Holderness.  Many  of  these  vanishing  land-
marks on  the  eastern  shores  of  England  may,
however,  be  accounted  for  by  sea-erosion.

The  information  obtained  from  the  short


124


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


intermittent  excavations  which  are  possible
within  the  limits  of  tidal  areas  has  been
supplemented  by  various  industrial  operations,
such  as  dock-excavations,  submarine  tunnel-
ling, borings,  etc.,  which  have  disclosed  former
land-surfaces  some  fifty  or  sixty  feet  below
present  sea-level.

The  following  extract  from  Mr.  Pengelly’s
paper,  “ On  the  Submerged  Forest  of  Torbay,”
gives  a good  idea  of  this  class  of  evidence  :
“ Similar  and  coeval  forests  are  well  known  to
exist  on  the  opposite  shores  of  all  the  British
seas  and  channels.  . . . Everywhere  the  change
of  level  appears  to  be  the  same,  the  stumps
in  situ  are  always  vertical,  and  the  roots
have  the  same  relation  to  the  horizontal  plain
as  they  must  have  had  when  growing.  Mixed
with  the  vegetable  remains,  which  are  those
of  species  of  plants  and  trees  as  still  exist  in
the  neighbourhood,  there  have  been  found
the  bones  of  the  mammoth,  Bos  longifrons,
red-deer,  horse  and  wild-hog.  In  the  Torbay
forest  a human  implement  made  of  the  antler
of  the  red-deer  was  found  twelve  feet  below
the  surface.”

From  a recent  correspondence  which
appeared  in  Nature  I take  the  following  ex-
tracts, which  strongly  support  the  above  views
on  the  submergence  question.  Mr.  J.  Sinel,  of
Jersey,  thus  describes  excavations  in  St.  Helier
(September  19,  1912)  :

“ The  soil  beneath  the  town  of  St.  Helier
is,  in  descending  order,  composed  as  follows  :


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  125


“ (1)  A deposit  of  blown  sand  and  recent
alluvium  from  4 feet  to  6 feet  thick.

“ (2)  A bed  of  brown  sandy  and  clayey  peat
(with  relics  of  Gallo-Roman  times).

“ (3)  A marine  deposit  consisting  of  clay,
shingle  and  shell  gravel  from  2 feet  to  5 feet
thick.

“ (4)  A bed  of  firm  black  peat  and  forest
remains  which  ranges  from  5 feet  to  14  feet
in  thickness.

“ This  peat  and  forest-bed  is  traceable  to
the  shore,  where  it  forms  the  well-known
‘ submerged  forest,’  thence  (as  revealed  by
the  dredge)  across  the  channel  that  separates
the  island  from  the  continental  coast  from
Cape  La  Hague  to  Finisterre.

This  no  doubt  is  all  one  with  the  post-
glacial submerged  forests  of  the  British  Isles
and  North-western  Europe  in  general,  for  all
through  the  flora  and  fauna  are  the  same,  viz.
oak,  alder,  birch,  hazel,  Juncus  and  Equisetum
with  hazel  nuts  in  profusion.  Bos  longifrons,
red-deer  and  wolf,  even  elytra  of  the  little
purplish-green  beetle,  Geotropes  vernalis,  are
present  in  this  layer  beneath  St.  Helier,  as
they  are  from  extreme  north  to  south  through-
out the  vast  forest  area.

• • • • •

“ Neolithic  relics,  in  the  way  of  stone
implements  and  fragments  of  pottery,  are
very  plentiful  on  the  surface  and  in  the  upper
levels  of  this  forest-bed,  but,  so  far  as  I can
ascertain,  have  never  been  recorded  from  the
strata  beneath.  In  a series  of  excavations


126


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


now  in  progress  for  the  foundations  of  a build-
ing in  St.  Helier,  the  strata  as  above  described
have  been  cut  through  and  in  the  blue  clay
beneath  the  jorest  bed  (which  here  is  eight  feet
thick)  were  found  Neolithic  implements  as
follows.”

After  describing  a number  of  worked  objects
which  he  considers  Neolithic  implements,
Mr.  Sinel  goes  on  to  write  : “In  the  same
stratum  as  these,  and  in  a layer  of  yellow  clay
which  lies  beneath,  flint  implements  of  decided
Chellian,  Acheulian  and  Mousterian  types
are  frequent,  but  the  relics  above  specified
are  clearly  and  decidedly  Neolithic.

“ As  the  portion  of  the  forest-bed  at  this
spot  must  represent  the  vegetation  that  first
fringed  the  land  as  it  recovered  from  the
depression  of  glacial  times,  and  these  relics
lie  beneath  it,  we  cannot  but  conclude  that
the  Neolithic  races  date  from  a period  far
more  remote  than  has  usually  been  assigned  to
them,  and  that  they  must,  in  fact,  date  back
nearly  into  the  last  glacial  period.”

In  reply  to  the  above,  Mr.  A.  L.  Leach,
London,  writes  as  follows  (October  3)  :

“ The  letter  of  Mr.  J.  Sinel,  in  Nature ,
September  19,  on  the  submerged  forest-bed
in  Jersey,  deals  with  several  questions  of  great
interest  in  relation  to  the  submerged  forest
on  the  south-western  coast  of  Wales.  I hope
to  publish  shortly  an  account  of  this  forest-bed
(so  far  as  it  is  seen  in  Pembrokeshire)  and  the


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  127


deposits  associated  with  it,  but  in  the  mean-
time I may  state  that  I have  found  worked
flints — flakes  and  cores — in  two  localities
on  the  Pembrokeshire  coast  in  positions
which  correspond  with  that  of  the  stratum  of
blue  clay  below  the  forest-bed  of  St.  Helier.
These  flints  were  clearly  worked  by  men  who
inhabited  the  woodland,  now  submerged,
before  the  trees  fell  into  decay  and  formed  the
peaty  mass  of  trunks,  branches,  leaves,  etc.,
overlying  the  true  root-bed  of  the  ‘ submerged
forest.’  One  locality  near  Amroth  in  Carmar-
then Bay  yielded  cores  and  flakes  in  abundance ;
the  circumstances  indicate  the  existence  of  a
chipping-floor  or  implement  factory  on  this
part  of  the  submerged  land-surface,  which  now,
during  spring-tides,  is  covered  by  no  less  than
twenty  feet  of  water.  In  the  patch  of  sub-
merged forest  recently  exposed  at  Freshwater
West,  in  southern  Pembrokeshire,  a few  small
implements  were  also  found.

“ Both  at  Amroth  and  Freshwater  West  the
flints  occurred  below  the  peaty  layer  in  a
thin  blue  slime  or  clayey  silt,  which  rests
in  turn  upon  clayey  rubble  largely  composed  of
material  derived  from  older  superficial  deposits.
There  is  evidence  that  the  forest  trees  in
Pembrokeshire  are  rooted  either  in  unquestion-
able boulder  clay  or  in  a clayey  drift  allied
to  the  glacial  deposits.

•

“ The  geological  horizon  of  the  worked
flints  of  the  Pembrokeshire  submerged  land-
surface  appears  identical  with  that  of  the


128  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Neolithic  implements  from  St.  Helier.  One
of  the  most  important  questions  that  arises
is  whether  these  implements  are  so  distinctively
Neolithic  in  character  as  to  exclude  the  possi-
bility that  they  may  belong  to  an  earlier
period.”

These  extracts  clearly  indicate  the  existence
of  a pre-Neolithic  civilization  within  the  sub-
merged area  of  the  English  Channel ; and  there
is  presumptive  evidence  to  show  that  a careful
examination  of  the  relics  will  bring  out  a
parallelism  between  them  and  the  archae-
ological remains  of  the  transition  period  as
recorded  from  the  north  of  Scotland  and  the
various  Azilian  stations  throughout  Western
Europe.

This  hypothesis  is  further  strengthened  by
analogous  discoveries  on  the  coast  of  Essex,
as  shown  by  the  recent  discoveries  of  Mr.  S.
Hazzledine  Warren,  F.G.S.  ( Anth . Institute ,
1912).  Here  are  submerged  strata  some  of
which  clearly  disclose  that  they  were  formerly
land-surfaces  inhabited  by  prehistoric  people.
“ We  have  no  evidence  to  show,”  writes  Mr.
Warren,  “ at  what  period  this  submergence
commenced,  as  the  record  now  lies  beneath
perhaps  fifty  or  a hundred  fathoms  of  water.
But  the  date  of  its  final  stage  can  be  approxi-
mately fixed  by  the  prehistoric  remains  which
are  found  on  the  ancient  surface  which  was
then  carried  beneath  the  sea.  . . . That  this
surface  was  inhabited  by  prehistoric  man,
down  to,  and  probably  far  below,  low-water
mark  is  proved  beyond  a doubt  by  the  pre-


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  129


historic  remains  now  found  upon  it.  Stone
implements  are  generally  distributed  over
this  surface.  They  are  sometimes  scarce,
sometimes  concentrated  in  considerable  num-
bers on  small  areas.  Not  unfrequently  the
sites  of  hearths  are  found ; sometimes  there
are  small  pits  about  three  feet  in  diameter
and  about  two  feet  in  depth,  the  interior  filled
with  wood  charcoal,  the  edges  showing  much
evidence  of  fire.  I suggest  that  these  may
possibly  have  been  used  for  burning  pottery.
I have  found  several  such  on  the  buried  pre-
historic surface  of  East  Essex.”

Mr.  Warren  describes  some  special  sites
on  these  prehistoric  floors,  containing  large
quantities  of  charcoal,  pottery  and  flint  im-
plements, which  he  regards  as  evidence  of
some  kind  of  industry.  Beneath  one  of  these
special  sites  on  a prehistoric  floor  there  was
discovered  in  1910  a human  skeleton  buried
in  a contracted  position  and  having  apparently
the  hands  and  feet  bound  to  the  body  by
ropes  of  sand-grass.  The  locality  in  which  this
important  discovery  was  made  is  near  Walton-
on-Naze.  Here  the  sea  is  disintegrating  the
coast-line,  and  in  recent  times  its  action  has
exposed  the  following  strata  :

(1)  A low  cliff  of  tidal  silt  eight  to  ten  feet
in  height.

(2)  A prehistoric  floor  over  which  were
found  “ worked  flints,  broken  pottery  and
rounded  lumps  of  burnt  clay,  the  whole  mixed
with  much  wood  charcoal.”

(3)  The  skeleton  was  a little  over  two  feet

i


130


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


beneath  the  prehistoric  floor  and,  according
to  Dr.  Keith  ( Ancient  Types  of  Man,  p.  7),
was  that  of  a female,  five  feet  four  inches  in
height,  with  a cephalic  index  of  78.  This
could  not  have  been  a recent  burial,  as,  until
the  result  of  recent  sea-erosion,  the  skeleton
lay  twelve  feet  below  the  present  surface  of
high-water  mark.  From  these  data  the  in-
ference of  submergence  since  Neolithic  times
is  too  patent  to  require  further  comment  (see
Chap.  X).

But  when  these  submerged  land-areas  and
forests  were  inhabited  by  a maritime  popula-
tion, who  lived  principally  on  the  produce  of
the  sea,  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  inland
parts  of  the  country  remained  uninhabited.
Hence  we  ought  to  find  some  traces  of  these
British  people  both  on  submerged  and  un-
submerged habitable  areas.  Indications  of
human  occupancy  on  the  latter  have  occasion-
ally been  observed  by  various  writers,  but  the
most  suggestive  evidence  which  has  come
under  my  cognizance  is  recorded  in  a com-
munication to  Man  (1910,  48),  by  Canon
Greenwell,  F.R.S.,  and  the  Rev.  R.  A.  Gatty,
LL.B.,  entitled  The  Pit  Dwellings  at  Holderness.

The  foundations  of  these  dwellings  were
excavated  in  the  boulder  clay  to  a depth  of
four  or  five  feet,  and  varied  in  shape  and  size,
some  being  as  long  as  forty  feet  and  nine  to
ten  feet  in  breadth.  They  are  distributed  in
groups  in  the  vicinity  of  Atwick,  some  two
miles  from  Hornsea,  and  not  far  from  the
present  coast,  but  it  appears  that  when  they


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  131


were  inhabited  the  sea  was  far  away,  as  no
shells  or  fish-bones  were  among  their  kitchen
debris.  From  their  number  it  was  evident
that  the  district  was  then  inhabited  by  a large
population.  They  are  now  filled  in  with  a
dark  coloured  deposit,  the  result  of  mud
washed  into  them  by  local  rainfall.  This
mud  contained  no  relics  of  any  kind,  all  the
animal  bones,  implements,  and  pottery  having-
been  found  on  the  floor  of  the  pits.

“ After  this  flooding,”  writes  Canon  Green-
well,  “ had  taken  place,  which  either  drove
out  the  occupants  or  found  the  pits  already
deserted,  they  became  covered  by  a deposit
of  surface  soil  from  fifteen  to  eighteen  inches  in
thickness.  This  soil,  which  equally  covered
the  boulder  clay  and  the  pits,  has  never  been
in  any  way  broken  through,  or  otherwise  dis-
turbed in  the  spaces  occupied  by  the  pits,  and,
therefore,  they  must  have  been  dug  out  and
inhabited  before  the  mud  was  carried  into
them,  and  the  surface  soil  had  later  on  ac-
cumulated over  them.  In  this  surface  soil
the  ordinary  implements  of  flint,  and  other
stones  characteristic  of  the  Neolithic  Age,
and  in  some  measure  those  of  bronze,  have
been  found  in  fair  abundance.  On  the  other
hand,  neither  on  the  floors  of  the  pits  nor  in
the  filling  in  has  any  example  of  the  highly
finished  implements  of  the  Stone  Age,  or  any
portion  of  one  of  them,  come  to  light.

“ This  is  a very  important  fact  in  con-
nection with  the  time  when  the  pits  were
occupied.  That  time  can  only,  however,  be


132


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


considered  as  it  has  a relation  to  other  periods
of  occupation  in  the  Stone  Age  in  this  district,
and  it  must  not  be  attempted  to  give  it  a place
in  chronological  time.  If  the  occupation  of
the  pits  is  considered  with  reference  to  other
and  later  periods,  when  the  country  was  in-
habited by  early  man,  it  is  evident  that  the
people,  who  had  their  abode  in  them,  must
have  been  living  there  a long  time  before  the
Neolithic  men  of  the  polished  Stone  Age  were
settled  in  the  district.”

It  is  scarcely  possible  to  put  any  other
interpretation  on  the  above  facts  than  that
the  Holderness  pit-dwellers  belonged  to  the
transition  period.  As  to  the  presence  of
rough  pottery,  it  may  be  observed  that  pottery
was  well  represented  in  the  debris  of  the  hut-
village  of  Campigny  described  as  typical  of
this  period  in  France  (Rev.  de  VEcole  d' Anthrop.
1898,  p.  402).

Similar  evidence  of  sites  inhabited  in
former  times,  but  now  submerged,  is  abund-
antly met  with  in  several  localities  along  the
shores  of  Brittany,  as  at  Mont-Dol  and  the
little  island  of  Er  Lanic,  near  Gavr’Inis.
From  the  facts  disclosed  on  the  former  site
M.  Sirodot  infers  that  man  was  an  inhabitant
of  the  district  when  the  sea  washed  the  foot
of  Mont-Dol,  that  upon  the  retreat  of  the  sea
its  exposed  bed  became  overgrown  with  great
forests,  and  that  after  a long  interval  the  sea
again  encroached  on  the  land  and  submerged
the  forests  within  early  historic  times  (Etudes
Critiques  d'Archeologie  prthistorique).  M.  de


NEOLITHIC  CIVILIZATION  133


Closmadeuc  has  shown  that  on  Er  Lanic  there
is  a double  cromlech  in  the  form  of  the  figure
8,  the  half  of  which  is  now  entirely  submerged.
These  deductions  seem  to  be  confirmed  by  the
numerous  legendary  traditions  of  buried  cities
which  are  prevalent  in  this  part  of  Europe.

According  to  the  Abbe  Hamard  (Ibid.,  p.  37),
there  is  an  old  manuscript,  of  the  eighth  or
ninth  century,  preserved  in  the  library  of
Avranches,  in  which  it  is  stated  that  formerly
there  was,  in  the  vicinity  of  Mont-Saint-
Michel,  a dense  forest  extending  six  miles
from  the  sea  which  harboured  all  manner  of
wild  beasts.  Now  the  whole  district  is  covered
by  the  sea  and  sand-beds.  To  show  how  much
the  sea  has  encroached  an  the  land  in  these
parts  he  reproduces  on  old  map  of  Contentin,
of  the  thirteenth  century,  which  shows  Mont-
Saint-Michel  a long  way  inland,  the  island  of
Jersey  as  united  to  the  Continent,  and  a
corresponding  increase  of  land  all  along  the
adjacent  shores.

When  the  ethnological  problems  regarding
the  immigrations  into  Britain  of  Neolithic
races  fall  to  be  considered  we  shall  have  a
few  further  remarks  to  make  on  submerged
antiquities,  and  their  bearing  on  the  solution
of  the  supposed  hiatus  in  the  continuity  of  a
human  population  in  Britain  since  Palaeolithic
times.


134


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


CHAPTER  VI

ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES  OF  THE  STONE
AND  BRONZE  AGES

Systematic  writers  on  Archaeology  gener-
ally describe  the  cultural  phenomena  dis-
closed by  the  relics  gathered  on  the  inhabited
sites  and  haunts  of  the  prehistoric  people  of
Europe  under  the  three  famous  ages  of  Stone,
Bronze  and  Iron.  It  must  not,  however,  be
forgotten  that  these  so-called  ages  are  but
undated  stages  in  the  sequence  of  events,
each  representing  a group  of  objects  suf-
ficiently differentiated  to  be  recognized  as
well-defined  phases  in  the  progress  of  European
civilization.  This  system  of  classification  is
founded  on  the  fact  that  there  was  a time,
in  the  history  of  mankind,  when  all  industrial
tools  were  made  of  stone,  horn,  bone,  teeth,
etc.  After  human  organizations  continued  to
exist  for  many  ages  with  the  assistance  of
such  objects  as  could  be  manufactured  from
these  limited  resources,  a discovery  was  made
which  ultimately  revolutionized  all  mechanical
appliances  for  cutting  purposes,  and  thus
raised  the  culture  and  civilization  of  the
people  to  a higher  degree  than  was  previously
possible.  This  discovery  was  the  art  of
making  bronze,  which  simply  consisted  of
adding  10  per  cent,  of  tin  to  copper,  a process
which  has  the  effect  of  rendering  the  latter
sufficiently  hard  to  give  to  cutting  imple-


ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES


135


ments  made  of  this  amalgam  a sharp  edge.
Before  this  discovery  cutting  implements
made  of  pure  copper  had  been  tried,  but  they
were  little  better  than  those  made  of  stone.
This  preliminary  metallic  stage — the  so-called
Copper  Age — was  not  of  long  duration.  It
was  otherwise  with  bronze,  as  its  superior
qualities  for  cutting  and  penetrating  purposes
became  at  once  apparent.  But  its  general
application  to  the  arts  and  industries  was  a
somewhat  slow  process,  especially  in  out-
lying districts,  such  as  Britain,  where  the
new  tools  and  implements  had,  in  the  first
instance,  to  be  imported  at  heavy  expense.
The  transition  from  a lower  stage  of  culture
to  a higher  one  involves  a series  of  minor
innovations  on  old  customs  and  mechanical
usages,  which  vary  in  the  course  of  time  in
different  countries.  Hence,  the  line  of  demar-
cation between  the  different  ages  is  not  sharply
defined,  the  result  of  which  is  that  many  of
the  stone  implements  formerly  in  use  sur-
vived in  out-of-the-way  districts  long  after
the  introduction  of  their  analogues  in  metal.

Man  is  not  unfrequently  defined  as  a tool-
maker,  a definition  which  has  the  advantage
of  placing  him  in  a category  which  excludes
all  other  animals.  In  virtue  of  this  monopoly
he  has  practically  discarded  the  natural  means
of  self-preservation,  with  which  Nature  en-
dowed him,  and  substituted  in  lieu  of  them
all  sorts  of  tools  and  appliances  manufactured
by  his  own  hands.  These  mechanical  in-
ventions, or  rather  such  of  them  as  have


136


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


reached  our  day,  are  now  of  inestimable  value
to  archaeologists,  as  they  disclose  the  technical
skill,  the  capacity  of  adapting  special  means
to  special  ends,  and  the  general  intelligence  of
their  respective  makers.

Implements. — The  objects  classified  as  imple-
ments include — axes,  adzes,  chisels,  hammers,
knives,  saws,  gouges,  scrapers,  grinding  and
polishing  stones,  domestic  appliances,  etc.

Axes  may  be  divided  into  two  groups,
according  as  they  have,  or  have  not,  a haft-
hole.  The  former  are  rarely  made  of  flint,
even  in  districts  where  this  material  is  abun-
dant, owing  to  the  difficulty  of  perforating  such
a hard  substance.  The  non-perforated  axes
have  a wedge  shape  with  one  cutting  edge
running  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  handle,
the  other  being  blunt  or  roughly  pointed.
Some,  however,  have  both  ends  brought  to
a cutting  edge.  As  a rule  they  have  polished
surfaces,  with  the  exception  of  those  made  of
flint,  which  are  generally  ground  only  at  the
cutting  edge.  The  members  of  this  group
vary  so  much  in  composition,  finish  and
dimensions  that  no  two  are  exactly  alike;
but  yet  many  of  them  have  so  many  points
of  resemblance  that  certain  types  are  recog-
nized as  peculiar  to  special  areas — a fact  no
doubt  due  to  prevailing  local  influences  and
customs.  It  is  marvellous  to  what  precision
experts  have  carried  the  art  of  assorting  these
implements  according  to  their  provenance.
In  Scandinavia,  owing  to  the  abundance  of
flint  in  certain  localities,  we  find  specimens


ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES


137


of  very  large  dimensions  made  of  this  material,
some  being  beautifully  chipped  and  others
finely  polished.  A few  specimens  found  in
Britain  assume  the  form  of  a modern  adze,
notably  one  from  Aberdeenshire.  It  is  made
of  grey  flint,  finely  polished,  and  finished  to
a curved  adze-like  edge  at  both  ends.  A
few  chisels  are  also  to  be  noted,  their  character-
istics being  a short  cutting  edge  and  a long
slender  body.

The  perforated  axes  are  worked  with  care,
being  nearly  all  polished,  and  sometimes
ornamented  with  linear  grooves  along  the
margins  of  the  perforated  surfaces.  They
are  for  the  most  part  made  of  metamorphic
or  volcanic  rocks,  and  vary  in  size  from  a few
inches  to  ten  or  eleven  inches.  They  may
have  a single  or  double  cutting  edge  running
parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  handle.  In  the
former  case  the  blunt  end  may  be  used  as  a
hammer,  and  then  the  implement  becomes
an  axe-hammer.  When  the  cutting  edge  is
at  right  angles  to  the  handle  the  implement
is  called  an  adze — a very  rare  form  in  Britain.

Knives,  saws  and  scrapers  are  all  made  of
flint  flakes  by  secondary  chipping,  and  assume
a great  variety  of  forms,  according  to  the
shape  of  the  flake.  Originally  the  knife-flake
and  the  saw  were  one  and  the  same,  but  their
specialization  into  separate  tools  dates  as  far
back  as  Palaeolithic  times,  as  we  find  saws
among  the  relics  of  the  reindeer  caves  of
France  and  the  rock-shelter  of  the  Schweizers-
bild  in  Switzerland.


138


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Among  remains  of  the  prehistoric  stone
industry  in  this  country  the  implement  most
largely  represented  is  the  scraper,  or  “ thumb
flint.”  It  generally  consists  of  a flake  having
the  thick  end  worked  into  a semicircular  edge
and  slanting  to  its  flat  face,  while  the  body,
or  “ neck,”  may  be  held  between  the  fingers.
But  sometimes  there  is  no  neck,  and  the
implement  may  be  of  a discoidal,  circular  or
horseshoe  shape.  Some  have  a concave  edge
and  are  known  as  “ hollow  scrapers,”  a type
of  implement  hitherto  found  more  frequently
in  Ireland  than  in  Britain.  The  tools  used
for  boring  have,  of  course,  a sharp  point,  but
otherwise  they  may  be  regarded  as  scrapers.

Of  all  the  materials  utilized  in  prehistoric
times,  flint  was  the  most  serviceable,  on
account  of  its  hardness,  and  the  facility  with
which  it  could  be  worked  into  any  required
shape  by  the  process  of  chipping.  Flint  is
only  found  in  situ  in  chalk  formations,  but
transported  nodules  of  it  are  frequently  met
with  in  glacial  drift  deposits  and  other  gravels.
It  has  been  proved  that  the  prehistoric  people
were  in  the  habit  of  procuring  a better  quality
by  mining  operations.  At  Grime’s  Graves,
near  Brandon,  in  Suffolk,  and  at  Cissbury,
near  Worthing,  in  Sussex,  the  disused  mines
have  been  discovered  and  investigated.  It
appears  that  shafts  had  been  driven  down  to
the  requisite  depth  from  which  narrow  galleries
were  run  in  all  directions.  In  the  former,  the
actual  deer-horn  picks  were  found  in  the
face  of  the  cutting,  just  as  the  miners  left


ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES


139


them,  and  the  marks  of  the  stone  axes  were
seen  on  the  walls  of  the  gallery.

Some  sensation  was  recently  created  at  a
meeting  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  (May  9,
1912),  by  Mr.  Reginald  Smith’s  paper  on
“ The  Date  of  Grime’s  Graves  and  Cissbury
Flint-mines,”  in  which  he  assigns  the  Cissbury
group  to  the  Palaeolithic  period,  chiefly  on
the  following  grounds:  “Certain  finds  in

stratified  deposits  both  here  and  abroad  serve
to  link  the  typical  Cissbury  celt  with  the
late  river-gravel  forms,  and  analogies  between
other  types  and  those  found  in  French  caves
suggest  placing  the  Cissbury  group  in  the
Aurignac  division  of  the  Palaeolithic  cave
period,  which,  at  any  rate  abroad,  was  followed
by  a deposit  of  loess.  Recent  finds  in  France
show  that  ‘ domesticated  ’ animals  existed
at  that  period ; and  the  absence  of  cold-
loving  animals  such  as  the  mammoth,  woolly
rhinoceros,  and  reindeer  may  perhaps  be
accounted  for  by  the  Gulf  Stream ; but  these
animals  are  also  unrepresented  on  several
important  French  sites.  If  the  above  view
can  be  maintained  there  can  be  no  hiatus
question.”  But  this  conclusion  would  follow
if  Mr.  Smith  had  assigned  the  Cissbury  imple-
ments to  the  transition  period  to  which  they
clearly  belong.

Another  class  of  implement,  the  use  of
which  is  unknown,  is  the  so-called  Shetland
knife.  A mere  glance  at  these  objects  shows
that  they  possess  certain  characteristics  which
place  them  in  a special  category  among


140


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


ancient  stone  implements.  They  are  large,
thin  blades,  made  of  volcanic  rock  known
as  rock-porphyry,  irregularly  oval  or  sub-
quadrangular  in  form,  and  highly  polished
on  both  surfaces,  with  the  entire  margin
ground  to  what  may  be  called  a cutting
edge.  Though  no  two  specimens  are  pre-
cisely alike,  there  is  a general,  indeed  a strik-
ing, resemblance  between  them  all ; and
only  in  one  instance  does  the  rates  between
their  long  and  short  diameters  go  beyond
six  to  four  inches.  Summarizing  the  details
of  the  various  discoveries  of  these  imple-
ments, I find  that  10  were  hoards,  each  con-
taining 4 to  16  specimens — 79  in  all.  The
total  number  at  present  known  may  be  stated
in  round  numbers  at  100,  thus  accounted  for  :
62  in  National  Museum,  Edinburgh;  30  in
Mr.  Cursiter’s  private  collection ; and  8 pre-
served in  museums  in  London  and  Copen-
hagen.

Weapons. — Objects  classified  under  the  cate-
gory of  weapons,  such  as  daggers,  spears,
javelins,  arrows,  etc.,  being  intended  to
pierce  the  body  of  an  animal,  resemble  each
other  in  having  a sharp  point ; but  otherwise
they  only  differ  in  size,  material  and  the
manner  in  which  they  were  used.  The
penetrating  portion  was  most  frequently
made  of  flint,  but  sometimes  short  daggers
were  made  of  bone  or  horn.

Arrow-points  may  be  divided  into  two
classes,  according  as  they  have,  or  have  not,
a tang  for  insertion  into  the  shaft,  the  latter


ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES  141


being  further  subdivided  according  as  the  form
resembles  a leaf,  a lozenge  or  a triangle — a
division  which  is  also  applicable  to  spear-heads.
The  workmanship  on  some  of  these  flint  objects
displays  marvellous  skill,  especially  in  the
execution  of  what  is  known  as  ripple-flaking.
Having  secured  the  tip,  the  warrior,  or  sports-
man, had  next  to  consider  how  it  could  be
best  attached  to  the  shaft  or  handle.  This
was  generally  effected  in  the  case  of  the
arrow  by  inserting  the  lower  end  of  the  flint
into  a slit  in  the  wood,  and  then  tying  it
with  a string.  Among  the  lake-dwellers  of
Switzerland  a kind  of  asphalt  was  used  to
keep  the  head  firmly  in  position.  It  is  per-
haps unnecessary  to  say  that  the  presence  of
arrow-points  implies  the  other  equipments
of  the  archer,  viz.  the  bow,  the  arrow-shaft,
the  quiver  and  the  wrist-bracer.  Of  the  three
former  articles  almost  nothing  has  survived
in  this  country,  owing  no  doubt  to  their
decay,  but  in  the  Swiss  lake-dwellings  several
specimens  of  the  bow  have  been  found.  One
from  Rohenhausen  was  made  of  yew,  about
five  feet  in  length,  and  showed  the  notch  for
the  string  at  both  ends.  The  wrist-bracer,
being  made  of  stone,  and  therefore  not  liable
to  decay,  has  been  found  in  several  localities
in  this  country,  generally  among  the  contents
of  graves.  The  few  objects  that  may  be  classi-
fied as  spear-  or  javelin-heads  differ  from
arrow-heads  only  in  being  a little  larger,  but
seldom  exceeding  three  inches  in  length.
Among  weapons  may  be  noticed  the  so-called


142


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


sling-stone,  which  may  be  a smooth  pebble
from  the  brook,  or  a flint  nodule  roughly
chipped  into  a lenticular,  discoidal,  or  globular
shape.  Hundreds  of  ovate  pellets  of  clay,
generally  of  the  size  of  a pigeon’s  egg,  burnt
and  unburnt,  have  been  found  on  the  site
of  the  lake-village  of  Glastonbury,  and  are
regarded  as  sling-bolts,  or  perhaps  fire-bolts.
Similar  clay  pellets  have  been  dug  up  on  the
site  of  Ardoch  Camp  associated  with  Roman
pottery  and  other  Roman  remains.

In  summing  up  a critical  review  of  the
different  theories  held  in  regard  to  the  re-
markable series  of  ornamental  stone  balls
found  in  Scotland — and  only  in  Scotland —
I came  to  the  conclusion  that  their  chrono-
logical range  extended  from  the  end  of  the
Stone  Age  down  to  the  end  of  Paganism
in  Britain.  Their  geographical  distribution
seems  to  me  to  have  an  ethnographical
significance.  Thus  of  111  specimens  dealt  with,
no  fewer  than  56  were  traced  to  Aberdeen-
shire, and  the  rest  to  the  eastern  districts  of
Scotland,  chiefly  north  of  the  Firth  of  Forth
— the  exceptions  being  three  from  Lanark-
shire, two  from  the  counties  of  Dumfries,
Argyll  and  Wigtown,  one  from  Islay,  and  one
from  Ireland.  Now  the  Scottish  area  thus
defined  strikingly  coincides  with  what  we
know  of  the  home  of  that  most  obscure  of  all
the  people  who  formerly  inhabited  North
Britain,  viz.  the  Piets  or  Caledonians.

Dress  and  Ornament. — We  have  no  know-
ledge of  any  phase  of  humanity  in  which  the


ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES


143


love  of  personal  ornament  does  not  play  an
important  part  in  the  life  of  the  individual.
The  savage  of  the  present  day,  who  paints,
or  tattoos,  his  body  and  adorns  it  with  shells,
feathers,  teeth  and  trinkets  made  of  the  more
gaudy  materials  at  his  disposal,  may  be
accepted  as  on  a parallel  with  the  Neolithic
people  of  Europe.  The  ornaments  of  the
latter  consisted  chiefly  of  beads,  pendants,
rings,  bracelets,  necklaces,  etc.,  made  of  jet,
amber,  bone,  horn,  teeth,  etc.  Few  of  such
relics  have,  however,  been  found  in  Britain
that  can  be  identified  as  belonging  exclusively
to  them.  Teeth  are  often  perforated  and  used
as  pendants,  especially  the  canines  of  carni-
vorous animals,  but  such  ornaments  are  not
peculiar  to  Neolithic  times,  as  they  were
equally  prevalent  among  the  later  Palaeolithic
races  of  Europe.  Buttons  made  of  jet,
amber,  ivory  or  stone  are  not  uncommon
among  the  contents  of  ancient  graves.  They
are  more  or  less  conical  on  the  upper  surface
and  flat  beneath,  with  a curved  V-shaped
tunnel,  both  ends  of  which  open  on  the  under
surface.  But  perhaps  the  earliest  of  all
methods  of  fastening  garments  was  the
simple  bone  pin.  Then  came  an  elongated
piece  of  wood,  bone  or  horn,  with  a groove
cut  round  its  middle  for  retaining  the  string
which  fastened  it  to  the  cloth  or  skin  garment.

Of  the  more  perishable  works  of  the  early
inhabitants  of  Britain  very  little  has  reached
our  day.  Of  the  spinning  industry  the
spindle-whorl  alone  remains  as  evidence.


144


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


but  as  it  has  also  been  used  in  all  subsequent
ages,  even  up  to  the  present  time,  it  possesses
no  chronological  value.  Portions  of  woollen
cloth  of  four  or  five  different  textures  are
said  to  have  been  found  in  a cist  at  Greenigoe,
parish  of  Ophir,  Orkney,  along  with  two
beads,  one  of  amber  and  the  other  of  an
opaque  vitreous  paste.  Also  Canon  Green-
well  has  recorded  the  occasional  finding  of
remains  of  woollen  and  leather  garments  in
British  barrows,  as,  for  example,  in  a coffin
made  out  of  a hollow  oak  trunk,  found  in
a barrow  at  Scale  House,  Craven.  For  a
notice  of  this  coffin,  and  similar  tree-coffins
recorded  from  England  and  Denmark,  I would
refer  readers  to  British  Barrows,  pp.  375-7.

Of  the  pottery  used  for  domestic  purposes
we  know  very  little.  According  to  Canon
Greenwell,  “ the  pottery  which  has  been
discovered  on  the  site  of  dwelling-places  is
a dark-coloured,  hard-baked,  perfectly  plain
ware,  without  ornament  of  any  kind,  is,  in
fact,  just  what  we  would  expect  domestic
pottery  to  be,  and  has  nothing  in  which  it
resembles  the  sepulchral  vessels.  And  more
than  this,  as  far  as  I know  of  my  own  experi-
ence or  can  learn  from  that  of  others,  no
whole  vessel,  or  even  fragments,  of  the  ordinary
sepulchral  pottery  of  the  barrows  or  other
places  of  sepulchre  has  ever  been  met  with
in  connection  with  places  of  habitation.”
Sepulchral  pottery  will  be  discussed  later  on
in  the  chapter  dealing  with  memorials  of  the
dead.


ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES


145


The  Bronze  Age

The  introduction  of  bronze  into  the  arts
and  industries  of  the  Stone  Age  people  of
Europe  speedily  revolutionized  their  whole
system  of  social  economy.  Not  only  had  all
the  primitive  implements  and  weapons  to  be
remodelled  in  accordance  with  the  principles
of  a metallic  regime,  but  new  industries  and
higher  artistic  aspirations  were  engendered
which,  by  degrees,  greatly  modified  the
commercial  and  social  aspects  of  life.

That  bronze  objects  first  found  their  way
into  Britain  in  the  form  of  cutting  implements
and  weapons  imported  from  abroad  there
can  be  little  doubt,  as  the  oldest  metallic
specimens  found  in  graves  were  made  of  the
best  quality  of  bronze,  viz.  10  per  cent,  of  tin
to  90  per  cent,  of  copper.  Now,  since  a know-
ledge of  this  compound  implies  a previous
acquaintance  with  its  component  elements,
it  follows  that  progress  in  metallurgy  had
already  reached  the  stage  of  knowing  the
best  combination  of  these  metals  for  the
manufacture  of  cutting  tools  before  bronze
was  practically  known  in  Britain.  That  this
skill  in  the  working  of  metals  had  not  been
acquired  by  the  ancient  nations  on  the
shores  of  the  Mediterranean  without  long
experience  of  the  qualities  of  copper  and  tin,
and  of  the  various  methods  of  hardening  the
former,  was  demonstrated  by  the  late  Dr.
Gladstone,  F.R.S.,  at  the  meeting  of  the
British  Association  held  at  Liverpool  in  1896.

K


146


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


In  a paper  on  “ The  Transition  from  Pure
Copper  to  Bronze  made  with  Tin,”  he  writes
as  follows  : “ The  use  of  copper  in  Egypt  can
be  traced  from  the  Fourth  Dynasty,  when
King  Seneferu  captured  the  copper  and
turquoise  mines  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula.
Tools  made  of  this  metal  have  been  found
not  only  in  Egypt,  belonging  to  the  Fourth,
Sixth  and  Twelfth  Dynasties,  but  also  in
Assyria,  at  Lachish  in  Palestine,  Hissarlick
in  Asia  Minor,  and  Naqada.  Attempts
were  tnade  to  render  this  copper  harder  and
stronger,  and  that  in  three  ways.  First,  the
admixture  of  a large  quantity  of  suboxide  of
copper  or  of  its  formation  in  the  process  of
smelting,  as  seen  in  adzes  from  Egypt  and
Palestine,  and  perhaps  Naqada.  Second,
the  presence  of  a little  arsenic  or  antimony,
as  shown  in  many  tools  from  Kahun  dating
from  the  Twelfth  Dynasty,  and  from  the
Sinaitic  mines,  as  shown  in  a communication
to  the  French  Academy  by  Berthelot  a few
weeks  since.  Third,  the  admixture  of  a little
tin,  as  at  Kahun,  the  Sinaitic  mines,  and
Cyprus,  perhaps  not  exceeding  one  per  cent.
When,  however,  the  superiority  of  tin,  as  the
hardening  material,  came  to  be  acknowledged,
it  was  added  in  larger  quantities  and  formed
the  alloy  known  as  bronze.  Such  proportions
as  4 and  6 per  cent,  occur  in  early  specimens,
as  at  Hissarlick,  but  subsequently  about
10  per  cent,  was  usually  employed.  Tools  of
this  composition  are  found  not  only  in  Egypt
during  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty,  but  in  most


N


ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES


147


countries,  and  for  an  immense  variety  of
purposes.”

As  soon  as  the  metallurgic  art  had  taken
root  among  the  prehistoric  people  of  Europe
each  country  began  to  manufacture  its
own  bronze  objects,  modelling  them,  in  the
first  instance,  after  their  analogues  in  stone,
or  imported  metal  specimens.  Such  a deriva-
tive connection  can  be  traced  not  only  be-
tween the  flat  bronze  axe  and  the  stone  celt,
but  also  between  most  of  the  other  bronze
implements  and  weapons  and  their  prototypes
in  non-metallic  materials.  The  original  safety-
pin  occupies  an  intermediate  stage  between  the
primitive  bone  or  bronze  pin  and  the  highly
ornamented  brooches,  which  were  in  use  among
the  Celts,  Saxons  and  Scandinavians.  Such
evolutionary  connections  are  often  obscure,
until  all  the  intermediate  links  of  a series  are
exhibited  side  by  side.

In  describing  briefly  the  Bronze  Age  relics
we  must  not  fall  into  the  common  error  of
supposing  that  we  are  dealing  with  a brand
new  civilization.  The  social  organizations
already  founded  by  the  Stone  Age  people  are
simply  continued,  but  carried  out  with  greater
efficiencjq  in  consequence  of  the  substitution
of  bronze  in  their  cutting  and  penetrating
tools  for  the  less  effective  materials  formerly
used.

Implements. — The  division  of  axes  into
flat,  flanged,  winged  and  socketed,  not  only
sufficiently  defines  these  forms,  so  far  as  any
classification  is  necessary,  but  also  indicates


148


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


the  chronological  order  of  their  development.
The  flat  celt,  a mere  copy  of  the  stone  axes,
was  the  first  to  spread  over  Europe,  and  it
is  the  type  of  implement  most  commonly
met  with  in  the  British  Isles.  The  first
alteration  made  was  to  raise  a flange  on
each  side,  probably  to  improve  the  manner
of  hafting;  then  these  flanges  became  larger
and  curved  inwards  until  the  two  nearly  met,
thus  forming  two  imperfect  sockets,  one  on
each  side.  Coincident  with  these  changes  a
stop-ridge  appears  between  the  flanges,  and
a loop  on  the  outside  margin  on  one  side,  the
object  of  which  was  to  fasten  it  to  the  handle
more  securely.  Finally  we  have  the  single
socket,  but  still  retaining  the  outside  loop,
which  is  the  culmination  of  all  previous
efforts  for  the  better  adjustment  of  the
implement  to  its  handle.

The  objects  described  by  Sir  John  Evans
under  the  category  of  knives  are  dagger-like
blades,  with  a socket  for  the  insertion  of  a
handle.  Specimens  of  these  implements  are
rare  in  Scotland,  more  frequently  met  with
in  England,  and  fairly  abundant  in  Ireland.
The  almost  entire  absence  of  the  typical
knife-blade  within  the  British  Isles  is  in
striking  contrast  to  what  we  find  on  the
Continent,  especially  among  the  relics  of  the
Swiss  lake-dwellings.  There  the  knives  are
large  one-edged  blades  and  extremely  elegant
in  form,  being  always  more  or  less  curved,
and  frequently  ornamented  with  parallel  or
wavy  lines,  concentric  circles,  dots,  etc.  They


ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES


149


were  hafted  either  by  a tang  or  socket,  unless,
as  it  sometimes  happened,  the  blade  and
handle  were  cast  as  one  piece.

Chisels  and  gouges  are  generally  socketed
or  tanged,  and  differ  from  the  axes  only  in
being  more  slender.  A few  specimens  of
bronze  hammers  have  been  recorded  from
England  and  Ireland,  all  of  which  have  a
socket  at  one  end.  On  the  site  of  the  lake-
dwelling of  Wollishofen,  near  Zurich,  six
hammers  of  this  type  were  among  the  remains
dredged  up.

One  of  the  most  noteworthy  facts  in  con-
nection with  the  Bronze  Age  in  Britain  is,
that  neither  knives,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the
word,  nor  saws  of  bronze  have  as  yet  been
discovered  among  its  antiquarian  remains.
The  small  hand-dagger  with  riveted  handle,
found  occasionally  in  graves,  may  have
served  the  purposes  of  a knife.

I am  not  aware  that  a bronze  saw  has  yet
been  discovered  within  the  British  Isles,  but
flint  saws  are  abundantly  met  with  in  the
Bronze  Age  and  even  in  the  early  Iron  Age.

Sickles  have  been  collected  in  considerable
numbers  both  in  Britain  and  Ireland.  They
are  all  socketed,  with  the  exception  of  one
or  two  specimens  from  Somersetshire,  which
appear  to  have  been  imported,  as  they  belong
to  continental  types.

A series  of  implements  supposed  to  be
razors  have  also  been  discovered  within  the
British  area,  generally  associated  with  burials.
They  are  roughly  oval,  often  highly  orna-


150


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


mented  with  geometrical  patterns,  and  present
either  a single  or  double  cutting  edge.  All
the  Scottish  examples  are  tanged,  writh  the
exception  of  one  which  has  a loop  at  the  end
of  a stem  and  semicircular  edges.  The
British  specimens  have  all  a strong  family
likeness,  but  do  not  differ  materially  from  the
continental  specimens,  as  represented  in  the
lake-dwellings  and  Terremare  of  Italy.  (For
continental  forms  see  Prehistoric  Scotland,
PI.  I,  p.  190.)

Weapons. — Bronze  daggers  are  usually  of
two  kinds  : (1)  those  with  a thin,  flat,  tri-
angular or  oval  blade,  generally  known  as
knife-daggers;  and  (2)  those  with  a blade
larger  and  heavier  than  the  former  and  having
a thick  midrib.  As  a rule  both  varieties  are
hafted  by  rivets  to  a wooden  or  horn  handle ;
but  there  are  a few  exceptions  in  which  a
tang  takes  the  place  of  rivets.

Another  class  of  weapon,  sparingly  found
in  Britain,  but  frequently  in  Ireland,  is  that
which  Sir  W.  Wilde  calls  the  “ broad  scythe-
shaped  sword.”  It  differs  from  the  dagger
in  having  the  two  edges  unsymmetrical,  and
also  in  being  attached  at  a right  angle  to  the
shaft,  which  gives  it  the  appearance  of  a
scythe.  Such  weapons  are  supposed  to  be
battle-axes,  and  may,  therefore,  be  classified
with  the  mace,  which  is  used  for  hand-to-hand
encounters.

Spear-heads  are,  perhaps,  the  most  abun-
dant weapons  among  the  relics  of  the  Bronze
Age  in  all  countries.  In  Britain  they  are,


ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES  151


almost  without  exception,  socketed,  and
gracefully  proportioned,  but  variable  as  re-
gards dimensions.

The  bronze  swords  found  in  Britain  are
nearly  all  leaf-shaped  blades,  with  sharp
points  and  a flat  projection  at  the  hilt  con-
taining several  rivet-holes,  by  means  of  which
plates  of  bone,  horn  or  wood  were  attached
on  each  side  so  as  to  form  the  handle.  These
weapons  had  no  guard;  and  although  both
edges  were  hammered  out  thin  and  sharpened
by  grinding-stones,  they  appear  to  have  been
better  adapted  for  thrusting  than  for  parrying
or  striking.  There  is  another  rapier-shaped
blade  occasionally  met  with,  the  peculiarity
of  which  is  that  it  has  no  projection  of  the
metal  into  the  entire  body  of  the  perishable
handle,  but  merely  a flattened  base  to  which
the  handle  was  attached  by  rivets,  like  the
knife-daggers.

The  most  common  type  of  shield  found  in
the  British  Isles  consisted  of  a circular  plate
of  thin  bronze,  having  a central  boss  3^  to
4£  inches  in  diameter,  surrounded  by  a series
of  concentric  raised  rings,  with  circles  of  small
studs  in  repouss£  work  between  each.

Sir  John  Evans  makes  the  following  obser-
vations on  the  chronology  of  British  shields  :
“ The  shields  first  in  use  in  Britain  were
probably  formed  of  perishable  material,  such
as  wicker-work,  wood,  or  hide,  like  those  of
many  savage  tribes  of  the  present  day ; and
it  can  only  have  been  after  a long  acquaint-
ance with  the  use  of  bronze  that  plates  could


152


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


have  been  produced  of  such  size  as  those  with
which  some  of  the  ancient  shields  and  bucklers
found  in  this  country  were  covered.  They
would  appear,  therefore,  to  belong  to  quite
the  close  of  the  Bronze  Age,  if  not  to  the
transitional  period  when  iron  was  coming  into
use.  There  are,  indeed,  several  bronze  cover-
ings of  shields  of  elongated  form,  such  as
those  from  the  rivers  Witham  and  from  the
Thames,  with  decorations  upon  them,  in
which  red  enamel  plays  a part,  that  have  been
found  associated  with  the  iron  swords  of
what  Mr.  Franks  has  termed  the  Late  Celtic
Period.  Those,  however,  which  appear  to
have  a better  claim  to  a place  in  these  pages
are  of  a circular  form.”  ( Bronze  Implements ,
etc.,  p.  343.)

The  use  of  war-trumpets  among  Celtic
races  has  been  often  referred  to  by  classical
writers,  but  only  a few  instruments  which
can  be  classed  in  this  category  have  been
found  in  Britain.  In  Ireland  they  are
more  numerous.  They  w'ere  made  either  in
a solid  casting  of  bronze,  or  in  sections  by
riveting  tubes  of  sheet  metal  together.  They
are  classified  into  two  varieties  according  as
the  aperture  for  blowing  the  trumpet  was
at  the  end  or  side.

Ornaments. — The  knowledge  of  the  work-
ing of  bronze  gave  a great  impetus  to  the
development  of  personal  ornaments  and  toilet
trinkets.  Being  an  attractive  metal  to  the
eye,  it  was  readily  seized  upon  for  the  manu-
facture of  armlets,  necklaces,  diadems,  rings,


ARTS  AND  INDUSTRIES


153


pendants,  ear-rings,  buttons,  ornamented  pins,
fibulae,  etc.  Most  of  these  objects  belong  also
to  the  early  Iron  Age,  as  personal  ornaments
were  very  scarce  in  the  Bronze  Age.

Art  of  the  Bronze  Age. — The  elements  of
decoration  used  in  the  Bronze  Age,  as  dis-
closed on  objects  of  metal,  bone,  jet  and
pottery,  consisted  of  a combination  of  incised
or  dotted  lines  arranged  in  herring-bone,
chevron,  saltire,  cross  and  other  rectilinear
patterns,  so  as  to  produce  a variety  of  geo-
metrical figures.  Circles,  spirals  and  curved
lines  also  occur,  but  they  are  generally  confined
to  stone-work  in  the  British  Isles.

With  regard  to  sepulchral  pottery,  it  may
be  observed  that  in  addition  to  incisions
made  in  the  soft  clay  by  means  of  small  bone
instruments,  impressions  were  often  made  by
stamps.  From  an  inspection  of  the  decorated
urns  it  will  be  observed  that  various  kinds  of
stamps  were  used  by  the  potters  of  the  period,
such  as  a piece  of  wood  or  bone  worked  into
dots,  small  triangles,  squares,  etc.,  the  teeth
of  a comb,  twisted  thread  in  two  or  three  plies,
the  finger-nail,  etc.  The  different  patterns
thus  made  were  generally  arranged  in  hori-
zontal bands  round  the  body  of  the  vessel,
especially  on  its  upper  and  middle  parts,  in
such  a variety  of  ways  that  no  two  vessels
precisely  alike  have  ever  been  found.  A few
socketed  celts  have  been  recorded  from
several  localities.  These  are  decorated  with
concentric  circles  in  relief,  the  incised  pattern
being  in  the  mould.  But  otherwise  neither


154  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


incised  circles  nor  spirals  are  to  be  seen  on
■metal-work  in  this  country — presenting  in
this  respect  a marked  contrast  to  the  bronze
relics  of  the  Scandinavian  archaeological  area.

Of  archaic  sculpturing  on  stones  and  solid
rock-surfaces  in  the  form  of  cups,  cup-and-
rings,  concentric  circles,  spirals  and  irregular
geometrical  figures,  there  is  no  lack  of  speci-
mens in  North  Britain  and  Ireland ; but
although  much  has  been  written  on  the  sub-
ject, none  of  the  theories  purporting  to  explain
their  meaning  has  met  with  general  acceptance.

On  analyzing  the  various  decorative  ele-
ments in  these  lapidary  sculpturings  they
readily  fall  to  be  classified  as  follows  :
(1)  Simple  cups;  (2)  cup-and-rings ; (3)  cup-
and-rings  interrupted  by  gutter  channels ;
(4)  concentric  circles ; (5)  semi-concentric

circles;  (6)  spirals;  (7)  stars,  wheels  and
enclosed  spaces;  (8)  zigzag,  wavy  or  parallel
lines.

Cups  vary  greatly  in  size,  from  about  one
to  several  inches  in  diameter,  and  from  half-
an-inch  to  about  an  inch  and  a half  in  depth.
They  occur  sometimes  singly,  but  generally
in  groups — often  forming  the  only  ornament
on  a stone — and  occasionally  in  combination
with  some  of  the  other  forms  above  defined.
Simple  cups  have  a wide  distribution  in
Western  Europe,  comprising  the  Iberian
peninsula,  the  British  Isles,  Denmark,  Sweden,
Germany,  Austria,  Switzerland  and  France.

Rings  are  not  so  deeply  cut  as  cups,  and
they  may  be  either  complete  circles,  or  inter-


EARLY  IRON  AGE


155


rupted  by  grooves  running  from  the  centre
to  some  distance  beyond  the  outer  circle.  It  is
noteworthy  that  the  cup-and-rings  with  gutter
channels  have  not  been  found  outside  the
British  Isles.

The  distribution  of  spirals,  which  is  remark-
able in  many  ways,  has  lately  attracted  much
attention  throughout  Europe.  The  great  de-
velopment of  this  ornament  in  Mycenae  is  now
generally  accepted  by  archaeologists  as  the
result  of  direct  intercourse  between  Crete,
Egypt  and  the  shores  and  islands  of  the
Aegean  Sea,  during  the  Eighteenth  Dynasty
(1580-1320  b.c.).  From  these  regions  there  is
reason  to  believe  that  it  spread  into  Europe
by  the  Danube  route.  That  this  was  the
route  by  which  the  spiral  ornament  reached
Bavaria,  North  Germany  and  Scandinavia,
is  proved  by  the  fact  that  it  is  not  found  as  an
ornament  on  the  bronze  remains  of  North
Italy,  France  and  Britain.


CHAPTER  VII

EARLY  IRON  AGE HALLSTATT LA  TENE

LATE  CELTIC

The  art  of  making  bronze  was  probably
an  Egyptian  invention,  but  its  introduction
into  Britain  was,  in  the  first  instance,  in  the
form  of  finished  objects  of  the  earliest  types,
such  as  the  small  hand- daggers,  awls,  pins,


156


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


etc.,  which  found  their  way  almost  simul-
taneously into  the  other  European  countries.
But  by-and-by  these  different  nationalities
began  to  manufacture  bronze  objects  them-
selves, as  is  proved  by  the  discovery  of  the
moulds  in  which  the  various  articles  were
cast.  Hence,  in  the  course  of  time,  a
great  development  in  the  bronze  industry
took  place,  especially  in  countries  at  some
distance  from  the  Adriatic,  such  as  Hungary,
Switzerland,  North  Germany,  Scandinavia
and  the  British  Isles.  On  the  other  hand,
in  Greece,  Italy,  South  Austria  and  the
valley  of  the  Rhone,  the  bronze  industry  was
cut  short  by  the  discovery  of  another  metal,
viz.  iron,  which  gradually  supplanted  bronze
in  the  manufacture  of  cutting  implements.
Although  iron  was  known  in  Egypt  about
1500  b.c.  it  was  not  utilized  to  any  great
extent  for  industrial  purposes  in  Europe  till
about  the  ninth  century  b.c.,  by  which  time
the  Greeks,  Italians,  Etruscans,  Illyrians  and
Phoenicians  were  settling  down  in  their  historic
homes.  No  iron  objects  occur  among  the
relics  from  the  prehistoric  cities  of  Trov,
Tiryns  and  Mycenae.

During  the  initiatory  stages  of  the  competi-
tion between  iron  and  bronze  it  is  probable
that  the  result  of  the  struggle  depended  on
the  comparative  expense  of  the  production
of  the  respective  metals,  the  former  being
possibly  the  dearer  of  the  two.  It  cannot,
however,  be  supposed  that,  in  the  face  of  the
abundance  and  wide  distribution  of  iron  ores,


EARLY  IRON  AGE


157


the  economic  problem  would  have  long  stood
in  the  way  had  there  been  no  other  difficulty
to  be  surmounted.  It  seems  to  me  that  the
real  hindrance  to  the  adoption  of  iron  in
the  manufacture  of  cutting  implements  was
the  softness  of  the  metal  itself,  as,  until  the
method  of  tempering  it,  by  suddenly  plunging
it  when  heated  into  cold  water,  became  known,
tools  and  weapons  made  of  it  would  be
actually  inferior  to  those  of  bronze.  Poly-
bius (Book  II,  c.  33)  incidentally  records  a
striking  instance  of  the  comparative  useless-
ness of  untempered  blades.  In  describing
the  victory  of  Flaminius  over  the  Insubres,
inhabiting  Cisalpine  Gaul,  he  informs  us  that
the  Romans  are  thought  to  have  shown  un-
common skill  in  this  battle  by  instructing
their  troops  how  they  were  to  conduct  them-
selves. Having  learned  that  the  Gallic  tribes
could  only  give  one  downward  cut  with  their
long  pointless  swords  (as  after  this  the  edges
got  so  turned  and  the  blade  so  bent  that  unless
they  had  time  to  straighten  them  with  the
foot  against  the  ground  they  could  not  deliver
a second  blow),  the  Roman  soldiers  were  in-
structed to  meet  the  first  onset  of  the  Celts  with
their  spears  and  then  use  their  swords.  The
result  was  that,  “ when  the  Celts  had  rendered
their  swords  useless  by  the  first  blows  delivered
on  the  spears,  the  Romans  closed  with  them
and  rendered  them  quite  helpless  by  preventing
them  from  raising  their  hands  to  strike  with
their  swords,  which  is  their  peculiar  and  only
stroke,  because  their  blade  has  no  point.


158


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


The  Romans,  on  the  contrary,  having  excellent
points  to  their  swords,  used  them  not  to  cut
but  to  thrust ; and  by  thus  repeatedly  hitting
the  breasts  and  faces  of  the  enemy,  they
eventually  killed  the  greater  number  of  them.”

Those  who  deny  the  existence  of  a Bronze
Age,  as  distinct  from  that  of  Iron,  are  in  the
habit  of  accounting  for  the  entire  absence  of
iron  relics  in  graves  and  early  habitations  by
the  theory  that  they  have  disappeared  in
consequence  of  the  natural  law  of  decomposi-
tion, it  being  well  known  that  iron  is  more
liable  to  oxidation  than  copper  or  bronze.
But  this  is  not  an  adequate  explanation  of
the  facts,  as  there  are  many  natural  conditions
in  which  iron  may  for  a long  time  resist  atmo-
spheric action.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that
steel  implements,  in  such  a dry  climate  as
that  of  Egypt,  could  have  been  in  use  from
the  earliest  times  without  having  left  some
traces  of  their  existence.

Whatever  may  have  been  the  causes  which
kept  this  useful  metal  so  long  in  the  back-
ground, there  are  indications  that  on  its  first
introduction  into  European  civilization  it
was  a scarce  commodity,  and  only  used  in
small  encrusted  bands  to  decorate  bronze
objects.  It  was  thus  occasionally  used  among
the  Swiss  lake-dwellers  at  the  stations  of
Moeringen,  Cortaillod,  Auvernier  and  Corce-
lettes,  to  ornament  bronze  swords  and  brace-
lets. From  these  considerations  it  is  evident
that  the  mere  knowledge  of  iron  as  a metal
is  not  to  be  regarded  as  contemporaneous


EARLY  IRON  AGE


159


with  its  general  introduction  into  the  arts  and
industries  of  human  civilization.

During  the  Homeric  Age  iron  was  known  in
Greece  as  a rare  and  expensive  commodity,
but  in  the  time  of  Hesiod  it  came  largely  into
general  use,  as  we  find  this  author  assigning
to  Hercules,  besides  armour  of  gold  and
greaves  of  bronze,  a helmet  of  steel  and  a
sword  of  iron;  and  to  Saturn  a steel  reaping-
hook  ( Ilios , p.  252).  As  the  knowledge  of
the  new  metal  slowly  spread  to  the  outlying
districts  in  the  north  and  west  of  Europe,
partly  through  commerce  and  partly  through
immigrants,  and  probably  through  warlike
expeditions,  it  is  but  natural  to  expect  that
antiquarian  remains  of  the  period  found  in
Central  Europe  wrould  disclose  the  metallurgical
changes  which  had  been  effected  in  conse-
quence of  the  substitution  of  iron  for  bronze
in  their  manufacture.  On  this  score  archae-
ologists have  not  been  disappointed.  Two
localities  in  particular  have  been  discovered
which  have  yielded  relics  so  instructive  and
characteristic  of  this  transition  stage  that
their  names  are  now  universally  used  not  only
as  generic  expressions  for  the  civilizations
they  respectively  represent,  but  also  as  stan-
dards of  comparison  for  contemporary  anti-
quities. These  are  the  cemetery  of  Hallstatt,
in  Austria,  and  the  Oppidum  La  Tene,  in
Switzerland.  Antiquities  similar  to  those
found  in  both  these  stations  due  to  the
same  primary  influences,  had  a wide  area  of
distribution,  extending  broadly  from  North


160


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Italy  and  the  Balkan  peninsula  to  the  British
Isles ; so  that  archaeologists,  who  wish  to  study
the  development  of  the  Iron  Age  anywhere
within  these  limits,  have  to  drink  from  the
same  fountain-head.  I propose,  therefore,  to
give  a short  description  of  a few  of  the  most
characteristic  remains  discovered  on  these
two  remarkable  stations,  noticing  at  the  same
time  some  of  the  analogous  remains  found
elsewhere  by  way  of  defining  their  respective
areas  of  distribution.

The  Hallstatt  Civilization. — The  ancient
necropolis  known  as  Hallstatt  lies  in  a narrow
glen  in  the  Noric  Alps,  about  an  hour’s  walk
from  the  town  of  Hallstatt.  Discovered  in
1846,  and  systematically  explored  for  several
years  under  the  superintendence  of  Berg-
meister  G.  Ramsauer,  the  results  were  pub-
lished by  Baron  von  Sacken  in  1868,  in  a
quarto  volume  with  twenty-six  plates  of
illustrations.

One  of  the  peculiarities  of  this  cemetery
was  that  it  contained  burials  by  inhumation
and  incineration  indiscriminately  dispersed
over  its  entire  area,  both  belonging  to  the
same  period,  as  was  clearly  proved  from  the
perfect  similarity  of  their  respective  grave-
goods.  The  graves  were  thickly  placed  over
an  irregular  area,  some  200  yards  in  length
and  about  half  that  in  breadth,  but  there
were  no  indications  above  ground  to  mark
their  position.

Baron  von  Sacken  thus  describes  and  classi-
fies the  grave-goods  :


1IALLSTATT


161


1.  Armour. — Swords,  daggers,  lances,  arrow-
points,  battle-axes,  helmets  and  shields.

2.  Ornaments  and  Dress. — Girdles,  pendants,
fibulae,  clasps,  pins,  bracelets,  finger-rings,
ear-rings,  hair-rings,  spirals,  chains,  beads  of
gold,  amber  and  bronze,  buttons,  various
ornamented  mountings,  amulets  and  symbols.

3.  Utensils. — Knives,  files,  anvils,  forceps,
fish-hooks,  needles,  bodkins,  nails,  whetstones,
and  polishing  stones.

4.  Vessels. — Caldrons,  urns,  cups  and  ladles
of  bronze;  pots,  cups  and  plates  of  earthen-
ware, and  a few  vessels  of  glass.

5.  Diverse  Objects. — Worked  stones,  clay
discs,  lumps  of  bronze  and  slag,  shells,  bones
of  animals,  etc.

Many  of  the  weapons  though  made  of  iron
retained  Bronze  Age  forms,  but  all  the  arrow-
points  were  of  bronze,  most  of  them  with
wings  and  a few  triangularly  shaped.  Arms
of  defence,  such  as  helmets  and  shields,  were
very  rare,  only  two  of  the  former,  one  with  a
double  crest  and  the  other  plain,  having  been
found.  Of  shields  there  were  only  a few
fragments  of  conical  bosses.  The  swords  and
daggers  had  sheaths  made  of  beaten  bronze,
or  of  wood  bound  with  bronze  bands,  which
were  more  or  less  ornamented.  Some  of  the
iron  swords  were  of  a novel  character.  The
blade  of  the  most  remarkable  weapon  was
double-edged,  nearly  three  feet  in  length,
almost  of  uniform  breadth  throughout  its
whole  length,  and  ended  abruptly  in  a point
with  two  short  slanting  edges.  It  was  riveted

L


162


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


to  a handle  of  bone  encrusted  with  ivory  or
amber,  and  terminated  in  a gilded  pommel
of  large  dimensions.  Of  nine  specimens,
eight  were  in  graves  containing  cremated
bodies,  and  associated  with  them  were  one  or
more  bronze  vases.  Other  swords,  some  of
iron  and  some  of  bronze,  especially  the  latter,
were  not  unlike  the  leaf-shaped  bronze  blades
so  common  in  the  British  Isles  towards  the
end  of  the  Bronze  Age.  There  were  also  iron
daggers,  with  handles  of  bronze  terminating
at  the  hilt  in  two  horn-like  projections,  and
knife-like  blades  of  unusual  size,  not  unlike
a butcher’s  cleaver.  The  spear-heads  were
all  socketed  and  mostly  made  of  iron.  Like
the  swords  they  show  a combination  of  Bronze
Age  types  together  with  a few  new  patterns,
some  of  which  closely  resembled  forms  pre-
valent in  La  Tene.

Among  articles  of  dress,  fibulae  were  con-
spicuous both  as  regards  numbers  and  variety
of  form.  Some  were  adorned  with  amber
beads,  and  others  had  attached  to  them  by
chains  a number  of  pendants  in  the  shape  of
discs,  crosses,  wheels,  miniature  axes,  and
various  kinds  of  animals  reminding  one  of
ducks  or  swans.  The  spiral  fibula,  with  two
or  four  discs,  goes  under  the  name  of  the
“ Hallstatt  fibula,”  as  it  is  seldom  met  with
in  North  Italy,  although  common  south  of
the  Apennines.  Bracelets — solid,  hollow,  or
in  bands  with  or  without  knobs — were  very
common.  One  found  in  a Yorkshire  barrow,
at  Cowlam,  and  figured  by  Canon  Greenwell


HALLSTATT


163


( British  Barrows , p.  210)  is  almost  a facsimile
of  some  of  the  Hallstatt  types.

But  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  objects
were  the  mountings  of  some  girdle  bands  and
a number  of  large  vessels  made  of  bronze.  The
latter  were  adorned  with  geometrical  patterns,
animal,  figures,  either  engraved  or  in  repousse
work,  involving  a great  variety  of  art  ele-
ments— points,  zigzag  lines,  concentric  circles,
spirals,  triangles,  crosses,  stars,  wheels,  as
well  as  the  forms  of  plants,  beasts  and  human
beings.  Some  of  the  vessels  had  round  bot-
toms and  others  were  like  pails  ( situlce ),  either
cylindrical  or  bulging  upwards,  and  again
contracting  a little  towards  the  mouth.  They
had  generally  one  or  two  movable  handles
attached  to  the  top  like  a modern  water-
pitcher,  or  small  handles  fixed  to  the  sides  of
the  vessel.  The  larger  specimens  were  made
of  beaten  bronze  riveted  together,  and  when
found  they  were  either  empty  or  contained
only  bones  of  animals.  The  lid  of  one  of  the
situlce  was  ornamented  with  a group  of
fantastic  animals  which  strongly  remind  one
of  the  winged  animals  of  Assyria.  The
cylindrical  cists — ciste  a cordoni  of  Italian
archaeologists — have  a series  of  parallel  ridges
or  cordons  running  round  the  body.  These
vessels,  which  spread  over  Central  and  West-
ern Europe  to  the  number  of  some  fifty,  but
did  not  reach  Britain,  were  in  some  places
used  as  cinerary  urns.

It  may  be  noted,  as  a point  of  some  signi-
ficance, that  neither  silver  nor  lead  has  been


164


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


found  in  Hallstatt.  The  absence  of  these
metals,  as  well  as  coins,  has  been  used  as  an
argument  in  support  of  the  opinion  that  the
cemetery  was  discontinued  before  these  metals
came  into  general  use,  i.e.  about  the  beginning
of  the  fourth  century  b.c.  As  the  most
probable  date  of  the  commencement  of  the
cemetery  is  about  the  ninth  century  b.c.,
its  duration  would  thus  extend  over  a period
of  500  years.  The  collection  of  Hallstatt
relics  as  a whole  is  thus  a mere  jumbling
together  of  an  assortment  of  objects,  not  only
influenced  by  a rapidly  progressing  civiliza-
tion, but  also  by  a continuous  importation
of  new  materials  from  Eastern  civilizations
by  way  of  the  Adriatic.

Sepulchral  remains  more  or  less  analogous
to  the  Hallstatt  antiquities  have  been  recorded
in  various  parts  throughout  Central  Europe,
while  sporadic  finds  have  been  discovered  in
Bohemia,  Silesia,  Poland,  Hungary,  Bosnia,
Moravia,  South  Germany,  Switzerland,  the
Rhine  district,  France  and  the  British  Isles.

La  Tene  Civilization. — The  celebrated  lacus-
trine station  called  La  Tene  is  situated  at  the
north  end  of  Lake  Neuchatel,  close  to  the
present  artificially  formed  outlet  of  its  waters
(the  Upper  Thielle).  Here  is  to  be  seen  a
gravelly  elevation,  some  200  yards  long  by
50  wide,  which,  before  the  “ Correction  des
Eaux  du  Jura,”  formed  the  bed  of  a shallow
part  of  the  lake,  known  among  the  fishermen
as  la  tene  (the  shallows).  As  early  as  1858,
Col.  Schwab  discovered  that  these  gravels  con-


LA  T&NE


165


tained  numerous  antiquities — swords,  spears
and  other  objects  of  iron — totally  differ-
ent from  those  found  on  the  Pfahlbauten,
then  so  prominently  before  the  archaeological
world ; and  of  these  he  made  a goodly  collec-
tion. Subsequently  Professor  Desor  directed
his  attention  to  the  same  field  of  research,
and  he  also  collected  a large  number  of  objects,
among  them  being  Gallic  coins  and  an  iron
sword-sheath  ornamented  with  three  fantastic
horses,  which  at  the  time  excited  much  interest
among  archaeologists.  Further  discoveries  in
the  same  locality  were  made  by  a number  of
investigators  at  various  times,  among  them
being  MM.  Dardel-Thorens,  E.  Vouga,  Borel,
Wavre,  etc.

As  the  relics  found  on  La  Tene  were  asso-
ciated with  piles,  the  locality  was  regarded
by  local  antiquaries  as  the  site  of  an  ordinary
pile-structure  of  the  Iron  Age;  and  as  such
it  has  been  described  by  Dr.  Keller  and
Professor  Desor.  In  face  of  the  facts  dis-
closed by  later  researches  this  opinion  can
no  longer  be  maintained.  As  a place  of
habitation  it  consisted  of  a series  of  rect-
angular wooden  buildings,  erected  on  both
margins  of  an  ancient  outlet  of  the  lake,  and
connected  by  a wooden  bridge  the  piles  of
which  have  been  traced  for  a considerable
distance.  The  submergence  of  the  locality,
such  as  it  was  when  its  archaeological  treasures
first  attracted  attention,  was  due  to  a gradual
accumulation  of  mud  and  peat  along  the  bed
of  the  sluggish  channel  which  carried,  and


166


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


still  carries,  its  surplus  waters  to  Lake  Bienne.
The  geographical  position  of  the  site,  com-
manding the  great  highway  between  Constance
and  Geneva,  and  the  vast  preponderance  of
weapons  of  war  among  the  relics  found  on  it,
unmistakably  point  to  its  having  been  a mili-
tary station.  Nor  is  there  evidence  a wanting
to  suggest  that  its  end  was  a tragic  catastrophe.
The  quantity  of  human  bones,  representing
some  thirty  or  forty  individuals,  with  skulls
said  to  have  sword-cuts  on  their  top;  the
number  of  abandoned  swords,  about  half  of
which  were  unsheathed ; the  incongruous
medley  of  relics  found  by  M.  E.  Vouga  at  the
bottom  of  the  ancient  river-bed,  comprising
swords,  lances,  axes,  chains,  razors,  various
wooden  implements,  fragments  of  a large
vase,  an  entire  wheel  and  other  parts  of  a
wagon,  together  with  the  bones  of  horses
and  oxen — all  indicate  that  the  onslaught
was  sudden  and  successful.  The  discovery  of
characteristic  Roman  remains,  such  as  coins,
tiles,  pottery,  bricks  (one  with  the  mark  of
the  21st  legion,  “ Rapax  ”),  on  and  around
the  site  of  La  T&ne  leaves  little  doubt  that  the
captors  of  the  Oppidum  were  the  Romans.

The  La  Tene  culture,  having  its  centre  of
development  considerably  to  the  west  of
Hallstatt,  spread  far  and  wide  on  the  Conti-
nent, reaching  Scandinavia  on  the  north,  the
British  Isles  on  the  west  and  Bosnia  on  the
east.

A mere  glance  at  the  Hallstatt  and  La  Tene
groups  of  antiquities  shows  that  a gradual


LA  TlfcNE


167


transformation  in  the  relative  use  of  bronze
and  iron  had  taken  place  prior  to  the  occupa-
tion of  the  Oppidum  La  Tene,  i.e.  some  time
during  the  first  century  b.c.  The  prevailing
forms  of  the  Bronze  Age  were  still  retained  in
iron  in  Hallstatt,  while  in  La  T£ne  they
entirely  disappeared.  In  Hallstatt  the  Bronze
Age  sword  was  replaced  by  a sword  only
the  blade  of  which  was  made  of  iron,  while
in  La  T£ne  both  blade  and  sheath  were  made
of  iron,  there  being  only  one  bronze  sheath,
so  far  as  known  to  me,  in  the  whole  of  the
La  Tene  collections.  During  the  latter  period
the  small  bronze  dagger,  the  pioneer  weapon
of  the  early  Bronze  Age  in  Western  Europe,
was  no  longer  met  with.  The  leaf-shaped
bronze  sword,  with  its  flat  tongue  and  rivet-
holes,  gave  place  to  a tanged  iron  blade,
generally  with  parallel  edges  and  blunt  point.
Even  the  great  iron  sword  of  Hallstatt  had
apparently  disappeared  from  the  armamentarv
of  Western  Europe.  Shields  and  helmets  of
iron  became  then  parts  of  military  costume
of  the  day.  The  superabundance  of  personal
ornaments  in  the  form  of  iron  fibulae,  beads
and  bracelets  of  glass,  the  use  of  coral  as  a
setting,  and  ultimately  the  invention  of  enamel,
etc.,  show  that  amber  and  bronze  had  then
become  less  necessary.  In  decorative  art
geometrical  designs  gave  way  to  various
symmetrical  combinations  of  curves,  spirals,
involutes  and  figures  of  fantastic  animals.
But  the  greatest  innovation  of  all  was  the
appearance  of  the  new  metal,  silver,  as  well


168


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


as  Gaulish  coins,  at  first  imitating  those  of
Greek  origin.

Late  Celtic  Period  in  Britain. — We  now
proceed  to  investigate  the  archaeological  phe-
nomena of  the  early  Iron  Age,  as  disclosed
by  the  antiquities  discovered  within  the
British  Isles.  This  subject  becomes  compara-
tively easy  in  light  of  what  we  have  seen  as
to  the  sources  from  which  their  inhabitants
derived  the  models  and  art  motives  which
inspired  the  artistic  productions  of  the  inhabi-
tants. The  effect  of  these  foreign  influences
on  British  civilization  was  to  develop  a new
school  of  art,  which,  though  retaining  the
primary  features  of  its  Continental  prototypes,
presented  so  many  deviations,  both  in  design
and  execution,  that  it  is  now  regarded  as  a
third  and  final  stage  in  the  evolution  of  the
Celtic  art  of  Europe.  Among  the  first  to  clearly
define  this  unique  group  of  antiquities  in
Britain  was  Sir  A.  W.  Franks,  who,  as  one  of
the  editors  of  Kemble’s  Horae  Ferales,  named  it
“ Late  Celtic  ” — an  expression  which  has  since
become  common  in  archaeological  literature.
His  description  of  the  principal  objects  in
that  group,  so  far  as  they  were  then  known
to  him,  is  prefaced  by  the  following  remarks  :

“ In  the  peculiar  class  of  antiquities  now
to  be  considered,  the  British  Islands  stand
unrivalled;  a few  ancient  objects,  analogous
in  design,  may  be  found  in  various  parts  of
the  Continent,  and  more  extended  researches
in  local  museums  may  bring  many  others  to


LATE  CELTIC


169


light,  but  the  foreign  contributions  to  this
section  are  scanty  when  compared  with  those
of  our  own  country.

“ The  antiquities  under  consideration  con-
sist of  shields,  swords,  and  daggers,  horse-
furniture,  personal  ornaments,  and  a number
of  miscellaneous  objects,  some  of  iron,  some
of  bronze,  and  frequently  decorated  with
enamel.  All  these  antiquities  exhibit  a style
of  decoration  remarkable  for  its  peculiar  and
varied  forms,  and  testify  to  an  extraordinary
skill  in  working  metals.”  {Horae,  Ferales,  p.
172.)

On  finishing  his  descriptive  details  of  the
objects  in  question — the  more  perfect  and
highly  decorated  being  delineated  on  seven
plates  of  beautiful  illustrations — he  proceeds
to  show  that  their  original  owners  could  be
no  other  than  the  Celts.

Since  1864,  when  Sir  A.  W.  Franks  wrote  his
description  of  the  “ Late  Celtic  ” antiquities
of  the  British  Isles,  a large  number  of  simi-
larly decorated  objects  have  been  discovered
throughout  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  Some
have  been  incidentally  found  as  stray  relics
in  fields,  peat-bogs,  the  beds  of  rivers,  etc.;
others  were  among  the  contents  of  hoards
or  hidden  treasures,  graves  and  inhabited
sites,  associated  with  other  objects  which
gave  a clue  to  their  date.

Among  sepulchral  sites  the  following  may
be  mentioned,  as  examples  of  burials  by
inhumation  which  have  yielded  relics  of  this


170


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


special  style  of  art  : Arras,  Cowlam,  Grim-
thorpe,  “ Danes’  Graves,”  near  Kilham,  and
Scarborough  Park,  near  Beverley  (all  in
Yorkshire) ; Barlaston  and  Alstonfield  (Staf-
fordshire) ; Middleton  Moor  and  Benty  Grange
(Derbyshire) ; the  Cotteswold  Hills,  near
Gloucester ; Trelan  Bahow,  Parish  of  St.
Keverne  (Cornwall);  Mount  Batten,  near
Plymouth;  Bigberry  Hill,  in  Kent,  etc.  The
Urn-field  (cemetery)  at  Aylesford  (Kent),
described  by  Sir  Arthur  Evans,  deserves  special
notice.  Among  the  relics  disinterred  from
this  locality  was  a wooden  pail  or  situla ,
having  the  upper  of  three  bronze  bands  which
surrounded  the  vessel,  decorated  with  the
forms  of  fantastic  animals  and  scrolls  in
repousse  work,  in  the  characteristic  style  of
Late  Celtic  art.  The  relics  also  included
a jug,  a long-handled  patella  or  pan  and
a couple  of  fibulae  of  late  La  Tene  types —
all  of  bronze.  The  fibulae  and  some  cremated
bones  were  inside  the  situla , while  the  jug,
patella  and  a number  of  earthenware  urns
were  placed  close  up  to  its  outside.  “ We  have
here,”  writes  the  author,  “ for  the  first  time
a native  example  of  an  ‘ urn -field  ’ belonging
to  the  period  that  preceded  the  Roman
invasion,  the  immediate  antecedents  of  which
are  to  be  sought  in  the  Belgic  parts  of  Gaul.”
Another  remarkable  bucket,  which  evident! v
belongs  to  the  same  class  and  period  as  that
of  Aylesford,  was  found  near  Marlborough
about  the  year  1807,  the  remains  of  which  are
now  preserved  in  the  Devizes  Museum.  When


LATE  CELTIC


171


found  it  contained  burnt  bones.  Its  wooden
body,  like  that  of  Aylesford,  was  surrounded
by  three  zones  of  bronze  on  which  were  repre-
sented, in  repousse,  weird  human  heads,  and
fantastic  horses  like  those  on  the  famous
sword-sheath  from  La  Tene.

This  fanciful  style  of  art  was  rather  Gaulish
than  British,  and  may  be  paralleled  with  the
Gundestrup  silver  bowl  discovered,  in  1891,
in  a peat-bog  in  Jutland,  Denmark — the  most
magnificent  work  of  Celtic  art  hitherto  found
in  Europe.  The  plates  of  which  this  very
remarkable  sacrificial  bowl  had  been  con-
structed represented  divinities,  processions
of  warriors  and  oriental  designs — elephants,
griffins,  ram-headed  serpent,  a man  astride  a
dolphin — together  with  the  symbol  of  the
boar,  the  triquetra,  torques,  crested  helmets
and  oblong  shields,  forming  an  unmistakable
assemblage  of  the  most  characteristic  elements
of  Celtic  art.

An  important  find  of  Late  Celtic  antiquities
in  connection  with  cremated  interments  was
also  made  at  Welwyn,  Herts,  which,  according
to  Sir  Arthur  Evans,  is  a complete  parallel
to  those  of  Aylesford,  both  as  to  date  (50  b.c.)
and  character  of  the  relics.  These  antiquities
are  now  in  the  British  Museum  ( Proc . Soc.
Ant.  London,  1912,  p.  5).

Chief  among  inhabited  sites  of  the  pre-
Roman  period  which  have  yielded  Late  Celtic
remains  are  Hunsbury  Camp,  near  Northamp-
ton; an  earthen  entrenchment  at  Stanwick
(Yorkshire);  and  Mount  Caburn,  near  Lewes.


172


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


From  the  debris  of  a series  of  refuse  pits
on  the  first  mentioned  were  dug  up  150
querns  (hand-mills),  charred  corn,  glass  beads,
bronze  fibulae  and  rings,  a bronze  sword-
sheath,  spindle-whorls,  long-handled  combs,
loom-weights,  bone  and  horn  needles,  human
and  animal  bones,  etc.

The  fine  collection  of  Late  Celtic  objects
from  Stanwick  includes  bridle-bits,  horse-
trappings,  fragments  of  repousse  work,  por-
tions of  iron  chain-mail,  a sword-sheath,
bronze  fragments  with  traces  of  enamel  on
them,  tyres  of  chariot  wheels,  etc.

Mount  Caburn,  described  by  General  Pitt-
Rivers  as  a Late  Celtic  entrenchment  of  pre-
Roman  times,  contained,  in  addition  to  a
number  of  relics  similar  to  those  from  Huns-
bury  Camp,  three  ancient  British  coins  of
tin.

Very  significant  are  some  implements  and
weapons  of  war  found  on  the  crannog  of
Lisnacroghera,  Ireland.  Here  the  entire  mili-
tary equipments  of  at  least  four  men,  con-
sisting of  shields,  iron  swords  with  bronze
sheaths,  lances  with  long  wooden  handles
and  bronze  mountings,  and  other  objects —
all  beautifully  decorated  with  Late  Celtic
designs  and  workmanship — were  by  some
unknown  fate  associated  in  a peat-bog  with
the  usual  promiscuous  objects  of  an  Irish
crannog.

In  1865  a remarkable  discovery  was  made
in  one  of  the  chambered  cairns  on  the  Lough-
crew  Hills,  Co.  Meath,  which  has  puzzled


LATE  CELTIC


173


many  antiquaries.  This  consisted  of  a large
quantity  of  flat  polished  pieces  of  bone,
among  which  were  fragments  of  combs,  and
some  plaques  ornamented  with  incised  circles,
spirals,  volutes  and  dots  in  the  Late  Celtic
style.  They  were  in  conjunction  with  a
heterogeneous  assortment  of  objects  of  stone,
bronze  and  iron,  beads  of  glass  and  amber,
sea-shells,  etc. — among  them  being  a pair  of
iron  compasses.  (See  Ollamh  Fodhla,  by  Eugene
A.  Conwell.)

Remains  of  Late  Celtic  work  have  also
been  found  in  peat-bogs,  surface  soil,  on
Roman  stations  in  England,  and  in  the  debris
of  some  of  the  crannogs,  Pictish  brochs,  under-
ground dwellings  and  hill-forts  of  Scotland.

But  among  recent  discoveries  the  most
important  is  the  Lake-village  of  Glastonbury,
which,  having  a chronological  range  of  con-
tinued occupancy  from  about  100  b.c.  to
50  a.d.,  has  yielded  a promiscuous  assortment
of  the  ordinary  debris  of  village  life  during
the  early  Iron  Age,  among  which  are  some
characteristic  objects  of  Late  Celtic  art  such
as  ornamented  hand-mirrors,  La  T6ne  fibulae,
bronze  bracelets,  a few  articles  of  harness
mountings,  pottery,  weaving  combs,  etc.

A number  of  massive  bronze  armlets  of  a
remarkable  type,  and  peculiar  to  Scotland,
have  been  found  in  different  parts  of  the
country.  They  consist  of  a solid  casting  of
bronze,  smooth  on  the  inner  surface  and
embossed  on  the  outer  by  running  scrolls  in
high  relief.  They  are  penannular  and  more  or


174


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


less  oval  in  shape,  with  ends  rounded,  slightly
expanded,  and  perforated  with  a circular
opening  for  an  enamel  disc.  The  decoration
usually  takes  the  form  of  three  convex  and
parallel  bands  ornamented  with  trumpet-
shaped elevations  and  connected  by  oblique
ridges.  (See  Scotland  in  Pagan  Times,  by  Dr.
J.  Anderson.)

From  what  we  have  said  it  will  be  seen
that  the  distribution  of  Late  Celtic  antiquities
embraces  a large  portion  of  Great  Britain  and
Ireland.  South  Britain,  however,  being  its
primary  home,  has  proved  to  be  richer  in
examples  of  its  best  style  of  workmanship,
such  as  the  two  magnificent  shields  found  in
the  rivers  Thames  and  Witham,  various  enam-
elled horse-trappings,  mirrors,  brooches,  brace-
lets, torques,  etc.  From  the  fact  that  no
settlements  or  cemeteries  of  the  period  have,
as  yet,  been  found  in  Britain  north  of  York-
shire, nor  in  any  part  of  Wales  or  Ireland,  it
has  been  suggested  that  the  products  of  this
special  art  first  reached  these  regions  by  means
of  commercial  intercourse,  rather  than  by
an  immigration  of  new  settlers.  At  the  same
time,  there  is  evidence  to  show  that  it  con-
tinued to  be  practised  both  in  Scotland  and
Ireland,  Avithout  any  break  of  continuity,
till  the  introduction  of  Christianity  into  these
regions.  There  the  adherents  of  the  new  faith
utilized  its  designs,  in  conjunction  with  inter-
lacements and  fret-work,  to  ornament  their
illuminated  manuscripts,  sculptured  stones,
and  metal-work.  On  the  other  hand,  the


LATE  CELTIC


175


people  of  South  Britain,  having  lost  their
native  art,  owing  to  the  rapid  spread  of  Roman
influence  in  that  part  of  the  country,  had
subsequently  to  borrow  its  details  from  the
books  and  writings  of  the  early  Christians  of
Scotland  and  Ireland.

In  discussing  some  of  the  archaeological
problems  arising  out  of  the  mass  of  relics
found  on  the  site  of  the  Glastonbury  Lake-
village,  I wrote  as  follows  in  regard  to  one  or
two  points  which  come  within  the  scope  of
the  present  chapter  :

“ The  absence  of  objects  ornamented  with
enamel  among  the  Lake-village  relics  may
have  some  significance,  although  it  would  be
hazardous,  or  at  least  premature,  to  draw  a
definite  conclusion  from  negative  premises.
That  enamel  working  was  practised  by  the
Gauls,  prior  to  the  Roman  conquest  of  their
country,  is  proved  by  excavations  made  on
the  site  of  Bibracte.  Here  crude  enamels,
but  only  of  one  colour  (red),  were  found  in
various  stages  of  manufacture,  in  workshops,
furnished  with  furnaces,  crucibles,  moulds,
polishing  stones,  and  other  tools  used  in  this
industry.  Champleve  was  the  first  kind  of
enamelling  practised  in  Britain,  the  artists
using  only  one  colour,  a brilliant  red,  with
which  they  filled  the  trumpet-shaped  spaces
of  their  Late  Celtic  designs ; but  this  was  long
after  these  designs  were  invented.  Many
of  the  specimens  of  British  enamel  have  been
found  in  association  with  Roman  remains?


176


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


while  the  rest,  being  mostly  sporadic  finds,
are  of  no  chronological  value,  so  that  the
precise  date  when  enamel  began  to  be  used
by  British  artists  is  absolutely  unknown.
We  know,  however,  that  during  the  Roman
occupation  of  Britain  the  working  of  enamel
was  successfully  prosecuted.  Much  has  been
made  of  the  historical  evidence  of  Philostratus,
that  the  ‘ barbarians  who  live  in  the  ocean
pour  these  colours  on  heated  brass,  that  they
adhere,  become  hard  as  stone  and  preserve
the  designs  that  have  been  made  in  them.’
But  this  was  written  at  the  beginning  of  the
third  century  a.d.,  and  evidently  refers  to  a
time  when  enamel  work  had  made  great
progress,  especially  by  the  adoption  of  a
variety  of  colours.

“ The  same  reasoning  applies  to  hand-
mirrors,  the  chronology  of  which  is  also  an
unknown  factor,  as  none  of  the  Late  Celtic
mirrors  discovered  in  Britain,  outside  the
Glastonbury  Lake-village,  have  been  shown
to  be  older  than  Romano-British  times.  It
would,  however,  be  unwise  to  push  these
arguments  further  in  the  meantime,  as  the
exploration  of  the  Meare  Lake-village,  the
discovery  of  which  has  been  recently  an-
nounced, may  supply  materials  which  will
throw  additional  light  on  the  various  points
here  raised.”  ( Glastonbury  Lake-Village,  Vol.  I
p.  31.)

In  casting  a retrospective  glance  over  the
sources  of  Late  Celtic  art,  as  developed  within


LATE  CELTIC


177


the  British  Isles,  it  may  be  observed  that  the
industrial  and  art  products  of  Hallstatt  are
somewhat  more  pronounced  in  France  than
in  Britain,  probably  because  the  former  was
nearer  their  eastern  sources  of  distribution.
Since  these  influences  first  reached  French
soil  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the
new  developments  they  engendered  suffered
any  break  in  continuity  till  the  advent  of
the  Romans.  Many  of  the  tumuli,  especially
in  the  Marne  district,  such  as  that  of  La  Gorge
Meillet  and  Berru,  disclosing  burials  of  chiefs
clad  in  full  armour  and  laid  alongside  of  their
horses  and  chariots,  must  be  placed  much
earlier  than  the  date  of  the  Oppidum  La  T£ne ;
and  it  is  probably  to  an  extension  of  this
custom  to  Britain  that  the  analogous  inter-
ments in  Yorkshire  must  be  assigned.  It
was  during  the  La  Tene  civilization  that  the
iron  industry  first  reached  Denmark,  so  that
the  Hallstatt  period  was  but  feebly  repre-
sented in  Scandinavian  lands.  This  is  quite
in  keeping  with  the  opinion  that  the  bronze
industry  reached  these  shores  by  way  of  the
lower  Danube,  Hungary,  and  the  southern
shore  of  the  Baltic — a route  little  affected  by
the  Hallstatt  civilization.

The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  lake-dwell-
ings of  Western  Switzerland,  many  of  which
were  in  the  full  Bronze  Age,  till  their  termina-
tion during  the  La  Tene  period.  Thus,  while
the  Bronze  Age  was  flourishing  in  the  north
of  Europe,  other  culture  currents,  emanating
from  Aegean  islands  and  the  mainland  of

M


178


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Greece,  long  after  the  Mycenean  culture  had
passed  its  zenith,  spread  into  Central  Europe
by  way  of  the  Adriatic,  and  ultimately
extended  as  far  as  the  British  Isles.

That  the  influence  of  the  Hallstatt  civilization
had  not  entirely  spent  itself  short  of  our  shores  is
amply  proved  by  the  existence,  in  the  museums
of  Britain  and  Ireland,  of  a number  of  objects
whose  origin  can  be  clearly  traced  to  common
types  in  Central  Europe.  These  continental
culture  and  art  elements  were,  however,  so
handled  by  the  “ barbarians  in  the  ocean  ”
as  to  produce  within  the  British  Isles  a new
school  of  art,  known  as  Late  Celtic,  whose
products  can  be  readily  differentiated  from
those  of  all  other  contemporary  phases  of
European  civilization.  The  most  character-
istic specimen  of  this  art  is  the  enamelled
bronze  shield  found  in  the  bed  of  the  Thames
at  Battersea,  now  in  the  British  Museum,  and
of  which  an  excellent  representation  is  figured
in  the  Museum  Guide.


CHAPTER  VIII

RELIGIOSITY  AND  COMMEMORATIVE  MONU-
MENTS  CROMLECHS,  DOLMENS,  BARROWS,

MENHIRS,  ALIGNMENTS,  ETC.

The  evolution  of  religion  runs  on  parallel
lines  with  human  civilization,  and  its  con-
summation into  the  various  codes  and  creeds


COMMEMORATIVE  MONUMENTS  179


prevalent  in  the  world  of  to-day  is  the  col-
lective result  of  generations  who  have  gathered
its  elements  from  almost  every  phase  of
human  life.  The  precise  origin  of  primitive
religion  is,  however,  a controverted  problem,
and  whether  its  first  germs  emanated  from  a
belief  in  magic,  or  in  the  existence  of  gods
and  demons,  or  from  a conception  of  the  dual
nature  of  man  as  body  and  soul,  are  questions
which  lie  outside  the  scope  of  archeology.
The  most  reasonable  hypothesis  on  the  sub-
ject is  the  animistic  theory,  advocated  by
E.  B.  Tylor,  which  represents  man  as  having
attained  to  the  idea  of  spirit  by  reflecting
on  various  physical  and  psychological  experi-
ences familiar  to  him  as  ordinary  occurrences
of  daily  life,  such  as  dreams,  trances,  shadows,
hallucinations,  breath,  sleep,  death,  etc.  The
idea  that  man  possessed  a material  body  and
a spiritual  soul  was  gradually  extended  till
it  applied  not  only  to  animals,  but  to  material
objects.  Certain  archaeological  remains  dis-
covered on  the  primitive  homes  and  haunts
of  mankind,  and  now  available  as  evidence  of
their  past  career  on  the  globe,  are  more  in
harmony  with  Dr.  Tylor’s  animistic  theory
than  with  any  other;  for,  as  soon  as  the
dualism  of  man’s  nature  became  a stereo-
typed belief,  the  idea  that  the  soul,  after
somatic  death,  passed  on  to  the  world
of  spirits,  became  an  inevitable  corollary.
Hence,  both  the  body  and  soul  of  a departed
friend  had  to  be  attended  to  by  the  surviving
relatives,  the  natural  sequence  to  which  was


180


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


the  performance  of  a variety  of  sacred  and
religious  duties  as  homage  to  his  memory,
such  as  a ceremonial  burial,  the  erection  of  a
suitable  commemorative  monument,  and  the
deposition  of  viands  and  such  objects  as  would
be  serviceable  to  the  soul  on  its  journey  to  the
unseen  world.  These  customs,  however,  be-
long to  a somewhat  advanced  stage  of  human
civilization,  and  until  sepulchral  monuments
and  relics  became  available  as  evidence,
archaeologists  had  no  reliable  data  to  combat
the  idea  that,  during  the  nomadic  wanderings
of  primitive  races,  their  dead  were  disposed
of  by  simple  abandonment  by  the  wayside,
probably  to  be  devoured  by  wild  animals.
Strabo  (Book  XI,  chap,  xi,  8)  informs  us
that  among  the  Bactrians,  those  who  were
disabled  by  disease  or  old  age  were  thrown
alive  to  be  devoured  by  dogs  kept  expressly
for  that  purpose.  The  custom  of  keeping
animals  for  such  sacred  duties  has  survived
to  the  present  day,  as  exemplified  by  the
Parsees  of  Bombay  in  their  Towers  of  Silence,
where  the  process  of  Scarnitura  is  completed
by  vultures  in  little  more  than  an  hour.  Some
other  semi-civilized  races  dispose  of  their
dead  by  exposing  the  corpse  on  the  branches
of  a tree,  which  , is  merely  a speedy  way  of
facilitating  decomposition  by  atmospheric
agencies.

Formerly  it  had  been  generally  held  bv
anthropologists  that  the  Palaeolithic  people  of
Europe  had  no  religion,  because,  among  the
relics  disinterred  on  their  inhabited  sites,  no


COMMEMORATIVE  MONUMENTS  181


idols,  graves,  or  grave-goods  had  been  recog-
nized. But  a fresh  interpretation  of  old
materials,  together  with  some  recent  dis-
coveries, have  shown  that  this  deduction
can  no  longer  be  maintained.  The  sepulchral
phenomena  associated  with  some  of  the
skeletons  from  the  Grimaldi  caves  of  Mentone
leave  no  doubt  that  the  bodies  had  been
intentionally  buried  with  their  personal  orna-
ments, coiffures,  necklets,  pendants,  etc.,
made  of  perforated  shells,  teeth,  fish-vertebrae,
pieces  of  ivory,  etc.

Among  other  skeletons  of  the  Palaeolithic
period  which  might  be  brought  forward  as
evidence  of  intentional  burial,  one  of  the
most  typical  is  that  discovered  in  1908  in  the
rock-shelter  of  Le  Moustier.  The  skeleton
lay  in  the  attitude  of  sleep,  beneath  undis-
turbed strata  of  Mousterien  Age.  The  right
arm  was  folded  under  the  head  and  the  left
extended.  Near  the  left  hand  lay  a pointed
flint  implement  of  the  coup-de-poing  type,  and
a little  farther  on  a flint  scraper.  The
cranium  had  the  osteological  characters  of  the
Neanderthal-Spy  race.  The  face  was  strongly
prognathic,  and  there  was  no  chin  (Fig.  12).
The  skeleton  was  that  of  a young  man  about
4 feet  10  inches  in  height,  whose  wisdom
teeth  had  not  yet  been  developed.  Bones  of
various  animals,  such  as  might  have  been
the  remains  of  a feast,  and  of  which  a few
appeared  to  have  been  calcined,  lay  near  the
skeleton.  Dr.  Klaatsch,  the  expert  who
examined  the  human  remains,  came  to  the


182  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

conclusion  that  the  individual  to  whom  they
belonged  had  been  ceremonially  buried.

Several  interments  dating  from  the  Mag-
dalemen  and  Transition  periods  have  come  to
light,  which  had  the  peculiarity  of  having
the  skeletons  sprinkled  over  with  a layer  of
ochre.  This  was  the  case  with  almost  all
the  skeletons  found  in  the  caves  of  Grimaldi,
and  in  the  stations  of  Chancelade,  Mas-d’Azil’
Briinn  (Moravia),  and  Paviland  (Gower  Penin-
sula). That  this  formed  part  of  some  ritual
ceremony  is  now  generally  admitted  by
archaeologists.  The  inference  from  these,
and  other  data  now  at  our  disposal,  is  that
some  of  the  earlier  Palaeolithic  races  had  been
in  the  habit  of  burying  their  dead  with  cere-
monious rites,  so  circumstantially  carried  out
as  to  suggest  that  they  were  the  outcome  of
an  already  established  cult  of  the  dead.

Some  writers  maintain  that  the  Paleolithic
gure  paintings  on  the  walls  of  caves  were
inspired  by  religious  motives.  Notably  is
this  the  case  in  respect  of  the  remarkable
fresco  discovered  on  the  rock  of  Cogul,  in  the
valley  of  the  Ebro,  in  Spain,  which  shows  a
gioup  ot  nine  women  dancing  round  a nude
man.  Their  garments  disclose  a striking
likeness  to  those  of  the  Minoan  women,  as
figured  on  the  fresco  paintings  on  the  walls
of  Knossos.  Breuil  regards  the  Cogul  scene,
as  well  as  some  other  rock-illustrations  found
on  the  south  of  the  Cantabric  Cordilleras  and
the  Ryrenees,  as  a continuation  of  the  cave
paintings  of  France  and  Spain  to  the  north


COMMEMORATIVE  MONUMENTS  183


of  these  mountain  ranges.  Other  writers,
however,  think  they  must  be  dated  nearer
our  own  time.  Some  of  these  rock  figures,
for  example  those  at  Alpera,  in  the  south-east
of  Spain,  represent  nude  men  hunting  deer
with  bows  and  arrows.  These  figures  are
interesting,  as  being  the  first  evidence  we  have
of  the  use  of  bows  and  arrows  in  the  chase,  for
the  so-called  bone  arrows  represented  among
Magdalenien  debris  were  only  lance-points;
propelled  by  the  hand  with  the  assistance  of
the  apparatus  known  as  dart-propeller  (pro-
pulseur).

But  it  was  not  till  the  advent  of  Neolithic
civilization  that  the  disposal  of  the  dead
assumed  archieological  importance,  in  conse-
quence of  the  number  of  sepulchral  monuments
then  constructed.  There  can  be  no  doubt,
judging  from  the  relics  associated  with  these
structural  remains,  that  the  Britons  of  that
period  believed  in  the  existence  of  a super-
natural world  which,  after  death,  became  the
home  of  the  soul  or  ghost.  When  a prominent
man  died,  his  weapons,  ornaments  and  other
cherished  objects  were  placed  in  the  tomb,  as
well  as  suitable  viands  for  the  soul  on  its
journey  to  the  realm  of  the  dead.  These
facts  show  that  they  did  not  regard  life  beyond
the  grave  as  differing  widely  from  that  on
earth.  The  idea  that  death  was  a severance
* for  ever  of  all  social  ties  and  friendships
formed  on  earth,  would,  probably,  be  more
repugnant  to  them  than  to  some  of  the  philo-
sophical minds  of  the  present  day.  To  the


184  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

former,  death  was  the  mere  portal  to  the
community  of  departed  heroes  and  friends
to  which  they  looked  forward  across  the  span
of  human  life  with  hopeful  anticipation  of  a
moie  pei  feet  state  of  existence.  Hence  the
abodes  of  the  dead  were  considered  of  greater
importance  than  those  of  the  living.  One  of
the  most  common  and  effective  methods  of
perpetuating  the  memory  of  a departed  friend
was  to  rear  a mound  of  stones  or  earth  over
the  grave.  As  an  alternative  to  a mound  the
site  ol  the  grave  was  occasionally  marked  bv
the  construction  of  some  surface  arrangement
such  as  menhirs,  stone  circles,  alignments’
ditches,  etc.  lo  these  customs  we  owe  some
of  the  grandest  monuments  in  the  world’s

nn^077?ie  ^mids  of  topes

and  dagobas  of  India,  the  mighty  mounds  of

silbury  and  New  Grange,  the  megalithic  circles
of  Stonehenge  and  Avebury,  together  with
the  numberless  rude  stone  monuments  known
as  dolmens  cromlechs,  standing  stones,  etc.
scattered  along  the  western  shores  of  Europe
from  Scandinavia  to  Africa.  Although  a
strong  family  likeness  permeates  the  whole
series  of  these  sepulchral  monuments,  they
differ  so  widely  m certain  districts  as  to  form
structure,  position  and  contents,  that  to  make
a systematic  classification  of  them,  on  the

wmdd°lf  hei1-  chronlol°gical  development,
would  be  an  impossible  task.  One  special

element  which  complicates  such  an  inquiry

was  the  custom  of  cremating  the  dead,  which

appears  to  have  originated  in  Eastern  lands


COMMEMORATIVE  MONUMENTS  185


and  to  have  reached  the  British  Isles  towards
the  close  of  the  Stone  Age.

Burial  by  inhumation,  i.e.  placing  the  body
in  a hole  in  the  earth  and  covering  it  over  with
the  excavated  material,  was  probably  the
earliest  method  of  disposing  of  the  dead,
after  religion  became  a ruling  factor  in  social
life.  The  next  step  would  be  to  protect  the
body  from  the  pressure  of  the  surrounding
earth.  This  was  usually  done  by  lining  the
grave  with  flagstones  set  on  edge,  over  which
a larger  one  was  placed,  as  a cover — thus
forming  the  well-known  cist  of  the  Bronze
Age.  Sometimes,  instead  of  flagstones,  wooden
planks  arranged  in  the  shape  of  a coffin  were
used,  and  at  other  times  the  body  was  placed
in  a tree-trunk  coffin.  This  was  made  by
splitting  the  trunk  of  a tree  of  a suitable
length  into  two  portions,  one  of  which  was
hollowed  out  as  a receptacle  for  the  body,
the  other  being  used  as  a lid.  Only  two  or
three  of  these  tree-trunk  coffins  have  been
found  in  Britain,  among  the  best  known  being
that  of  Gristhorpe  barrow,  the  skeleton  from
which  is  preserved  in  Scarborough  Museum;
but  in  Denmark  no  fewer  than  forty-three
have  been  recorded  up  to  1895.  But  the
particular  material  used  for  protecting  the
body  depended  on  what  was  most  readily
procurable  in  the  neighbourhood.  Canon
Greenwell  tells  us  that  on  the  Yorkshire
Wolds  the  stone  cist,  so  common  in  other
parts,  was  almost  entirely  wanting,  because
in  chalk  districts  the  requisite  slabs  were


186


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


unprocurable.  On  the  other  hand,  wood  is  so
liable  to  decay  that  it  is  rare  to  find  evidence
of  its  having  been  used.

The  stone-lined  grave  is  perhaps  the  most
widely  distributed  of  all  the  sepulchral  monu-
ments in  Britain.  From  this  to  the  mega-
lithic  chamber,  with  its  internal  compart-
ments, entrance  passage  and  superincumbent
cairn,  was  an  easy  transition.  But  the
sequence  thus  suggested  is  of  little  chrono-
logical value  in  dating  these  monuments,  as
there  is  evidence  to  show  that  chambered
cairns  and  long  barrows  were  the  earliest
tombs  constructed  in  this  country.  Thus,
in  the  counties  of  Gloucester,  Wilts,  Somerset,
Dorset  and  some  neighbouring  localities,
there  are  chambered  cairns  in  which  the
primary  interments  were  by  inhumation,
and  the  human  skulls  found  in  them  belonged
to  a dolichocephalic  race.  Similar  chambered
cairns,  also  containing  remains  of  a dolicho-
cephalic race,  have  been  found  in  the  island
of  Arran ; but  as  regards  the  analogous
groups  farther  north  in  the  counties  of
Argyll,  Inverness,  Sutherland,  Caithness  and
the  Orkneys,  it  has  been  conclusively  proved
that  cremation  and  inhumation  were  carried
on  simultaneously  from  their  very  commence-
ment. This  shows  that  the  custom  of  con-
structing chambered  cairns  travelled  slowly
northwards,  and  was  overtaken  by  that  of
cremation.  It  would  thus  appear  that,  subse-
quent to  the  construction  of  the  English
megalithic  chambers,  there  was  a period  of


COMMEMORATIVE  MONUMENTS  187

decadence  in  this  kind  of  architecture  in  South
Britain,  during  which  the  well-known  barrows
of  the  Bronze  Age  became  the  prevailing  type
of  burial.  Another  inference,  and  not  an
improbable  one,  is  that  the  Neolithic  invaders
of  Britain  were  already  familiar  with  the  art
of  constructing  dolmens  and  megalithic  monu-
ments, before  they  left  their  European  homes.
This  view  finds  support  in  the  fact  that  nearly
all  the  continental  dolmens  belonged  to  the
pre-cremation  period,  and  contained  unbuint
skeletons.  Besides  the  dolmens,  which  are
very  numerous  in  the  middle  and  southern
departments  of  France,  there  are  in  various
districts  throughout  the  country  spacious
caverns  which  had  been  used  as  ossuaries  and
burial-places  by  the  earlier  races.  Of  such
memorials  the  caverns  of  L’Homme-Mort
and  Baumes-Chaudes  (Loz£re)  may  be  in-
stanced as  good  examples,  both  of  which
contained  skeletons  belonging  exclusively  to
a dolichocephalic  people.  The  dolmens  of
the  Iberian  Peninsula  are  also  monuments  of
the  Stone  Age,  and  their  interments  consisted
of  skeletons  with  dolichocephalic  skulls— a
fact  which  also  applies  to  the  cave-burials  of
that  country,  some  of  which  were  older  than
the  dolmens.  Cremation  would  thus  appear
to  have  reached  the  Iberian  portion  of  Europe
at  a comparatively  late  period  m the  Bronze
Age,  as  was  the  case  in  North  Britain.

In  Scandinavia  the  Giant  graves,  all  of
which  flourished  in  the  Stone  Age,  gave  place
during  the  Bronze  Age  to  large  stone-lmed


188


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


cists  adapted  for  more  than  one  body.  But
during  the  early  Iron  Age  both  these  types
of  graves  were  discarded,  and  the  people
reverted  to  simple  burial,  either  by  inhuma-
tion or  after  cremation.  But  in  the  case  of
great  men  their  graves  were  covered  over  with
huge  earthen  mounds,  such  as  those  of  Thor,
Odin  and  Freya,  at  Gamla  Upsala  and  the
ship  barrow  at  Gokstad.

In  the  absence  of  sufficient  data  for  classi-
fying the  abodes  and  memorials  of  the  dead
on  some  scientific  basis,  our  remarks  on  this
phase  of  the  subject  must  be  restricted  to  brief
notes  on  a few  of  the  more  typical  monuments
found  within  the  British  area.

Cromlechs,  or  Stone  Circles

Of  the  prehistoric  monuments  which  come
under  this  category  of  cromlechs,  Britain
possesses  more  than  any  other  country  in
Europe.  Although  most  of  them  are  in  a
more  or  less  dilapidated  condition,  archaeo-
logists are  generally  successful  in  extracting
from  their  extant  remains  sufficient  structural
details  to  give  a fair  idea  of  their  original  forms
and  dimensions.

Avebury. — The  great  circle  of  standing
stones  at  Avebury  (Wiltshire)  is,  or  rather
was,  the  largest  monument  of  the  kind  in
Britain,  measuring  some  1200  feet  in  diameter.
“ When  perfect,”  writes  the  author  of  Pre-
historic Times,  “ this  so-called  Druidical  monu-
ment consisted  of  a circular  ditch  and  em-


CROMLECHS


189


bankment,  containing  an  area  of  28|  acres;
inside  the  ditch  was  a circle  of  great  stones,
and  within  this,  again,  two  smaller  circles,
formed  by  a double  row  of  smaller  stones,
standing  side  by  side.  From  the  outer  em-
bankment started  two  long  winding  avenues
of  stones,  one  of  which  went  in  the  direction
of  Beckhampton,  and  the  other  in  that  of
Kennet,  where  it  ended  in  another  double
circle.  Stukely  supposed  that  the  idea  of
the  whole  was  that  of  a snake  transmitted
through  a circle;  the  Kennet  circle  repre-
senting the  head,  the  Beckhampton  avenue
the  tail.  Midway  between  the  two  avenues
stood  Silbury  Hill,  the  largest  artificial  mound
in  Great  Britain,  measuring  no  less  than
130  feet  in  height.  At  one  time  it  was
probably  much  higher.  From  its  position  it
appears  to  form  part  of  the  general  plan,  and
though  it  has  been  twice  examined,  no  primary
interment  has  been  found  in  it.  On  the  whole,
this  appears  to  have  been  at  one  time  the
finest  megalithic  ruin  in  Europe;  but,  un-
fortunately for  us,  the  pretty  little  village  of
Avebury,  like  some  beautiful  parasite,  has
grown  up  at  the  expense,  and  in  the  midst
of  the  ancient  temple,  and  out  of  650  great
stones,  not  above  20  are  still  standing.”

The  remaining  monoliths  are  all  of  the
native  Sarsens  (which  occur  everywhere  in
the  district),  and  show  no  evidence  of  having
been  hewn.  They  vary  in  size  from  5 to
20  feet  in  height  above  ground,  and  from  3 to
12  feet  in  breadth.


190


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


The  outer  circles  of  the  two  enclosed  groups
measured  respectively  325  and  270  feet  in
diameter,  and  in  the  centre  of  each  was,  in
one  case,  a menhir,  and  in  the  other  a ruined
dolmen.

Various  opinions  have  been  held  with
regard  to  the  primary  object  of  the  Avebury
circles,  avenues,  menhirs,  etc.  Dr.  Stukely
advocated  the  theory  that  they  are  the  remains
of  a Druidical  temple,  the  priests  of  which
were  serpent -worshippers ; while  Fergusson
believed  that  they,  as  well  as  Silbury  Hill,
mark  the  site  of  the  graves  of  those  who  fell
in  the  last  Arthurian  battle  of  Badon  Hill
(a.d.  520).  But  the  majority  of  archaeologists
of  the  present  day  see  no  reason  for  dissoci-
ating the  Avebury  group  from  analogous
remains  elsewhere  in  Britain,  many  of  which
are  proved  to  have  been  burial-sites  of  the
Bronze  Age.

Some  recent  explorations  have  been  made
both  within  and  without  the  great  circle,
especially  in  the  surrounding  ditch,  but  with-
out throwing  much  new  light  on  its  age  or
purpose.  In  the  ditch  picks  made  of  antlers,
similar  to  those  from  Cissbury  and  Grime’s
Graves,  have  been  found,  and  an  urn  of  the
beaker  type  was  found  within  the  circle.

Stonehenge. — No  other  monument  within
the  British  Isles  has  given  rise  to  more  in-
genious speculations,  as  to  its  origin,  purpose
and  date  of  construction,  than  Stonehenge.
The  few  hoary  stones  still  in  situ  are  suf-
ficiently imposing  to  excite  the  wonder  of


CROMLECHS


191


the  passing  traveller,  and  mysterious  enough
to  puzzle  the  antiquary.

Within  a circular  earthwork,  300  feet  in
diameter,  was  a circle  of  trilithons,  100  feet
in  diameter,  formed  of  thirty  hewn  monoliths
(Sarsens),  each  pair  supporting  large  lintels.
About  nine  feet  within  this  circle,  and  con-
centric with  it,  was  another  circle,  consisting
of  forty  smaller  stones  of  an  imported  material
known  as  “ blue  stones.”  Inside  this  “ blue
stone  ” circle  were  five  groups  of  huge  tri-
lithons, arranged  in  a horseshoe  shape,  each
consisting  of  two  monoliths  bearing  an  impost.
Inside  of  the  latter  was  a second  horseshoe
arrangement  (originally  consisting  of  nineteen
“ blue  stones  ”),  the  centre  of  which  contained
a large  slab  of  micaceous  sandstone,  called  the
Altar  Stone.

The  open  spaces  of  these  horseshoe  arrange-
ments faced  towards  the  rising  sun  at  the
summer  solstice,  and,  in  line  with  its  prolonged
axis  in  the  circumference  of  the  outer  earthen
rampart,  there  is  the  so-called  Sun-stone,  or
“ Friar’s  Heel.”  The  Sarsen  monoliths  in
the  outer  circle  measured  12  feet  7 inches  in
height,  but  the  “ blue  stones  ” were  only
about  8 feet  high.

Dr.  Gowland,  who  superintended  some
recent  excavations  in  course  of  replacing
one  of  the  fallen  monoliths,  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  Stonehenge  was  a temple  dedi-
cated to  sun-worship,  and  assigns  its  erection
to  the  end  of  the  Neolithic  period  (2000-
1800  b.c.),  on  the  ground  that  no  bronze


192  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

•implements  or  relics  were  found  during  his
explorations.

On  the  supposition  that  the  “ Friar’s  Heel  ”
was  raised  to  mark  exactly  the  line  of  sun-
rise on  Midsummer  Day  when  the  structure
was  erected,  it  would  follow,  according  to
well-known  astronomical  causes,  that  in  the
course  of  time  the  direction  of  the  line  of
sunrise  would  slowly  deviate  from  that  of  the
stone,  so  that  the  amount  of  change  being
commensurate  with  the  lapse  of  time,  would
supply  chronological  data  for  determining
the  age  of  the  building.  The  solution  of  this
problem  has  recently  been  attempted  by  Sir
Norman  Lockyer,  who  calculated  that  on
Midsummer  Day,  1680  b.c.,  the  sun  would  rise
exactly  over  the  “ Friar’s  Heel,”  in  a direct
line  with  the  axis  of  the  temple  and  the  avenue.

Looking  at  Stonehenge  from  the  archi-
tectural standpoint,  I can  have  no  hesitanc)''
in  1 egarding  it  as  an  advanced  representa-
tive of  the  ordinary  stone  circles,  some  200  of
which,  great  and  small,  are  known  within
the  British.  Isles,  It  is,  however,  differen-
tiated  fiom  them  all  by  having  hewn  stones,
capstones,  tenons  and  sockets.  That  its
earlier  analogues  were  chiefly  used  as  sepul-
chies  has  been  fully  established,  and  this  is
presumptive  evidence  that  the  sepulchral
element  was,  at  least,  one  of  the  objects  for
which  Stonehenge  was  constructed;  and  it
was  probably  for  that  reason  that  it  was
erected  on  Salisbury  Plain,  where  there  already


CROMLECHS


193


existed  an  extensive  necropolis  of  the  Bronze
Age.  Nor  would  this  by  any  means  militate
against  its  supposed  use  as  a temple  for
consecrating  the  dead,  or  for  sun-worship,
or  any  other  religious  purpose.

Callernish. — On  the  west  coast  of  the  island
of  Lewis  there  are  four  stone  circles  within
about  a mile  of  each  other,  but  without  any
visible  connection  between  them.  In  1858
the  peat  on  the  site  of  the  principal  one,
known  as  the  Callernish  Circle,  which  had
accumulated  to  a depth  of  5 feet,  was
completely  cleared  away;  and  in  course  of
this  operation  the  workmen  came  upon  a
bipartite  chamber  close  to  a large  standing
stone,  17  feet  in  height,  which  occupied
the  centre  of  the  circle.  No  relics  were  found
in  the  chambers,  except  some  minute  frag-
ments of  burnt  bone.  The  circle  is  42  feet
in  diameter  and  contains  thirteen  stones,
including  the  central  monolith.  The  special
feature  of  the  Callernish  monument  is  that
two  parallel  rows  of  standing  stones,  forming
an  avenue  270  feet  in  length  and  27  feet  in
breadth,  cross  the  circle  from  north  to  south,
and  a single  row,  120  feet  in  length,  crosses
it  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  average
height  of  the  stones,  after  the  removal  of  the
peat,  is  11  to  13  feet.

Stanton  Drew  (Somersetshire). — This  group
consists  of  three  circles  (two  with  avenues)
and  a few  isolated  menhirs,  one  of  which
goes  under  the  name  Kingstone.  The  larger

N


194  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


circle  measures  360  feet  in  diameter,  and  the
others  129  and  96  feet  respectively.

The  Ring  of  Brogar  (Orkney). — The  great
circle  of  Brogar  (for  there  are  one  or  two
smaller  circles,  as  well  as  several  tumuli  in
the  vicinity)  measures  342  feet  in  diameter;
and  when  the  present  writer  visited  the  locality
some  years  ago,  there  were  fourteen  mono-
liths standing  and  fifteen  lying  in  the  heather,
out  of  the  sixty  which  it  originally  contained.
Some  of  the  stones  might  be  about  15  feet
high,  but  others  do  not  rise  above  the  surface
more  than  6 or  7 feet.  Outside  the  circle
there  is  a surrounding  ditch,  from  20  to  30
feet  wide,  and  6 feet  deep.  Access  is  got  to
the  interior  by  two  unexcavated  portions  of
the  ditch,  like  roads  entering  it  on  opposite
sides.

S tennis  (Orkney). — Of  the  twelve  stones,
15  to  18  feet  high,  which  the  circle  of  Stennis
originally  contained  there  are  only  two  now
in  position ; but  a third  lies  on  the  ground
close  to  a ruined  dolmen.  The  diameter  of
the  circle  was  104  feet,  and  surrounding  it
there  was  a ditch  50  feet  wide.  A conspicuous
monolith,  18  feet  in  height,  stands  at  a short
distance  outside  the  circular  area.  Some-
where in  the  vicinity  not  far  off  was  the  famous
Stone  of  Odin,  8 feet  high  and  perforated  with
a round  hole,  on  which  a binding  oath  used
to  be  taken  with  hands  joined  through  the
hole.

Little  Salkeld  (Cumberland). — The  circle


CROMLECHS


195


at  Little  Salkeld,  called  “ Long  Meg  and  her
daughters,”  is  one  of  the  most  perfect  in
England.  It  measures  330  feet  in  diameter
and  contains  sixty-seven  stones,  besides  an
outside  monolith  (Long  Meg)  of  sandstone,
on  which  are  incised  several  groups  of  con-
centric circles  with  gutter  channels.

Holywood  (Dumfriesshire). — This  circle  has
a diameter  of  about  291  feet,  but,  like  many
others,  it  is  not  perfectly  round.  It  is  locally
known  as  the  “ Twelve  Apostles  ” although  at
the  present  time  there  are  only  eleven  stones
in  situ.

Burn  Moor  (Cumberland). — The  specimen
at  Burn  Moor  has  two  circles,  placed  con-
centrically, and  measuring  respectively  150
and  100  feet  in  diameter.  This  concentric
arrangement  of  the  circles  is  not  an  uncommon
feature  among  this  class  of  remains.  A small
circle  at  Kenmore,  near  Aberfeldy,  is  of  this
type.

Rollrich  (Oxfordshire). — Although  tradition
has  magnified  the  Rollrich  circle  to  the  im-
portance of  having  been  “ a splendid  temple
of  the  Druid  priesthood,”  it  is  comparatively
an  insignificant  structure.  It  is  100  feet  in
diameter  and  its  tallest  stone  is  only  5 feet
in  height,  the  average  size  of  the  others  being
only  3 feet.

Mayborough. — A different  type  of  monu-
ment is  to  be  seen  at  Mayborough,  near
Penrith.  This  consists  of  a circular  ring-
mound  entirely  composed  of  an  immense


196


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


aggregation  of  small  stones  enclosing  a flat
area  300  feet  in  diameter.  The  central  space
is  entered  by  a wide  aperture  in  the  ring,
and  near  its  middle  there  stands  a fine  mono-
lith, one  of  several  known  to  have  formerly
stood  there.  The  famous  Giant’s  Ring,  near
Belfast,  is  an  example  of  this  type;  but  the
ring  in  the  Irish  case  is  made  of  earth  and
is  larger,  having  a diameter  of  580  feet,  while
the  central  object  is  a fine  dolmen.

The  above  examples  will  give  the  reader
a general  idea  of  the  different  types  of  free
standing  cromlechs  to  be  met  with  in  this
country,  though  they  by  no  means  reveal
the  details  of  all  their  varying  features.  The
smaller  stone  circles  are  so  associated  with
dolmens,  barrows  and  cists  that  they  more
frequently  fall  to  be  described  as  integral
portions  of  one  or  other  of  these  sepulchral
structures.

When  these  cromlechs  are  considered  as
groups  in  different  districts,  though  not
widely  apart,  they  and  their  associated  struc-
tures often  disclose  different  features.  Thus
the  Clava  group,  near  Inverness,  have  one  or
more  circles  of  standing  stones  surrounding
a central  chambered  cairn.  On  the  other
hand,  the  stone  circles  of  Aberdeenshire  have
no  central  cairns,  but  nearly  all  of  them  have
a large  recumbent  stone,  with  a tall  menhir
at  each  end,  placed  in  the  circumference.


DOLMENS


197


Dolmens,  Tumuli,  and  Barrows

Among  memorials  of  the  dead,  dolmens
take  a prominent  place  in  archaeological
records,  not  only  on  account  of  the  large
assortment  of  the  relics  of  past  humanity
which  they  have  yielded  to  explorers,  but  also
for  their  imposing  appearance  and  wide  geo-
graphical distribution,  especially  in  Western
Europe.

A dolmen  in  its  simplest  form  may  be
defined  as  a rudely  constructed  chamber  of
not  less  than  three  uprights,  set  a few  feet
apart,  and  so  arranged  as  to  support  a mega-
lithic  slab,  called  the  capstone,  such  as  may
be  seen  in  the  well-known  dolmen  of  “ Kit's
Coty  House,”  near  Maidstone.  Between  this
simple  structure  and  the  Giants’  Graves,
Grottes  des  Fees,  Allees  Couvertes,  Hunnebedden,
Antas,  etc.,  there  is  a graduated  series  pro-
portionate in  size  to  the  number  of  supports
and  capstones  used  in  their  construction.

If  England  be  the  home  of  the  great  stone
circles,  France  claims  that  position  for  the
dolmens,  the  number  of  which  is  estimated  at
some  4000,  distributed  over  78  departments ;
and  of  this  number  there  are  no  less  than  618
in  Brittany.  Free-standing  dolmens  are  by
no  means  abundant  in  the  eastern  counties  of
England,  but  they  are  frequently  met  with
in  the  south  and  west,  and  in  Wales,  Angle-
sey, the  Isle  of  Man,  Scotland  and  Ireland.
Although  many  of  them  show  no  traces  of


198  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


having  been  embedded  in  a cairn  or  tumulus
— -as  was  the  case  of  the  entire  group  in  the
Drenthe,  of  which  some  fifty  still  remain  in  a
fairly  well-preserved  condition — some  arche-
ologists maintain  that  this  was  the  original
condition  of  all  of  them.  The  theory  also
derives  support  from  the  fact  that  throughout
the  whole  area  of  their  distribution  many  are
to  be  seen  in  all  stages  of  denudation.

The  covered-up  dolmens  and  tumuli  vary
much  in  size,  ranging  from  that  of  an  ordinary
barrow  a few  yards  in  diameter  up  to  Silbury
Hill,  which  is  130  feet  in  height  and  over
500  feet  in  diameter  at  the  base.  They  also
vary  in  appearance  owing  to  the  growth  of
vegetation,  and  other  surface  changes.

The  larger  chambered  cairns  and  tumuli
had  entrance  passages  generally  constructed
of  flags  set  on  edge,  characteristic  specimens
of  which  have  been  recorded  at  Uley  (Glou-
cester), Stoney  Littleton  (Somerset),  Park
Cwn  (Gower  Peninsula),  Achnacree  (and
other  cairns  in  the  counties  of  Argyll  and
Inverness),  the  Horned  Cairns  of  Caithness,
Maeshowe  (Orkney),  etc.  But  between  dol-
mens, cairns,  tumuli,  barrows,  etc.,  there  is
sometimes  no  clear  distinction,  so  much  do
they  overlap  in  constructive  details.

N o megalithic  chamber,  or  entrance  passage,
has  been  discovered  in  Silbury  Hill,  and
therefore  it  remains  a tumulus.  But  at  one
time  Minning  Low  (Derbyshire)  was  a large
truncated  cone,  300  feet  in  diameter  and


DOLMENS


199


covered  with  trees.  Now  it  appears  a double-
chambered,  free-standing  dolmen,  described
by  Bateman,  after  the  soil  had  been  removed,
as  “ exactly  of  the  construction  as  the  well-
known  Kit’s  Coty  House.”

The  great  chambered  cairns  with  entrance
passages  were  evidently  family  vaults,  and
often  contained  the  osseous  remains  of  several
generations.

Burial  mounds  are  called  “ cairns  ” when
their  constructive  materials  consist  of  small
stones,  and  “ barrows  ” when  the  material
is  ordinary  soil;  but  not  unfrequently  both
substances  were  used  in  the  same  mound —
a small  cairn  being  often  found  inside  an
earthen  barrow.  Their  great  diversity  in
appearance  and  form  gave  rise  to  a number
of  qualifying  epithets,  such  as  “ long,”
“ round,”  “ oval,”  “ bell-shaped,”  etc.  Some-
times the  mound  was  surrounded  by  a ditch,
or  a stone  circle,  or  by  both ; and  instances  are
on  record  in  which  both  these  accessories  were
within  the  area  covered  by  the  mound.  In
the  event  of  no  mound  being  raised  over  an
interment  made  in  the  ground  there  may  be
no  indication  whatever  of  its  presence.  This
is  a condition  often  met  with  in  the  case  of
urn  cemeteries  of  later  times.  In  burials
by  inhumation  the  grave  was  frequently
marked  by  a standing  stone,  or  a circle  of
earth  or  stones.  As  inhumation  and  crema-
tion were  practised  simultaneously,  both
methods  may  be  found  in  the  same  mound.


200  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

When  the  body  was  burnt  the  incinerated
lemains  were  carefully  collected  and  usually
placed  in  an  urn,  and  then  buried,  either  in
the  earth,  or  in  a prepared  grave.  A common
practice  was  to  bury  an  urn  in  a more  ancient
tumulus  01  barrow,  and  hence  these  are  known
as  secondary  interments.  When  no  urn  was
used  the  cremated  remains  were  laid  in  a little
heap  in  the  grave,  or  in  a hole  in  earth  that
had  already  been  consecrated,  such  as  a
barrow  or  cemetery.  The  corpse,  thus  reduced
to  a few  handfuls  of  ashes. -and  calcined  bones
required  no  great  space  for  its  preservation!
Hence  sprung  up  a tendency  to  diminish  the
size  of  the  grave,  and  thus  the  megalithic
chambers  gave  place  to  short  stone  cists
containing  the  body  in  a contracted  position,
these  stone-lined,  short  cists  generally  con-
tained  skeletons  with  brachycephalic  skulls
while  the  chambered  cairns 'contained  those
of  the  earlier  dolichocephalic  race.  In  the
Yorkshire  barrows  the  two  races  became
mixed.

The  pottery  found  in  prehistoric  burials
consists  of  a variety  of  vessels,  collectively
called  urns,  but  as  they  are  found  with
un burnt,  as  well  as  burnt,  interments,  they
could  not  all  be  intended  for  cinerary  purposes
Hence  they  have  to  be  classified  according  to
their  ascertained  functions.  Urns  found  with
inhumed  bodies  are  supposed  to  have  con-
tained food  or  drink,  and  are  therefore  called
drinking-cups,”  or  “ beakers,”  and  “ food-


MENHIRS


201


vessels.”  The  former  are  tall  (6  to  9 inches
in  height)  and  highly  ornamented  vessels,
narrowing  from  the  mouth  to  near  the  middle,
then  bulging  and  again  narrowing  at  the  base.
Beakers  are  almost  invariably  associated  with
unburnt  bodies  with  brachycephalic  skulls —
only  two  out  of  twenty-four  having  been
found  by  Canon  Greenwell  in  the  wold  barrows
with  cremated  burials.  The  food-vessel  has
a wide  mouth,  a narrow  base,  and,  though
shorter,  weighs  more  than  the  beaker.

The  cinerary  urns  vary  greatly  in  size,
form  and  ornamentation,  being  generally
from  10  to  18  inches  in  height.  They  are  either
narrow-based  and  wide-mouthed,  with  a
broad  overhanging  rim,  to  which  the  orna-
mentation is  generally  restricted;  or  shaped
like  a flower-pot  and  ornamented  by  one  or
two  parallel  ridges  round  the  body.  The  urns
containing  the  cremated  bones  are  placed  in
the  earth  with  a flat  stone  over  the  mouth,
or,  in  some  instances,  they  are  placed  mouth
downwards  covering  the  calcined  bones.


Menhirs,  Alignments,  etc.

Menhirs. — Standing  stones  appear  to  have
been  erected  at  all  times  for  a variety  of
commemorative  purposes,  such  as  to  mark
the  site  of  a burial,  a battlefield,  or  boundary
line.  Throughout  the  British  Isles  such  iso-
lated monuments  are  widely  distributed,
especially  in  the  less  cultivated  districts.


202


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Many  of  them,  however,  are  but  remnants  of
more  elaborate  structures,  such  as  avenues,
circles  and  dolmens,  which  formerly  occupied
the  site,  but  which,  in  the  course  of  time,
have  been  removed  by  the  ruthless  hands  of
builders  and  agriculturists.

The  largest  menhir  in  Europe  is  to  be  seen
at  Locmariaquer  (Morbihan),  lying  on  the
ground  in  four  fragments,  the  aggregate
length  of  which  amounts  to  67  feet.  Origin-
ally the  monument  was  one  block  of  granite
foreign  to  the  neighbourhood,  and  according
to  recent  calculations  weighed  342  tons.  The
tallest  pillar-stone  in  Scotland  is  Clach-an-
Truiseil  in  the  island  of  Lewis,  standing
18  feet  9 inches  above  ground.

In  Scotland  stones  used  ceremonially  in
the  act  of  crowning  a king  were  called  Tanist-
stones , the  most  famous  of  which  is  the
Lia  Fail,  formerly  at  Scone,  but  now  in  West-
minster Abbey.  Some  menhirs  were  artifici-
ally perforated,  and  associated  with  these
are  various  superstitious  ceremonies.  As  ex-
amples of  this  class  may  be  mentioned  the
Stone  of  Odin,  which  formerly  stood  near  the
circle  of  Stennis ; the  Clach-Charra,  or  Stone
of  Vengeance,  at  Onich  near  Ballachulish ; and
Men-an-Tol,  in  Cornwall.

Alignments. — The  most  celebrated  group
of  stones  known  under  the  name  of  alignments
is  to  be  seen  at  Carnac,  in  Brittany,  situated
in  the  centre  of  a district  containing  the  most
remarkable  megalithic  monuments  in  the


ALIGNMENTS


203


world.  The  Menec  monoliths  extend  in  eleven
lines  for  nearly  a couple  of  miles,  where,  after
a little  break,  they  are  supposed  to  have  been
continuous  with  the  Kermario  group.  The
only  stone  monument  in  England  that  can
be  at  all  paralleled  with  Carnac  alignments
is  at  Ashdown,  in  the  Vale  of  the  I\hite  Horse
(Berks).  Here  the  stones,  numbering  about
800,  are  grouped  in  three  divisions  and  extend
over  an  irregular  parallelogram  for  500  to
600  yards  in  length,  and  about  half  that  in
breadth.  Sir  Henry  Dryden  describes  several,
but  smaller,  groups  in  Caithness,  as  at  Garry  -
whin,  Camster,  Yarhouse  and  the  “ Many
Stones  ” at  Clyth  (Fergusson,  Rude  Stone
Monuments , p.  529).  In  Britain  alignments
are  more  frequently  met  with  in  single  or
double  rows  leading  to,  or  from,  other  mega-
lithic  monuments  which  still,  or  formerly,
existed,  such  as  the  avenues  at  Avebury,
Stonehenge,  Dartmoor,  Shap,  Callernish,  etc.
At  St.  Colomb,  in  Cornwall,  there  is  a single
row,  called  the  “Nine  Maidens,”  which
consists  of  eight  quartz  stones  extending  in  a
perfectly  straight  line  for  262  feet.

Rocking- stones. — Just  on  the  borderland
between  the  works  of  Nature  and  Art  comes
the  so-called  Rocking-stone,  or  Logan-stone,
wrhich  is  usually  nothing  more  than  an  ice-
transported  boulder,  poised  so  nicely  on  its
rocky  bed  that  gentle  pressure  by  the  hand
may  cause  it  to  rock,  or  oscillate.  Some  of
these  stones  had  the  pivot-like  prominence  on


204


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


which  they  rested  artificially  formed,  by
cutting  away  a portion  of  the  rock ; but,  on
the  other  hand,  natural  causes  can  produce
similar  results.  The  stone  itself,  acting  like
an  umbrella,  protects  the  central  portion  of
the  bed,  while  weathering  is  going  on  all
around  it.  Such  stranded  boulders,  being
generally  large  and  fantastically  placed  on
prominences,  were  pre-eminently  calculated
to  awaken  astonishment  in  the  minds  of  the
worshippers  of  the  mysterious  works  of
Nature.  Hence  the  important  position  as-
signed to  Rocking-stones  in  the  Druidical
system  of  worship  invented  by  Stukely  and
other  antiquaries  of  the  eighteenth  century.

The  famous  Rocking-stone  at  Pontypridd
(Glamorgan),  known  as  the  Maen  Chwyl,  and
weighing  9|  tons,  was  surrounded,  about  the
year  1850,  “by  a stone  circle  with  serpentine
avenues,  in  imitation  of  Dr.  Stukely’s  Dra-
contia ; and  since  then  the  Pontypridd
megaliths  have  become  the  rendezvous  of
the  adherents  of  the  neo-Druidic  cult  of  the
serpent.

In  the  absence  of  historical  records  and
scientific  investigations  it  was  formerly  the
fashion  to  regard  all  these  primitive  stone
monuments  as  the  work  of  the  Druids,  the
so-called  priests  of  the  Celts.  Against  the
theory  that  any  of  them  were  ever  used  as
altars  for  human  sacrifice,  there  is  prima-facie
evidence  in  the  care  taken  to  have  the
smoothest  and  flattest  surface  of  the  stones


INHABITED  SITES


205


(composing  the  chambers  always  turned  in-
- wards.  Moreover,  cup-marks  and  other
i incised  markings,  when  observed  on  capstones
; are  almost  invariably  on  their  under-side.

No  chronological  sequence  has  been  detected
i in  their  construction ; nor  can  their  special
i forms  in  different  countries  be  said  to  indicate
.contemporaneity.  The  irregular  manner  in
which  they  are  distributed  along  the  sea-
shores of  Europe  and  Africa  has  given  rise
to  the  theory  that  they  were  erected  by  a
wandering  race  called  “ the  people  of  the
. dolmens,”  but  of  the  whence  and  whither  of
these  peripatetic  dolmen  builders  we  have  no
knowledge.

From  these  general  considerations,  together
with  the  accumulative  results  of  recent  re-
searches, there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the
megalithic  monuments  of  Europe  are  chiefly
remains  of  the  abodes  and  memorials  of  the
dead.


CHAPTER  IX

INHABITED  SITES  AND  PROTECTIVE  WORKS

Man  is  no  exception  to  the  law  of  the  organic
world  which  forces  all  animals  to  instinctively
protect  themselves  from  their  natural  enemies.
We  have  already  seen  that  during  the  Palaeo-
lithic period  caves  and  rock-shelters  were


206


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


resorted  to  as,  perhaps,  the  best  and  readiest
means  of  securing  personal  protection,  not
only  from  enemies  but  from  the  exigencies
of  a variable  climate.  When,  however,  caves
and  rock-shelters  were  no  longer  sufficient
to  accommodate  the  increasing  families  of
these  nomadic  people,  the  surplus  population
would  have  to  migrate  to  localities  which
might  not  possess  these  natural  means  of
shelter.  In  these  circumstances,  necessity
would  compel  them  to  seek  or  invent  some
other  means  of  security,  the  particular  form
of  which  would  largely  depend  on  the  physical
conditions  of  the  environment.  If  stones
were  abundant  they  might  be  used  to  con-
struct primitive  huts,  but  if  these  materials
failed,  their  next  resource  would  probably
be  to  dig  a circular  trench  in  the  earth  and  to
cover  it  with  a timber  roof  and  thatch.  If,
however,  the  locality  was  swampy,  or  liable
to  be  flooded,  it  cannot  be  said  that  their
ingenuity  would  be  greatly  overtaxed  if  they
invented  the  plan  of  laying  cross-beams  over
a series  of  supporting  piles,  so  as  to  raise  the
floor  of  the  hut  above  the  damp  soil.  Or,
finally,  they  might  construct  a chamber  en-
tirely underground  in  imitation  of  the  natural
caves.  All  these  methods  were  adopted  by  the
Prehistoric  people  of  Britain.

In  glancing  over  the  inhabited  sites  of  the
Neolithic  and  subsequent  people,  we  find  that
natural  caves  were  still  resorted  to,  not  only
as  hiding-places  in  times  of  danger,  but


INHABITED  SITES


207


occasionally  as  places  of  usual  abode.  How-
ever, from  the  earliest  times  men  were  in  the
habit  of  constructing  various  kinds  of  artificial
huts,  which  they  often  fortified  by  enclosures
of  stone,  earth  or  wood.  There  may  be  no
chronological  sequence  in  the  construction
and  selection  of  these  different  kinds  of  abode,
although  caves  were  probably  the  only  places  of
security  of  the  earlier  races  of  mankind.  But
caves  have  been  more  or  less  inhabited  in  all
successive  ages,  concurrently  with  other  kinds
of  artificial  habitations,  as  we  have  noted  in
the  case  of  Kent’s  Cavern,  which  afforded
shelter  to  both  Palaeolithic  and  Neolithic
races  up  to  post-Roman  times.

Caves. — Besides  the  caves  of  South  Britain,
already  described  as  the  haunts  of  Palaeolithic
man,  we  may  mention  the  Victoria  Cave  near
Settle,  Kirkhead  Cave  on  the  north  shore  of
Morecambe  Bay,  Poole’s  Cave  near  Buxton,
Thor’s  Cave  in  Staffordshire,  and  the  Borness
Cave  in  Kirkcudbrightshire,  as  examples
of  caves  which,  after  careful  exploration,
have  yielded  abundant  evidence  of  having
been  inhabited  as  late  as  Romano-British
times.

In  the  cave  of  Heathery  Burn,  near  Durham,
there  was  found  a remarkable  hoard  of  objects
of  the  Bronze  Age,  together  with  two  human
skeletons,  charcoal,  and  other  evidence  of
human  occupancy.  Among  this  varied  assort-
ment of  relics  were  a singular  socketed  knife,
socketed  celts  (and  a mould  for  the  same),


208


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


spear-heads,  armlets,  pins,  a razor,  and  one
of  those  large  riveted  caldrons  of  the  Hallstatt
type — all  of  bronze.  In  addition  to  the  above
there  were  many  other  relics,  proving  that  the
hoard  belonged  to  the  latest  phase  of  the
Bronze  Age.

Beehive  Huts. — The  beehive  hut  consists
of  a circular  or  oval  building  of  dry  stones,
so  constructed  that  each  layer  of  stones  over-
laps the  one  beneath  it,  till  the  opening  of
the  apex  becomes  so  small  as  to  be  closed  by
one  stone.  Such  buildings,  when  constructed
in  the  open,  are  on  architectural  principles
necessarily  limited  in  their  dimensions,  being
only  a few  feet  in  diameter;  but  when  sur-
rounded by  an  accumulation  of  stones  or  earth
they  are  capable  of  attaining  a considerable
size,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  tombs  of  Mycenae,
Orchomenos  and  other  sites  in  Greece.
Among  these  Grecian  structures  that  known  as
the  “ Treasury  of  Atreus  ” measures  48  feet
in  ground  diameter  and  48  feet  in  height.

The  invention  of  the  beehive  principle
dates  to  the  Neolithic  period,  but,  on  the
introduction  of  Christianity  into  Britain,  this
type  of  building  was  found  to  be  so  well
adapted  to  the  simple  wants  of  the  early
Christians  that  it  was  utilized  as  a monastic
cell.  The  most  perfect  example  of  the
primitive  Christian  Cashel  now  to  be  seen  is
on  Skellig  Michel,  on  the  south-west  coast  of
Ireland,  which  contains  a church,  oratory
and  several  beehive  houses — the  latter  being


INHABITED  SITES


209


still  entire.  On  Eilean-na-N aoimh  (Island  of
the  Saints),  on  the  west  coast  of  Argyllshire,
may  also  be  seen  two  ruined  beehive  cells
associated  with  the  ruins  of  a small  church.
The  beehive  principle  is  frequently  met  with
in  the  roofing  of  underground  dwellings  and
chambered  cairns.

Underground  Dwellings. — As  places  of  refuge
and  habitation  underground  chambers  have
been  used  both  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.
In  Scotland  they  are  known  as  “ Eirde
Houses  ” or  “ Weems,”  in  Cornwall  as
k:  Fogous,”  and  in  Ireland  as  “ Souterrains.”

In  Scotland  such  dwellings  had  a wide
distribution,  attaining  their  greatest  develop-
ment in  the  district  between  the  river  Tay
and  the  Moray  Firth — a district  generally
recognized  as  the  original  home  of  the  Piets;
and  hence  these  underground  dwellings  are
sometimes  called  Piets’  Houses.  They  are
generally  met  with  as  isolated  dwellings  con-
cealed below  the  surface,  but  sometimes  they
occur  in  groups,  as  on  the  moor  of  Kildrummy,
in  Aberdeenshire,  where  nearly  fifty  were
found  extending  over  an  area  of  less  than
a couple  of  square  miles.  They  are  long,  low,
narrow  galleries,  always  more  or  less  curved,
and  gradually  expanding,  both  laterally  and
vertically,  till,  towards  the  inner  extremity,
they  may  measure  as  much  as  10  or  12  feet
in  width,  and  6 or  7 in  height.  They  are
most  frequently  built  of  undressed  dry  stones,
with  convergent  walls  bearing  heavy  lintels;
o


210


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


but  occasionally  the  walls  are  made  with  flags
set  on  end.  The  narrow  entrance,  probably
concealed  by  a stone  door,  sloped  down  to  the
floor  level  of  the  chamber,  but  before  reaching
the  latter  there  was  occasionally  a second
door,  often  placed  at  the  point  where  the
direction  changed.  Sometimes  a passage
branched  off  from  one  side  of  the  gallery  and
led  to  another  chamber,  usually  of  a circular
or  oval  shape.  These  chambers  were  fre-
quently roofed  in  a dome  fashion,  on  the
beehive  principle,  much  in  the  same  manner
as  those  of  the  chambered  cairns.  Though
all  built  on  a uniform  plan  they  are  found
to  vary  greatly  in  dimensions,  that  at  Tealing,
Forfarshire,  measuring  80  feet  in  length,
5 feet  8 inches  in  height,  2 feet  6 inches  in
width  at  entrance,  and  8 feet  6 inches  next
the  inner  end ; while  the  corresponding
measurements  of  one  at  Kinnord  are  only
21,  1|,  3 and  2|  feet.

It  is  the  general  opinion  of  archaeologists
that  these  subterranean  chambers  were  always
associated  with  surface  habitations,  whose
structural  materials,  being  made  of  timbers,
have  disappeared  through  natural  decay  and
changes  due  to  the  cultivation  of  the  land.
Striking  evidence  of  such  an  association  was
observed  in  1859,  at  Cairn  Conan,  near  Ar-
broath. Here,  an  underground  structure  pre-
sented the  peculiarity  of  having,  in  addition
to  the  usual  long  curved  gallery,  a circular
beehive  chamber  attached  to  it  by  a low


INHABITED  SITES


211


passage,  and  to  which  there  was  also  a second
entrance.  About  six  or  seven  paces  north  of
the  underground  gallery  a circular  space,
twenty  feet  in  diameter,  and  rudely  paved
with  flagstones,  was  detected  a few  inches
beneath  the  surface  soil.  This,  upon  exami-
nation, was  recognized  as  the  site  of  a habita-
tion, of  which,  however,  nothing  then  remained
except  the  floor,  and  a few  relics  which  its
occupants  had  left  behind  them.  These
relics  are  important  in  showing  that  the
structures  belonged  to  post-Roman  times,
for  there  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  both
the  surface  and  underground  remains  were
part  of  the  same  homestead.  Among  them
were  the  upper  stones  of  a quern  mill,  two
whorls  of  lead,  a portion  of  a bronze  ring,
some  rudely  hollowed  stones,  and  fragments
of  iron  cutting  implements.  Those  from  the
underground  chambers  comprised  fragments
of  various  kinds  of  pottery,  some  wheel-made,
a bronze  needle,  part  of  a quern,  horses’  teeth,
calcined  bones,  and  a large  spiral  bracelet  of
the  snake-like  pattern — all  of  which  point  to
Romano-Britisli  times.

Outside  the  British  Isles  the  underground
dwellings  seem  to  be  unknown,  although  the
statement  of  Tacitus  suggests  the  prevalence
of  such  hiding-places  among  the  Germans.
In  discussing  the  manners  and  customs  of
this  people  he  writes  as  follows  (Chap.  XVI) :
“ They  also  dig  subterranean  caves,  and  cover
them  over  with  a great  quantity  of  dung.


212


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


These  they  use  as  winter  retreats  and  gran-
eries,  for  they  preserve  a moderate  tempera-
ture; and  upon  an  invasion  when  the  open
country  is  plundered,  these  recesses  remain
unviolated,  either  because  the  enemy  is
ignorant  of  them,  or  because  he  will  not
trouble  himself  with  the  search.”

Hut-circles. — The  habitations  known  as  hut-
circles  are  found  in  numberless  localities
throughout  Britain,  especially  on  upland
moors  that  have  been  little  disturbed  by
cultivation.  They  are  generally  associated
with  other  prehistoric  monuments,  such  as
cairns,  cromlechs,  beehive  houses,  menhirs,
souterrains,  etc.  I cannot  think  of  a better
way  of  conveying  to  readers  a general  idea  of
these  promiscuous  remains  than  to  give  a
brief  account  of  one  or  two  localities,  where
they  are  still  to  be  seen.  During  a stay  of
a few  days  at  Penzance  the  present  writer
was  able  to  visit  the  principal  antiquities  of
West  Cornwall,  the  result  of  which  may  be
thus  summarized.

Starting  from  Penzance  and  following  the
Morvah  road,  we  first  come  to  the  “ Lanyon
Cromlech,”  a free-standing  dolmen  with  a
cover-stone  17  feet  long  by  nearly  9 feet
broad,  and  resting  on  three  pillar-stones,
5 feet  in  height.  But  this  is  not  its  original
height,  as  the  cover-stone  fell  some  years
ago,  and  when  it  was  being  raised  the  supports
had  to  be  reduced.  Before  this  event  it  is
said  that  a man  on  horseback  could  ride  under


INHABITED  SITES


213


the  capstone.  Half  a mile  beyond  the  so-
called  Cromlech  we  come  on  two  famous
monuments,  viz.  Men-an-Tol  (holed  stone)
and  Men  Scryfa  (inscribed  stone).  Turning
to  the  left  we  come  to  Chun,  where  there  is
a group  of  interesting  antiquities,  including
a hill  castle  or  fort,  a dolmen  and  an  ancient
British  village.

Chun  Castle  is  of  an  oval  shape,  180  feet
long  by  170  feet  broad,  and  consists  of  two
concentric  ditches  alternating  with  dry-stone
walls.  The  inner  wall  is  20  feet  thick,  and,
before  it  was  plundered  of  its  stones  more
than  a century  ago,  it  is  said  to  have  been
at  least  10  feet  high.  The  dolmen,  which
has  its  stones  covered  with  a thick  coating  of
lichens,  stands  in  solitary  grandeur  about  250
yards  to  the  west  of  the  castle.  It  consists
of  a large  capstone  supported  on  four  pillar-
stones  enclosing  a chamber  7 feet  in  height.
It  was  formerly  covered  by  a tumulus  of  earth
and  stones  and  surrounded  by  a circle  of
standing  stones.

A quarter  of  a mile  to  the  east  of  the
ruined  castle  is  the  site  of  the  ancient  British
village  of  Bosullo,  which  appears  to  have
been  connected  with  the  former  by  a paved
way.

About  a mile  to  the  south  there  are  the
ruins  of  another  hut-village  situated  on  the
slope  of  a hill  at  Bodinar,  in  which,  “ within
the  memory  of  man,”  there  were  beehive
huts  to  be"  seen,  but  they  are  all  now  in


214


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


ruins.  However,  I had  the  satisfaction  of
seeing  one  of  the  Cornwall  beehive  huts  at
Bosporthennis,  now  the  only  remaining  speci-
men of  a large  British  settlement,  once  situated
on  the  side  of  Carn  Galva.  The  beehive  house
consists  of  two  chambers,  one  circular  and  the
other  rectangular.  The  former  is  13  feet  in
diameter,  and  has  no  less  than  three  small
doors.  The  roof  has  unfortunately  collapsed,
but  enough  of  the  wall  remains  to  show  the
converging  system  on  which  the  dome  was
constructed.  The  latter  is  connected  with  the
former  by  a low  square  door,  and  measures
9 feet  long  by  4 feet  broad ; but  it  is  regarded
as  a later  appendage  to  the  beehive  chamber.

The  ancient  British  village  of  Chysauster,
situated  in  the  vicinity  of  the  liill-fortress  of
Castle-an-dinas,  has  been  partly  cleared  out,
and  in  the  course  of  these  operations  evidence
of  tin-smelting  and  fragments  of  Romano-
British  pottery  were  discovered.

Another  interesting  excursion  towards
Land’s  End  allows  the  pedestrian  to  visit
the  celebrated  Logan  Rock,  some  menhirs
and  castles,  and  three  or  four  stone  circles,
including  Boscawen-un.  But  without  dwell-
ing on  these  ancient  remains,  we  must  pass
on  to  notice  the  characteristics  of  the  subter-
ranean dwellings  in  this  neighbourhood.  A
good  specimen  of  them  is  the  “ Fogou  ” at
Boleit,  on  the  lower  Buryan  road,  near  the
ruins  of  the  ancient  Manor-house  of  Trewoof.
It  consists  of  a subterranean  gallery,  40  feet


PROTECTIVE  WORKS


215


long,  from  which  another  chamber,  at  present
about  13  feet  long,  branches  off,  but  whose
full  dimensions  have  not  been  ascertained.
The  convergent  walls  are  of  unhewn  stones
and  covered  with  large  granite  slabs.

Another  and  still  more  interesting  speci-
men is  at  Chapel  Euny,  parish  of  Sancreed,
about  4i  miles  from  Penzance.  Its  mam
features  consist  of  a gallery  60  feet  long,

6 feet  wide  and  from  6 to  7 feet  high.  At  one
end  it  gives  access  to  the  surface  by  a sma
trapdoor  closed  by  a stone,  with  holes  in  the
side  apparently  for  barring  it,  and  at  the
other  there  is  a low  passage,  10  feet  long
which  leads  to  a beehive  chamber,  16  feet  in
diameter.  The  floors  of  the  gallery  and
chamber  were  paved  with  flagstones  and
provided  with  drains  beneath  the  pavement
During  the  excavation  of  these  underground
structures  evidence  of  tin-smelting,  and
various  relics  were  found,  among  the  latte
being  whetstones,  hammer-stones,  fragments
of  different  kinds  of  pottery,  an  iron  spear-
head, a “ pot-hook,”  and  a piece  of  red
Samian  ware.  On  the  surface  m the  close
vicinity  of  these  chambers  there  are  the
remains  of  a British  hut-village-thus  showing
like  other  examples  in  this  district  as  well
elsewhere,  that  there  was  a relationship  be-
tween the  surface  and  underground  dwelling.

The  Cornish  and  Irish  souterrams  do
manifest  so  strongly  the  single,  alKJ  S°w'
times  double,  curvatures  which  are  so  cha.


216  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

acteristic  of  those  within  the  Scottish  area.
But  in  all  other  respects  they  are  so  similar
that  their  development  can  hardly  be
accounted  for,  except  on  the  supposition  of
their  having  a common  origin.  These  trivial
differences  may  be  explained  by  the  Roman
occupation,  the  effect  of  which  was  to  isolate
the  people  of  outlying  districts,  who  for  a
long  time  retained  old  British  customs,  after
they  were  discontinued  in  the  central  areas  of
Britain,  in  consequence  of  Roman  civilization.

The  Hill -fort  of  Carn  Bre,  a conspicuous
landmark  to  the  east  of  Chun  Castle  and
lising  to  the  height  of  740  feet,  is  crowned
by  a fort  strongly  protected  by  inner  and
outer  walls  of  dry  stone.  The  greatest  length
of  the  defensible  area  is  540  yards  and  °its
width  is  nearly  300  yards.  Some  years  ago
extensive  excavations  were  made  within  this
enclosure,  mainly  with  the  view  of  deter-
mining the  nature  of  some  dozen  hut -circles
to  be  seen  among  some  large  boulders  which
lay  partly  sunk  in  the  ground.  But  instead
of  a few  nearly  a hundred  were  exposed  and
examined.  The  dwellings  were  rudely  circular
generally  from  20  to  22  feet  in  diameter,  and
their  foundations  were  laid  with  granite  stones,
lhe  following  is  a summary  of  the  objects
lound  m the  course  of  the  explorations  :

Flint  implements  and  weapons — scrapers,
knives,  spear-heads  and  arrow-points.  Cores]
flakes  and  chips  in  great  profusion.  Upper
portion  of  a quern,  pebbles  for  pounding  or


PROTECTIVE  WORKS  217

bruising  and  a small  muller.  Spindle-whorls
of  stone  and  pottery.  One  perfect  stone  celt
and  a number  of  broken  ones.  A perforated
disc  of  slate,  4 inches  in  diameter.  Frag-
ments of  pottery  both  hand  and  wheel
made.  A bronze  ring.  A silver  denarius  of
Vespasian.

Previous  records  of  objects  from  Cam  Bre
include  bronze  celts,  and  gold  coins  of  British
kmgs  contemporary  with  the  early  Roman
emperors.

A few  days  at  Chagford  would  enable  a
keen  antiquary  to  visit  most  of  the  Dartmoor
antiquities  avenues,  menhirs,  cromlechs,
dolmens,  and  especially  a few  groups  of  hut-
circles.  Of  the  circles  of  standing  stones,
tliat  at  Scorhill  is  the  best  on  Dartmoor.  Its
twenty-four  stones  still  in  situ,  and  eight
prone,  form  a circle  90  feet  in  diameter.
It  is  the  northerly  termination  of  a series
of  prehistoric  monuments  extending  to  the
Fernworthy  circle,  some  two  miles  distant.
With  regard  to  the  hut-circles  and  dolmens,
till  a few  years  ago  little  could  be  said  of  them,
as  of  the  former  only  broken-down  rings  of
stones  arranged  in  groups  here  and  there  were
to  be  seen ; and  as  for  the  latter  they  were
rifled  long  ago.  The  Dartmoor  Exploration
Committee  have,  however,  within  recent  years
done  a considerable  amount  of  spade-work,
and  from  their  published  reports  we  gather
a few  definite  facts  about  these  primitive
habitations  and  their  constructors.


218


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Grimspound,  one  of  the  most  perfect  settle-
ments on  Dartmoor,  lies  in  a semicircular
depression  in  the  form  of  an  oval  enclosure
(154  by  121  yards),  and  surrounded  by  a
double  stone  wall  which,  even  in  its  present
mined  condition,  rises  three  or  four  feet
above  the  surface.  Inside  this  enclosure  are
the  remains  of  twenty-four  hut-circles,  two
of  which  are  thus  described  (as  seen  after
excavation)  by  Mr.  Robert  Burnard.  One  of
them  “ is  nearly  11  feet  in  diameter,  with  a
doorway  2 feet  9 inches  wide,  protected  by
a low  curved  wall  which  was  probably  roofed.
Entering  the  hut,  there  is  on  the  right-hand
side  a raised  dais  or  platform,  standing  eight
inches  above  the  floor  of  hard  trodden-in  sub-
soil. This  is  supposed  to  have  formed  a couch,
and  with  rushes  and  heather  made  a comfort-
able prehistoric  bed.  Opposite  the  door  is
the  hearth,  and  near  it  a cooking-hole  lined
with  stones  set  on  edge.  Almost  in  the
centre  of  the  hut  is  a small  flat  stone,  which
may  have  served  as  an  anvil  for  cracking
bones,  etc.,  on ; or  it  may  have  been  a foot-
stone  for  a post  supporting  the  roof.  Much
wood  charcoal  was  found  in  this  dwelling,
together  with  fragments  of  flint.  No  pottery
was  observed.  The  other  hut — not  quite
ten  feet  in  diameter — had  its  floor  paved  and
contained  a small  cooking-hole  and  much
charcoal.  A broken  flint  knife,  much  used,
was  found  near  the  fireplace.”

Of  the  debris  of  such  dwellings  scattered


PROTECTIVE  WORKS


219


over  the  more  elevated  plateaus  and  valleys
of  Britain  there  is  no  end.  They  are  generally
in  groups  associated  with  cairns,  cists,  stone
circles,  standing  stones  and  frequently  pro-
tected by  enclosures.  Near  the  Loch  of
Kinnord,  in  Aberdeenshire,  may  be  seen  the
ruins  of  the  so-called  Pictish  town  of  Davan,
which,  from  the  extensive  area  covered  by
foundations  of  all  sorts  of  buildings,  must
have  been  a strongly  fortified  centre  of  a
large  and  busy  population.

The  Welsh  antiquaries  have  recently  ex-
plored the  Fortress  City  of  Treceiri,  in  Car-
narvonshire, perhaps  the  finest  of  the  kind  in
Britain.  The  space  enclosed  is  an  irregular
oval — the  walls  following  the  contour  of  the
hill-top — and  measures  330  by  125  yards.  On
being  excavated  this  area  was  found  to  be
covered  with  the  foundations  of  primitive
dwellings — circular,  oval  and  square — on  the
sites  of  which  were  found  fireplaces,  raised
seats,  flint  implements,  pottery  and  other
evidences  of  human  habitation.

The  great  prehistoric  town  of  Worlebury,
in  Somersetshire,  wras  situated  on  a pro-
truding plateau,  with  steep  sides  and  a flat
top  of  considerable  extent,  overlooking  the
present  fashionable  town  of  Weston-super-
Mare.  Across  the  neck  of  this  plateau
there  runs  a massive  dry-stone  rampart  35
feet  thick,  the  raison  d'etre  of  which  was  not
understood  till  excavations  revealed  the  exist-
ence of  numerous  cylindrical  pits  containing


220


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


grain — no  doubt  storing-places  in  connection
with  the  perishable  huts.

Another  inhabited  site,  showing  defensive
arrangements  somewhat  similar  to  Worle-
bury,  is  that  on  St.  David’s  Head,  Pembroke-
shire, which  has  been  recently  subjected  to
some  spade  exploration.  It  had  been  long
known  that  the  extreme  end  of  this  headland
was  strongly  fortified  by  a dry-stone  rampart
which  cut  it  off  from  the  mainland,  and  that
within  the  area  thus  protected  were  the  re-
mains of  hut-circles ; but  as  to  their  age,  or
who  were  their  constructors,  no  one  seemed
to  have  the  remotest  idea.  The  result  of  the
excavations  was  to  show  that  they  belonged
to  the  early  Iron  Age.  The  objects  discovered
on  their  sites  consist  of  hammer-stones  of
beach  pebbles,  flint  flakes,  scrapers  and  cores,
sharpening  stones,  spindle-whorls,  perforated
discs  of  slate,  part  of  a jet  armlet,  fragments
of  rude  pottery,  variously  coloured  beads,
and  a few  articles  of  iron,  but  no  Roman
relics.

Few  indications  of  ancient  inhabited  sites
have  been  hitherto  recorded  in  low-lying
districts  where  cultivation  has  been  practised
from  time  immemorial.  Two  reasons  may  be
assigned  for  the  apparent  absence  of  hut-
dwellings  in  such  localities.  In  the  first
place  they  were  constructed,  not  of  stones,
but  of  timbers  and  clay  wattling  over  de-
pressions more  or  less  deeply  excavated  in
the  soil ; and  in  the  second  place  the  structural


PROTECTIVE  WORKS


221


materials  quickly  decayed,  the  pits  became
filled  up  with  silted  material,  and  subsequent
cultivation  obliterated  nearly  all  traces  of
their  former  existence.  Stone  implements
were  frequently  gathered  in  localized  spots
on  ploughed  fields,  suggesting  the  sites  of  some
kind  of  dwellings,  but  little  information  can
be  got  from  such  surface  finds.

Mr.  George  Clinch,  who  has  excavated  many
prehistoric  pit-dwellings  of  this  type  on  Hayes
Common,  West  Wickham  and  other  localities,
within  an  area  of  some  four  miles  near  the
boundary  between  Kent  and  Surrey,  has  put
on  record  the  result  of  his  experience,  as  regards
their  structure  and  classification.  He  divides
them  into  three  types,  viz.  :

1.  Large  circular  pits  from  3 to  10  metres
in  diameter  and  from  15  to  90  centimetres
deep,  and  surrounded  by  a well-defined
mound.  These  pits  showed  no  evidence  of
fire.

2.  Large  circular  pits,  similar  in  every
way  to  those  of  the  first  type,  but  with  a low
conical  mound  in  the  centre,  supposed  to  be
for  a central  pillar  to  support  a roof.

3.  Small  circular  pits,  35  centimetres  deep,
containing  reddened  pebbles,  charred  wood,
and  other  marks  of  fire — supposed  to  be  for
cooking  purposes.

Only  stone  implements  were  found  in  the
course  of  his  operations,  as  all  articles  made  of
bone,  horn,  wood  and  other  organic  tissues
had  completely  decayed.  The  flints  consisted


222


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


of  flakes,  scrapers,  arrow-heads,  drills,  saws,
chips,  cores,  etc.  Of  other  kinds  of  stone  were
hammers,  celts  and  grain  crushers.  On  this
evidence  Mr.  Clinch  assigns  these  hut-circles
to  the  Neolithic  Age.

Deneholes.  — The  much-discussed  Dene-
holes  of  Kent  and  Essex  are  still  surrounded
by  a halo  of  mystery,  owing  to  the  number
of  theories  advanced  by  different  writers  to
explain  their  object  and  uses,  the  most  plau-
sible of  which  is  that  they  are  simply  the  pits
from  which  chalk  had  been  extracted  for  indus-
trial purposes.  Deneholes  are  usually  met
with  on  the  higher  ground  of  the  lower  reaches
of  the  Thames,  the  best-known  localities  being
the  Hangman’s  Wood,  Abbey  Wood,  Graves-
end, etc.  In  fact,  North  Kent  and  South  Essex
appear  to  be  studded  with  them.  A Dene-
hole  consists  of  a round  shaft,  three  feet  in
diameter,  sunk  through  ordinary  soil  and  gravel
till  the  chalk  is  reached,  often  at  a depth  of
some  sixty  feet.  The  shaft  then  widens  out,
like  the  shoulder  of  a bottle,  and  forms  a cir-
cular chamber,  from  which  galleries  branch
out  in  different  directions.  No  relics  indica-
tive of  human  habitation  have  hitherto  been
found  in  any  of  the  Deneholes,  although  a
considerable  number  have  been  more  or  less
explored.

Camps  and  Forts. — Every  country  in  Europe
possesses  remains  of  the  refuges  and  strong-
holds of  its  early  inhabitants.  The  selection
of  the  site  and  the  kind  of  works  constructed


PROTECTIVE  WORKS


223


varied  according  to  the  nature  of  the  ground
and  the  materials  readily  procurable  in  the
vicinity.  The  hill-forts  of  Scotland  were
usually  constructed  of  either  stones  or  earth,
seldom  a mixture  of  both  being  used — a fact
strikingly  illustrated  by  the  two  Caterthun
Forts,  in  Forfarshire.  One,  the  White  Fort,
is  entirely  built  of  stones,  though  strengthened
by  surrounding  entrenchments ; while  the  other,
the  Brown  Caterthun,  is  mainly  composed  of
earthwork.  And  yet  they  occupy  rival  sum-
mits, facing  each  other  across  a deep  valley  less
than  half-a-mile  wide.  In  Wales  and  Scotland
stone  forts  predominate,  but  in  England
earthworks  are  the  prevailing  defensive  works,
among  which  are  very  large  specimens,  such
as  Maumbury  Rings  (Dorchester),  which
measures  345  by  330  feet,  and  Cissbury
Camp,  on  the  Downs  of  West  Sussex,  which
covers  not  less  than  60  acres.  One  of  the
best  known  of  these  ancient  strongholds  is
the  British  Camp  on  the  Herefordshire  Beacon
near  Malvern,  which  takes  the  form  of  an
irregular  oval  1100  yards  in  length.  It  con-
tains a citadel  entrenched  within  an  array
of  amazing  ramparts,  ditches  and  fortified
entrances.

The  chronological  range  of  these  camps
and  forts  extends  from  the  Neolithic  period
down  to  post-Roman  and  even  Norman
times ; but  after  the  lapse  of  a few  centuries
they  have  all  fallen  into  the  category  of  the
unknown,  and  it  is  only  spade-work  that


224  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

can  now  reveal  their  true  history.  No  one
has  done  more  to  clear  up  this  point  than  the
late  General  Pitt-Rivers  by  his  excavations
on  Cranbourne  Chase.  This  indefatigable
explorer  has  shown  that  the  Bronze  Age
camps  were  approximately  rectangular— a
feature  which  was  formerly  supposed  to  be
peculiar  to  Roman  camps.  The  relics  col-
lected m the  stratified  silt,  which  had,  in  the
course  of  time,  partially  filled  the  surrounding
ditches  furnished  valuable  data  for  establish-
ing a chronological  sequence  in  the  occupancy
of  the  camps  In  this  way  he  was  able  to
classify  and  differentiate  them  according  as
they  belonged  to  the  Stone,  Bronze,  Late
Celtic,  Roman  or  post-Roman  Ages.

The  ^ variety  of  forts  known  as  “ Vitrified
*orts  has  gathered  around  it  an  extra-
ordinary amount  of  literature,  chiefly  of  a
controversial  character.  The  real  problem
at  issue  is  to  account  for  the  vitrifaction
which  to  a greater  or  less  extent  is,  or  rather
was,  to  be  seen  on  the  surrounding  walls  of
some  fifty  stone-built  forts  scattered  through -
out  the  northern  and  south-western  districts
ot  Scotland  covering  a broad  band  stretching
from  the  shores  of  the  Moray  Firth  to  the
counrtes  of  Argyll  and  Wigtown.  I have
satisfied  myself,  from  a practical  examination
of  the  more  important  examples  in  Scotland
that  the  vitrifaction  was  effected  by  the
external  application  of  fire  after  the  wall
had  been  constructed,  and  that  the  sole  object


PROTECTIVE  WORKS


225


was  to  consolidate  a wall  which  was  composed
of  small  stones  such  as  could  be  gathered
around  the  site.  At  the  vitrified  fort  of
Carradale,  in  Cantyre,  may  be  seen  an  un-
interrupted portion  of  wall,  upwards  of  100
feet  in  length,  which  is  absolutely  consoli-
dated for  three,  four  and  five  feet  from  the
top.  In  one  or  two  places,  where  previous
visitors  had  picked  a hole  right  through  the
wall,  it  was  clearly  seen  that  the  vitrifaction
was  less  in  the  lower  and  central  parts  and
disappeared  altogether  at  the  base,  which
consisted  mostly  of  water-worn  stones.

Outside  the  Scottish  area  the  distribution
of  vitrified  forts  is  somewhat  remarkable.
Four  are  stated,  on  the  authority  of  Dr.
Petrie,  to  be  in  Co.  Londonderry  and  one  in
Co.  Cavan,  Ireland.  They  are,  however,  to
be  found  in  Brittany  and  Normandy,  Saxony,
Bohemia,  Silesia,  Thuringian  Forest  and  the
Rhine  district.

Lake  Dwellings. — The  security  afforded  by
natural  islands  probably  first  suggested  the
idea  of  constructing  artificial  abodes  in  lakes
and  marshes.  But  whatever  were  the  precise
circumstances  of  their  origin,  it  is  certain
that  lacustrine  dwellings  continued  for  many
centuries  to  be  the  favourite  system  of  pro-
tection adopted  by  the  early  races  of  Europe,
wherever  the  requisite  hydrographical  con-
ditions were  to  be  found.  The  plan  of  con-
struction was  to  plant  a series  of  upright
piles  in  a selected  portion  of  the  shallow

p


226


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


margin  of  a lake,  over  the  tops  of  which
cross  timbers  were  laid  so  as  to  form  a plat-
form capable  of  supporting  huts,  and  suf-
ficiently raised  above  the  level  of  the  lake  to
be  beyond  the  reach  of  the  waves.  A gang-
way connected  the  village  writh  the  shore.
During  the  Stone  and  Bronze  Ages  hundreds
of  such  villages  studded  the  bays  of  nearly
all  the  lakes  of  Central  Europe  north  and
south  of  the  Alps.  But,  strangely  enough,  all
these  came  to  a sudden  end  in  proto-historic
times.

Within  the  British  Isles  they  had  a different
system  of  constructing  lake-dwellings.  In-
stead of  using  piles  to  support  the  hut-bearing
platform,  they  constructed  an  artificial  island
of  wood,  stones,  rushes,  earth,  etc.,  which
formed  the  foundation  of  a large  wooden
house.  It  is  of  importance  to  note  that  these
lacustrine  structures,  called  crannogs  in  Scot-
land and  Ireland,  were  of  a later  date  than
those  of  Europe,  as  scarcely  any  of  the  former
date  back  to  the  Bronze  Age.  They  belong
to  Romano-British  and  early  mediaeval  times,
and  hence  they  are  frequently  referred  to
in  historical  documents.  In  Scotland  and
Ireland  crannogs  were  very  abundant,  their
number  amounting  to  over  100  in  the  former,
and  to  twice  that  number  in  the  latter  country.
Only  a few  have  been  recorded  in  Britain  south
of  the  Scottish  border,  but  on  the  other  hand,
the  discovery  of  the  lake-villages  of  Glaston-
bury and  Meare  in  Somersetshire  makes  up  for


PROTECTIVE  WORKS


227


their  scarcity,  as  they  yielded  archaeological
remains  of  the  greatest  importance  to  British
history.

The  chronological  range  of  the  occupation
of  the  former  was  confined  to  the  century
and  a half  which  preceded  the  Roman  occu-
pation, and  its  relics  are  thus  the  purest
exposition  of  Late  Celtic  civilization  hitherto
found  in  Britain.  The  village  was  con-
structed on  peaty  ground  within  a marsh  in
the  form  of  a gigantic  crannog,  with  founda-
tions and  platforms  of  wood,  stones,  brush-
wood, etc.,  and  fortified  with  wooden  palisad-
ing. The  site  of  this  unique  British  village
occupied  a triangular  space,  measuring  be-
tween three  and  four  acres,  and  contained
some  90  circular  huts,  each  containing  a pre-
pared hearth  of  stones  and  clay.  The  investi-
gation of  the  village  extended  over  a period
of  some  twenty  years,  and  the  results  are
recorded  in  the  magnificent  monograph,  in
two  quarto  volumes,  just  published  under  the
editorship  of  Messrs.  Bulleid  and  St.  George
Gray.

The  Meare  village  which  is  now  being  in-
vestigated appears,  from  the  character  of  the
relics  and  structure  of  the  huts,  to  belong  to
the  same  chronological  horizon  as  that  of
Glastonbury.


228


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


CHAPTER  X

BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY

We  have  already  sufficiently  discussed  the
culture,  civilization  and  physical  characters
of  the  Palaeolithic  people  of  Britain  whom
we  encountered  as  inhabitants  of  the  western
fringe  of  the  great  European  continent  which
represented  the  inhabited  land-areas  of  those
days.  They  were  regarded  as  belonging  to
the  same  races  as  their  fellow-hunters  on  the
other  side  of  the  English  Channel — there
being  then  no  water  barrier  to  prevent  free
intercourse  between  them  and  the  rest  of  the
people  of  Europe.  Their  fossil  remains  were
too  scanty  and  fragmentary  to  furnish
reliable  data  for  founding  on  them  any
specific  racial  distinctions — even  the  Eoan-
thropus  dawsoni  is  still  sub  jndice.


River-bed  Race

The  first  problem  we  have  to  consider  is,
what  became  of  the  descendants  of  these
early  inhabitants  of  Britain  ? Have  they
died  out  like  the  dodo  ? Or  did  they  emigrate
with  the  reindeer  to  more  congenial  lands  ?
To  both  these  questions  the  answer  is  in  the
negative,  for  reasons  annexed.  Evidence  will
be  adduced  to  prove  that  they  continued  to


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY  229

live  in  their  native  land,  after  it  became
detached  from  Europe,  till  the  Neolithic
immigrants  came  upon  the  scene.

It  has  been  also  conclusively  proved  that
there  was  no  hiatus  in  the  continuity  of
human  life  and  civilization  on  the  European
continent  during  the  whole  range  of  the
successive  culture-stages  from  Mousterien  to
Neolithic  and  later  times,  as  shown  by  the
discoveries  at  Mas-d’Azil,  Sirgenstein,  the
Schweizersbild  and  many  other  stations.  It
now  becomes  imperative  on  us  to  show  that
a similar  state  of  matters  obtained  in  Britain,
although  the  evidence  on  which  this  con-
clusion is  founded  may  be  somewhat  different.
We  have  not  as  yet  discovered  caves  in  this
country  indicating  continued  occupancy  of
man  during  all  the  stages  of  progressive
civilization.  But  this  is  not  the  only  evidence
available  by  which  a similar  result  may  be
reached.  At  no  time  was  Palaeolithic  man  an
inhabitant  of  North  Britain,  but  yet  we  have
laid  before  our  readers  incontrovertible  facts
to  show  that  a pre-Neolithic  race  of  savages
existed  there  during  the  Transition  or  Azilian
period.  Who  were  these  troglodyte  hunters,
shell-eaters  and  devourers  of  stranded  whales  ?
How  did  they  come  to  the  north  of  Scotland  ?
Did  they  come  by  long  sea-voyages,  or  across
the  narrowest  portion  of  the  English  Channel  ?
If  by  the  latter  is  it  not  strange  that  they
should  forsake  the  richer  lands  of  England  and
find  their  way  to  Scotland  without  leaving


230  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


any  traces  of  their  existence  and  wanderings
behind  them?  Unfortunately  we  have  no
skeletal  remains  of  these  primitive  people,
for  we  are  not  justified  in  assuming  that  the
human  skeletons  found  in  the  Oban  cave  were
contemporary  with  the  shell-eating  troglodytes
who  frequented  it.  Here  the  evidence  so  far
depends  entirely  on  the  character  of  the  tools
and  implements  they  left  among  the  remains
of  the  marine  and  land  faunas  on  which  thev
feasted.

Again,  it  has  been  conclusively  proved  that,
by  a subsidence  of  the  land  in  South  Britain,
archaeological  materials  of  the  highest  signi-
ficance have  been  for  a long  time  submerged,
and  so  were  concealed  from  the  immediate
cognizance  of  modern  antiquaries.  We  now
know  that  man’s  handicraft-works  have  been
found  in  widely  separated  localities  which
were  formerly  inhabited  as  ordinary  land-sur-
faces, but  which  are  now  more  or  less  under
the  level  of  the  present-day  sea.  Notwith-
standing the  difficulties  involved  in  sub-
aqueous investigations,  modern  researches
have  brought  to  light,  not  only  a goodly
number  of  worked  objects  from  these  old
land-surfaces,  but  actually  two  skeletons  of
the  individuals  who  inhabited  them,  viz.  the
woman  of  Walton-on-Naze  and  the  Tilbury
man,  both  of  which  have  already  been  de-
scribed, as  well  as  the  circumstances  in  which
they  were  found.  The  former  belonged  to
the  ordinary  Neolithic  type,  and  differed  little


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY  231

in  physical  characters  from  women  ol  the
present  day.  The  body  was  buried  two  feet
beneath  the  prehistoric  floor,  oyer  which
eight  to  ten  feet  of  silt  had  accumulated  since
then.  The  latter  lay  in  a sand-bank,  thirty-
four  feet  below  the  present  surface  of  the
land,  and  above  it  rested  a succession  of
deposits  of  silt,  peat  and  old  habitable  land-
surfaces,  indicating,  on  precise  geological
grounds,  the  time  that  has  elapsed  since  the
Tilbury  man  was  in  life.  Dr.  Keith,  on  well-
defined  archaeological  data,  estimates  that
4000  years  is  the  probable  antiquity  of  the
Essex  woman.  He  then  calculates,  fiom  a
comparison  between  the  respective  depths
below  sea-level  at  which  the  bodies  were
found,  the  antiquity  of  the  Tilbury  man  at
not  less  than  15,000  years.  ( Ancient  Types  of

Man,  p.  12.)  _ . .

On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Clement  Reid  gives
in  the  following  extracts  a different  estimate
of  the  rate  of  submergence  : —

“ Our  next  inquiry  ( Submerged  Forests,
p.  117)  must  be  into  the  length  of  time  repre-
sented by  the  series  of  submerged  forests  and
associated  deposits  described  in  the  foregoing
pages.  The  newest  of  them  belongs  certainly
to  the  age  of  polished  stone,  and  the  earliest
also  probably  comes  within  the  Neolithic
Period.  Within  the  period  represented  by
the  submerged  forests,  we  have  seen  that
there  has  been  a change  of  the  sea-level  to  the
extent  of  eighty  feet,  or  perhaps  rather  more.


232  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

If  we  can  obtain  some  measure  of  the  time
occupied,  this  should  give  us  some  approxim-
ate idea  as  to  the  length  of  the  Neolithic  period,
and  of  the  rate  at  which  changes  of  the  sea-
level  can  take  place.”

After  descanting  on  the  rapid  growth  of
forests  and  estuarine  silts,  he  continues  :

It  is  useless  to  pretend  to  any  exact
calculations  as  to  the  time  needed  for  the
formation  of  these  alternating  strata  of
extensive  silt  and  marsh-soil ; but  looking  at
the  whole  of  the  evidence  without  bias  either
way.  if*  seems  that  an  allowance  of  1000,  or  at
most  1500,  years  would  be  ample  time  to
allow.  A period  of  1500  years  may  therefore
be  taken  to  cover  the  whole  of  the  changes
which  took  place  during  the  period  of  gradual
submergence.  If  this  is  approximately  cor-
lect  the  date  at  which  the  submergence  began
was  only  5000  years  ago,  or  about  3000  b.c.”

Admitting  that  no  change  of  sea-level  has
taken  place  in  Britain  during  the  last  2000
years,  that  the  rate  of  submergence  has  been
in  the  same  localities  of  a uniform  character,
that  the  Essex  Woman  lived  about  4000  years
ago,  and  that  eight  feet  of  land-submergence
has  taken  place  during  the  2000  years  this
movement  was  in  action,  it  follows  that  the
rate  of  submergence  at  Walton-on-Naze  would
be  four  feet  per  1000  years.  The  same  rate
of  submergence,  if  applicable  to  the  Thames
Valley,  would  make  the  Tilbury  Man’s  age
10,000  years,  and  that  of  the  commencement


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY  233

of  the  Submerged  Forest  period  22,000
years.

Now  comes  important  evidence  in  support
of  the  views  advocated  in  this  chapter;  and
1 it  is  so  precise  and  condensed  that  its  re-
corder, Dr.  Keith,  will  pardon  me  if  I quote
his  own  words,  as  any  abstract  would  greatly
deteriorate  their  argumentative  value.

“ To  what  race  of  mankind  did  the  Tilbury
man  belong?  He  is  abundantly  represented
in  the  population  of  modern  England.  To
what  race,  when  we  see  this  type  of  man  in  the
flesh  to-day,  do  we  assign  him  ? He  and  his
successors  are  ancient  British,  if  you  will,
but  it  is  better  to  follow  the  example  of  the
sharp-sighted  Huxley  and  speak  of  a type
rather  than  of  a race.  In  1862,  twenty-one
years  before  the  Tilbury  man  was  discovered,
Huxley  had  recognized  and  described  a form
of  prehistoric  skull  found  in  England  under
the  name  of  the  ‘ river-bed  ’ type.  The
Tilbury  cranium  is  of  the  river-bed  type.
The  actual  specimens  described  by  Huxley
are  still  in  the  Museum  of  the  Royal  College
of  Surgeons,  England ; one  is  from  an  old
bed  of  the  River  Trent,  near  Muskham ;
another  is  from  a dolmen  in  Anglesey.  Lately
another  of  this  type  was  discovered  by  the
Rev.  E.  H.  Mullins  in  the  floor  of  a cave  in
Derbyshire,  with  bones  of  the  reindeer,  and
other  animals  long  extinct  in  England.  In-
deed, this  specimen  of  the  river-bed  type  from
the  Langwith  cave  deserves  fuller  mention,


234


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


for  that  able  scientist,  Mr.  Martin  A.  C.  Hinton,
regards  the  fauna  found  with  this  skull  as  of
the  Pleistocene  period,  and  therefore  much
older  than  the  Tilbury  specimen.  Another
of  the  same  type,  also  in  the  Museum  of  the
Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  was  found  beneath
a layer  of  peat  and  fifteen  feet  of  blue  clay
when  a railway  cutting  was  made  in  Gloucester.
The  skull  found  beneath  the  limestone  deposit
of  Gough’s  Cave  at  Cheddar,  Somerset,  is  also
of  the  river-bed  type.  All  of  these  are  usually
assigned  to  the  Neolithic  period,  and  represent
the  prevailing  type  of  Englishman  at  the
commencement  of  that  period,  and  probably
also  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Palaeolithic  period.
The  skulls  mentioned  may  represent  British
men  and  women  living  thousands  of  years
apart.  They  clearly  belong  to  the  same  race
which,  for  lack  of  a better,  we  may  name  the
‘ river-bed  race.’  It  is  the  prevailing  type  in
England  to-day,  and  from  the  scanty  evidence
at  our  disposal  we  may  presume  that  it  has
been  the  dominant  form  many  thousands  of
years.  Remains  of  the  same  race  have  also
been  found  at  Schweizersbild  in  Switzerland.
These  remains  of  a Neolithic  people  have  been
described  recently  by  Dr.  Franz  Schwertz.
All  trace  of  this  race  has  disappeared  in
Switzerland,  whereas  in  England,  in  spite
of  invasion  of  Saxon,  Jute,  Dane  and  Norman,
it  still  thrives  abundantly.  Further  research
will  probably  show  that  this  race  was  at  one
time  widely  distributed  throughout  Europe,


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY


235


where  it  appears  towards  the  close  of  the
Glacial  period.”

In  addition  to  the  above  list  of  the  “ river-
bed race  ” I submit  another  specimen  which
clearly  comes  under  the  same  category.  This
skull  was  extracted  from  a rock-fissure  by
quarrymen,  at  Great  Casterton,  in  Rutland,
and  brought  under  public  notice  by  Mr.
Crowther-Beynon,  Hon.  Secretary  of  the
Rutland  Archaeological  and  Natural  History
Society.  Its  osseous  characters  (cephalic

index,  73 '4)  approach  so  nearly  those  of  the
Neanderthal-Spy  type  that  for  some  time
doubts  were  entertained  as  to  whether  or  not
it  belonged  to  that  race.  This  skull  is  figured
in  Vol.  XXVI,  p.  280,  of  the  Proceedings  of  the
Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh.

Could  any  widely  distributed  series  of
skulls  be  brought  together  which  more
effectually  proves  that  these  “ river-bed  ”
types  belonged  to  the  people  of  the  Transition
period  ? How  otherwise  is  their  presence
to  be  accounted  for  ? According  to  Dr.
Keith,  Palaeolithic  blood  is  as  rife  in  the
British  people  of  to-day  as  in  those  of
the  European  continent — a conclusion  which
entirely  meets  with  the  present  writer’s
views.

Hitherto  it  was  supposed  that  there  was  no
archaeological  evidence  in  support  of  the  theory
that  Britain  was  inhabited  during  the  Transi-
tion period.  The  general  idea  was  that  the


236


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Palaeolithic  races,  who  frequented  Kent’s
Cavern  and  other  caves  in  the  south  of  England
up  to  the  Magdalenien  epoch,  had,  prior  to,
or  rather  in  consequence  of,  the  submergence
of  their  hunting-grounds,  shrunk  back  to
their  original  home  in  France.  Even  the
present  writer,  as  late  as  last  year,  admitted
the  possibility  of  holding  such  a view,  as
will  be  seen  from  the  following  statement
then  made  on  the  subject :

“ When  Palaeolithic  civilization  began  to  be
curtailed  in  virtue  of  cosmic  changes  in  the
environment,  and  new  methods  of  living  were
forthcoming,  it  is  possible  that  the  British
fringe  of  the  Palaeolithic  population  would
shrink  back  to  Europe,  and  thus,  for  a time,
leave  a gap  in  the  continuity  of  human  life
in  Britain.”  ( Munro  Lectures  for  1912,  p.  286.)

Since  the  above  was  written  fresh  discoveries
have  turned  the  scale  in  favour  of  a more
satisfactory  explanation.  I am  now  of  opinion
that  these  “ river-bed  ” people  were  the
descendants  of  the  Palaeolithic  races  who  con-
tinued to  inhabit  Britain  after  the  setting
in  of  the  milder  climate  which  destroyed
the  big  game  on  which  they  formerly  de-
pended for  sustenance.  In  the  changed  cir-
cumstances they  were  gradually  reduced  to
great  straits,  and  had  to  resort  to  the  produce
of  the  sea-shores  as  the  most  readily  avail-
able source  of  food,  next  to  small  animals,


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY


237


roots,  nuts,  seeds,  etc.  They  wandered  chiefly
along  the  shores  of  the  British  seas,  where
their  haunts,  workshops  and  relics  are  now
mostly  submerged.  In  course  of  time  they
pushed  their  way  northward,  as  far  as  the
Valley  of  the  Forth  and  the  islands  on  the
west  coast  of  Scotland,  where  the)’’  found  a
rich  harvest  among  the  luxuriant  faunas  of
both  sea  and  land.  Had  the  bed  of  the
English  Channel  been  raised  some  forty  or
fifty  feet,  instead  of  being  depressed  to  that
extent,  we  would  probably  find  many  shell-
heaps  and  other  remains  of  feasting  along  the
raised  beaches  of  its  shores.  The  only  thing
that  improved  the  social  life  of  this  primitive
population  was  the  incoming  of  the  first
Neolithic  immigrants  from  Europe,  who
brought  with  them  the  arts  of  cultivating
plants  and  cereals,  and  the  rearing  of  animals
in  a state  of  domestication.  Henceforth  the
miserable  shell-eaters,  and  other  members  of
the  “ river-bed  race,”  became  clodhoppers
and  cowherds  to  the  invaders.  They,  how-
ever, retained  to  a certain  extent  the  cranial
features  as  well  as  the  culture  habits  of  their
forefathers  with  this  difference,  that  while
they  had  to  eat  snails  and  shell-fish,  their
hunting  predecessors  fed  on  steaks  of  horse-
and  reindeer-flesh.

Shell-mounds  may  belong  to  any  age,  but
it  is  to  be  noted  that  those  of  the  early  Transi-
tion period,  such  as  the  Kj0kkenm0ddings  of
Denmark  and  Portugal,  contain  no  bones  of


238  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


domestic  animals,  nor  any  of  the  cultivated
cereals,  nor  pottery.

The  few  instances  of  food  refuse-heaps
here  brought  forward  as  evidence,  in  support
of  the  theory  that  the  people  of  the  Transition
period  were  the  surviving  remnants  of  the
old  Palaeolithic  people  of  Britain,  are  by  no
means  exhausted,  and  I believe  that  a more
careful  investigation  of  promising  ground,
especially  submerged  forests  and  old  habitable
land-areas,  would  produce  further  corrobo-
rative materials.  Shell-mounds  on  land  are
not  readily  recognized,  being  often  covered
with  a coating  of  decayed  vegetation,  but
nevertheless  they  exist  in  many  localities
along  the  shores  of  Britain  and  those  of  the
adjacent  continent.  On  this  phase  of  the
subject  Mr.  Clement  Reid’s  book  on  Submerged
Forests  may  be  consulted  with  advantage.
Although  the  best  lesson  to  be  derived  from
his  large  experience  is  to  show  how  much
more  remains  to  be  done  in  such  matters,
especially  by  carefully  watching  the  contents
of  dock-excavations.

If  we  glance  for  a moment  at  the  earlier
archaeological  discoveries  in  this  country,  we
shall  see  that  they  bear  out  the  above
interpretation  of  the  facts.  As  early  as  1850
Sir  Daniel  Wilson  maintained,  as  the  result  of
an  investigation  of  the  craniological  materials
then  available,  that  the  earliest  British  people
were  characterized  by  markedly  elongated
and  narrow  skulls,  to  which  he  gave  the


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY


239


name  kumbeceyholic ; and  that  after  a time
a brachycephalic  people  appeared  on  the
scene,  who,  though  still  practising  the  simple
methods  of  living  prevalent  in  the  Stone  Age,
were  to  some  extent  acquainted  with  the  use
of  bronze.  Through  the  researches  of  Bate-
man, Thurnam  and  Davies,  Busk,  Greenwell
and  Rolleston,  Boyd  Dawkins,  Huxley,  Morti-
mer and  others,  archaeologists  have  been  long
conversant  with  the  fact  that,  as  a rule,  the
crania  found  in  the  chambered  cairns  of
Wiltshire,  Somerset,  Gloucester,  and  some
adjacent  localities  were  dolichocephalic;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  that  both  forms  were  found
in  almost  equal  proportions  in  the  round
barrows  and  other  graves  of  the  Bronze  Age.
Although  Dr.  Thurnam’s  aphorism,  “ long
barrows,  long  skulls;  round  barrows,  short
skulls,”  is  not  strictly  accurate,  it  undoubtedly
conveys  an  important  ethnological  fact,  which
is  thus  stated  by  Professor  Rolleston  : “In
no  skull  from  any  long  barrow,  that  is  to  say,
in  no  skull  undoubtedly  of  the  Stone  Age,
examined  by  us,  has  the  breadth  been  found
to  bear  so  high  a relation  as  that  of  80:100
of  the  length.”  The  more  recent  discoveries
of  human  remains  in  the  Oban  caves,  the
chambered  caves  of  Arran,  and  the  Wick
Barrow  (Somersetshire)  also  lend  support  to
the  same  view.

With  regard  to  the  contemporary  ethnology
of  Ireland,  Sir  W.  Wilde  expressed  the  opinion
that  two  races  existed  simultaneously  in  that


240  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

country,  viz.  a long-headed,  dark  Irish  stock,
on  the  west  of  the  Shannon,  and  a fair-haired,
globular-headed  stock,  on  the  north-east  of
that  river.  But  this  precise  distribution  of
the  different  races  has  not  been  corroborated
by  subsequent  researches.  So  far  as  I know,
the  opinion  of  Professor  Huxley,  published
forty  years  ago,  still  holds  good.  “As  the
evidence  stands  at  present,”  writes  the  Pro-
fessor, I am  fully  disposed  to  identify  the
ancient  population  of  Ireland  with  the ‘long-
barrow  and  ‘ river-bed  5 elements  of  the
population  of  England,  and  with  the  long-
headed and  ‘ kumbecephalic  5 inhabitants  of
Scotland ; and  to  believe  that  the  1 round-
barrow  ’ or  Belgic  element  of  the  Britannic
people  never  colonized  Ireland  in  sufficient
numbers  to  make  its  presence  ethnically  felt.”
Ihe  fact  that  the  beaker  type  of  sepulchral
ceramic  has  very  rarely,  if  at  all,  been  found
in  the  prehistoric  burials  of  Ireland,  together
with  the  rarity  of  brachycephalic  skulls  from
that  country,  supplies  fresh  evidence  in  support
of  the  above  exposition  of  Irish  ethnology  by
Professor  Huxley.  As  cremation  advanced  the
beaker  type  of  ceramic  would  be  gradually
superseded,  and  this  might  have  taken  place
before  these  Goidelic  invaders  had  penetrated
as  far  as  Ireland  and  found  time  to  revolu-
tionize the  life  and  language  of  its  original
inhabitants.

According  to  Dr.  Thurnam’s  cranial
statistics,  the  range  of  the  cephalic  index


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY


241


in  sixty-seven  skulls  from  long  barrows  was
63  to  79,  and  in  seventy  from  round  barrows
74  to  89.  There  was  thus  no  dolichocephalic
skull  in  a round  barrow,  and  no  brachy cephalic
skull  in  a long  barrow.  Later  researches  have,
however,  entirely  disproved  the  idea  that
long  skulls  were  confined  to  long  barrows,
for,  of  the  four  typical  long  skulls  from
Canon  Greenwell’s  collection  of  crania  from
the  Yorkshire  barrows,  specially  selected  by
Dr.  Rolleston  for  description  and  illustration,
three  were  taken  out  of  round  barrows.

Dr.  Thurnam  calculates  the  mean  height  of
the  dolichocephalic  men  of  the  long  barrows
to  have  been  5 feet  5 inches,  and  that  of  the
brachycephalic  men  of  the  round  barrows  to
have  been  5 feet  8 inches.  On  the  other  hand,
according  to  measurements  by  the  late  Mr.
Mortimer,  of  thirty-four  dolichocephalic  and
twenty-eight  brachycephalic  skulls  taken  from
barrows  on  the  mid-wolds  of  Yorkshire,  the
dolichocephalic  people  were  taller  by  T2
inches  than  the  incoming  round  heads.  (See
Glastonbury  Lake-Village , Vol.  I,  p.  35.)

Neolithic  and  Bronze  Age  People

We  now  come  to  inquire  who  were  the  first
Neolithic  invaders  of  Britain,  and  how  they
came  to  be  dolichocephalic,  whereas  the  next
immigrants  into  the  country  were  brachy-
cephalic ? What  relationship  existed  between
these  two  very  different  races,  and  what  were
Q


242


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


their  physical  and  cultural  characteristics  ?
These  problems  open  up  a wide  field  of  facts,
theories  and  speculative  inferences,  utterly
beyond  the  modest  scope  of  this  book.  We
can  only  hope  to  call  attention  to  a few
guiding  landmarks.  Our  first  object  is  to
find  a few  inhabited  sites  disclosing  the
physical  characters  of  the  Palaeolithic  people
and  the  brachycephalic  hordes  who,  from
time  to  time,  found  their  way  into  Europe
from  Eastern  lands,  before  their  respective
racial  characters  became  blended  by  marriage
and  social  intercourse.

M.  Dupont  describes  the  Trou  du  Frontal
as  the  burying-place  of  the  reindeer-hunters
inhabiting  the  Trou  des  Nutons — the  latter
being  a large  cavern  situated  about  200  metres
lower  down  the  valley.  The  former  is  a small
recess  at  the  end  of  a rock-shelter  which  had
in  front  of  it  deposits  containing  relics  of
different  ages.  The  cavity  measured  two
metres  in  depth  and  one  metre  in  height
and  breadth,  and  contained  the  remains  of
sixteen  human  skeletons,  five  being  those  of
children.  The  bones  were  disconnected  before
being  deposited,  as  none  was  in  its  normal
anatomical  position.  A human  jaw,  for  in-
stance, had  been  broken  into  two  portions.
One  portion,  having  a whitish  appearance,  lay
in  one  part  of  the  vault,  and  the  other,  having
a brown  colour,  was  found  at  some  distance
from  the  former,  but  yet,  when  brought
together,  the  portions  fitted  exactly.  A large


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY


243


slab  placed  in  front  converted  the  recess  into
an  ossuary.  The  skeletons  were  pronounced
by  Pruner-Bey  to  belong  to  a Mongoloid  race.
The  skulls  were  apparently  of  a mixed  charac-
ter— more  brachycephalic  than  dolichocepha-
lic; but  only  two,  a male  and  a female,  were
sufficiently  entire  to  yield  correct  anatomical
details.  At  the  entrance  to  the  cave,  and
inside  it,  were  found  some  twenty  worked
flints,  perforated  pendants  of  fluorine,  many
shells  from  Eocene  formations  (perforated),
two  plaques  of  sandstone  with  incised  orna-
mentation and  a globular  vessel,  or  urn,
restored  from  fragments  of  coarse  pottery.
M.  Dupont,  probably  influenced  by  Lartet’s
opinion  of  the  analogous  sepulchral  cavern
of  Aurignac,  regarded  the  Trou  du  Frontal
as  a cemetery  of  the  Palaeolithic  hunters  of
the  Reindeer  period.  But,  because  of  the
brachycephalism  of  the  skulls,  the  pottery
and  the  associated  relics,  it  is  now  generally
believed  to  have  belonged  to  the  early
Neolithic  Age.  The  point  to  be  noted  here
is  that  already  two  races  are  represented  in
the  community  who  owned  this  cemetery.

One  of  the  most  useful  contributions  to
prehistoric  craniology  is  a statistical  list  of
the  Neolithic  crania  of  Gaul  drawn  up  in  1895
by  Philippe  Salmon.  In  looking  into  the
details  of  these  tabulated  crania  some  striking
facts  are  brought  out.  Thus  there  are  some
stations,  especially  among  sepulchral  caverns,
which  contained  only  dolichocephalic  skulls,


244


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


while  others  were  restricted  to  brachy cephalic
types.  A large  majority  of  them,  however,
included  long,  intermediate,  and  short  types
of  skulls  in  various  proportions.  The  two
most  remarkable  stations  which  contained
only  long  skulls  were  the  caverns  of  L’Homme-
Mort  and  Baumes-Chaudes,  both  situated  in
the  department  of  Lozere.  The  details  of
their  exploration  and  osseous  contents  have
been  recorded  by  Drs.  Broca  and  Prunieres.

In  the  cavern  of  L’Homme-Mort  there  were
nineteen  skulls  sufficiently  well  preserved  to
furnish  the  necessary  measurements.  The
cephalic  indices  of  seventeen  of  these  varied
from  68‘2  up  to  76’7,  and  of  the  other  two
they  were  78’ 5 and  78’ 8.  There  wTere,  there-
fore, no  brachycephalic  skulls  in  this  sepulchre,
so  that  the  race  was  comparatively  pure.  It
may  also  be  mentioned  that  some  of  the
crania  had  been  trepanned — a feature  which,
though  at  first  overlooked,  subsequently
became  the  subject  of  much  interest  to
anthropologists.  The  animal  remains  were
those  of  the  Neolithic  epoch,  but  among  them
were  none  of  the  reindeer,  horse,  ox  or  stag.
Among  the  relics  were  a lance-head  and  a
portion  of  a polished  stone  axe.  Drs.  Broca
and  Prunieres  were  of  opinion  that  the
individuals  whose  remains  were  consigned  to
this  ossuary  belonged  to  an  intermediate  race,
who  flourished  in  the  Transition  period,  and
thus  became  connecting  links  between  the
people  of  the  reindeer  caves  and  the  dolmens.


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY  245

The  cavern  of  Baumes-Chaudes  contained
a vast  collection  of  human  bones,  representing
some  300  individuals.  It  was  regarded  by
the  investigators  as  a family  burying-place,
which  had  not  been  altogether  abandoned  till
the  beginning  of  the  Bronze  Age,  as  one  of
the  skeletons  in  the  upper  deposits  had  beside
it  a bronze  dagger.  The  crania  measured
and  classified  from  this  ossuary  amounted  to
thirty-five,  and  all  of  them  were  dolicho-
cephalic. The  average  height  of  this  race
was  calculated  to  be  about  5 feet  3i  inches.
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  cavern  of  Tertre-
Guerin  (Seine-et-Marne)  only  two  skulls  were
found  and  they  were  highly  brachycephalic,
with  cephalic  indices  of  86'6  and  91.  .The
archaeological  remains  in  this  cavern  com-
prised polished  stone  celts,  with  and  without
horn-casings,  together  with  various  other  relics
indicating  an  advanced  Neolithic  civilization.

We  thus  see  that  in  post- Palaeolithic  times
there  sprang  up  over  Western  Europe,  as  the
result  of  the  social  contact  of  two  different
populations — one  dolichocephalic  and  the
other  brachycephalic— a mixed  people  who
between  them  founded  the  Neolithic  civiliza-
tion. At  first  there  was  a preponderance  of
the  long-headed  races  among  them,  but  as  the
flow  of  new-comers  from  the  East  continued,
this  cephalic  feature  was  in  some  localities
reversed,  especially  in  Central  and  Eastern
Europe.  It  was  a colony  of  this  mixed
population  in  Europe,  but  mostly  long-headed


246


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


people,  who  first  invaded  Britain.  They  were
in  the  early  stage  of  Neolithic  culture,  manu-
factured pottery  which  was  occasionally
deposited  in  graves,  possessed  some  knowledge
of  agriculture  and  the  art  of  rearing  domestic
animals,  and  disposed  of  their  dead  by
inhumation  in  megalithic  chambers.  These
invaders  hailed  from  some  part  of  the  European
continent,  possibly  the  Iberian  Peninsula,  and
entered  Britain  by  way  of  Kent,  and  spread
westwards  to  Somerset,  Wilts,  Gloucester,  etc.,
ultimately  reaching  North  Britain  and  Ireland.
They  found  the  island  already  inhabited  by
the  descendants  of  its  former  Palaeolithic
inhabitants,  but  in  sadly  reduced  circum-
stances. As  already  mentioned,  they  were
the  people,  whose  stray  skulls  have  been
occasionally  met  with  and  recorded  by  Huxley
and  Keith  under  the  name  of  “ river-bed  ”
type.  It  would  appear  that  both  they  and
the  invaders  consorted  together  and  lived  on
friendly  terms  till  the  invasion  of  Britain  by
the  brachycephali,  who  thus  added  another
racial  element  to  the  already  mixed  population
of  the  island.

t Of  the  pottery  manufactured  by  the
Neolithic  people  of  Britain,  prior  to  the
advent  of  the  Bronze  Age  civilization,  we
know  very  little  owing  to  the  scantiness  of
its  remains.  From  the  few  specimens  that
have  been  found  in  graves,  the  vessels  seem
to  have  round  bottoms,  slightly  bulging  bodies,
and  wide  mouths,  with  little  ornamentation


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY


247


—totally  different  from  the  ceramic  of  the
Bronze  Age.

Tacitus  informs  us  that  he  identified  the
Silures,  a people  then  occupying  South  Wales,
as  Iberians,  on  account  of  their  swarthy
complexion  and  curly  hair.  The  inference
that  the  Silures  were  the  descendants  of  the
long-headed  British  immigrants  is  not  un-
reasonable, more  especially  as  by  that  time
the  eastern  parts  of  Britain  had  been  taken
possession  of  by  successive  waves  of  Gaulish
and  Belgic  people  from  the  Continent,  thus
causing  the  earlier  inhabitants  to  recede  more
and  more  westwards.  If  this  be  so,  it  follows
that  the  long-headed  man  of  the  chambered
cairns  of  Britain  and  Ireland  had  a swarthy
complexion  with  dark  hair  and  eyes,  like  so
many  people  still  living  on  the  more  secluded
and  out-of-the-way  portions  of  the  British

Isles.

The  brachycephalic  invaders  of  Britain  are
described  as  having  light  hair  and  a fair
complexion,  but  there  is  no  archaeological
evidence  to  justify  this  assertion  they
buried  their  dead  in  short  cists  and  round
barrows  and  had  a knowledge  of  bronze.
According  to  the  Hon.  John  Abercromby
(A  Study  of  the  Bronze  Age  Pottery,  1912)
they  hailed  from  the  Rhine  district,  and
introduced  the  type  of  sepulchral  ceramic
known  as  the  Beaker,  or  drmkmg-cup.  Inis
vessel  was  almost  invariably  deposited  beside
the  body,  and  is  supposed  to  have  contained


248  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

food  for  the  soul  of  the  departed  on  its  way
to  the  other  world.  These  people  are  also
supposed  to  have  entered  Britain  by  way  of
Kent,  and  to  have  spread  northwards,  keeping
more  to  the  east  coast  till  they  reached  the
Yorkshire  wolds,  where  their  remains  are
exceptionally  abundant,  and  ultimately  Scot-
land. While  these  new-comers  wrere  quietly
settling  down,  apparently  in  harmony  with
the  long-headed  population,  the  custom  of
cremating  the  dead  spread  over  the  land  with
the  rapidity  of  a religious  epidemic,  reaching
North  Britain  before  the  dolichocephals  had
barely  commenced  the  construction  of  their
chambered  cairns.

The  Brythons

At  a considerably  later  period,  but  not
many  centuries  before  the  Roman  occupation
of  Britain,  another  set  of  immigrants  from
the  opposite  shores  of  France  gradually
spread  over  South  Britain,  where  they  also
mingled  with  its  previous  inhabitants.  These
new-comers  were  the  Brythons  of  modern
authors,  who  are  regarded  as  an  offshoot  of
the  Galli  of  classical  writers — probably  the
Belgae  of  Caesar.  Their  entry  into  Britain  was
during  the  Early  Iron  Age,  and  so  they  are
credited  with  having  introduced  the  technical
elements  of  the  civilization  known  as  Late
Celtic.  The  Brythons  differed  from  the  pre-
ceding brachycephalic  invaders  in  having


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY


249


dolichocephalic  heads — a statement  which
is  supported  on  archaeological  evidence,  as,
for  example,  a number  of  skulls  found  at
Danes’  Graves,  Arras,  etc.,  in  Yorkshire.  A
skull  from  one  of  the  Arras  tumuli,  and  con-
taining relics  characteristic  of  the  Late  Celtic
period,  is  described  by  Dr.  Thurnam  as  having
a cephalic  index  of  73  7.  They  were  a branch
of  the  later  Celts  or  Galli,  whose  very  name  at
one  time  was  a terror  in  Europe.  Classical
writers  describe  them  as  very  tall  and  fierce-
looking,  with  fair  hair,  blond  complexion  and
blue  eyes.

The  next  and  last  of  the  racial  elements,
which  entered  into  the  ethnic  composition  of
the  British  people  of  to-day,  were  the  suc-
cessive Teutonic  invasions  from  Germany,
Denmark  and  Scandinavia,  all  belonging  to
a tall,  blond,  dolichocephalic  people  who
existed  in  Central  Europe  from  time  im-
memorial— possibly  the  descendants  of  the
Cro-Magnon  race  of  the  late  Palaeolithic  Age.

Conclusion

From  these  facts  and  observations  we  see
that  at  the  dawn  of  Neolithic  civilization  there
extended  over  Western  Europe  a primitive
population  living  on  shell-fish,  the  produce  of
the  chase,  seeds,  fruits,  roots,  etc.,  varying
according  to  the  natural  resources  of  the
environment.  At  an  early  stage  their  domestic
economy  was  of  a low  order,  having  only


250


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


roughly  formed  implements  of  stone,  bone
and  horn.  They  had  few  ornaments,  little  or
no  pottery,  and  no  domestic  animals  with  the
possible  exception  of  the  dog.  But  even  at
this  low  and  early  stage  there  were  among
the  shell-eaters  of  Portugal  both  dolichocephali
and  brachicephali.  The  former  were  greatly
in  excess  of  the  latter  in  point  of  numbers,
and  being  the  descendants  of  the  Palaeolithic
people  may  be  regarded  as  indigenous.  The
latter,  on  their  first  appearance  in  Europe,
were  not  more  civilized  than  the  former,  but
there  was  a constant  stream  of  new-comers
who  gradually  introduced  improved  methods
in  the  manufacture  of  tools,  the  cultivation
of  grain,  and  the  rearing  of  domestic  annuals.

Meantime  the  Troglodyte  hunters  of  wild
animals  continued  to  live,  but  in  gradually
diminishing  numbers,  on  the  uplands  of
France  and  the  flanks  of  the  Pyrenees —
localities  where  the  reindeer  and  other  animals
of  sub-Arctic  origin  still  lingered.  Contem-
porary with  them,  but  outside  the  areas  of
their  hunting-grounds,  their  fellow-country-
men, along  with  the  ever-increasing  population
from  Eastern  lands,  were  devising  new  sources
of  food  from  the  natural  products  of  a more
ameliorated  climate.  If  the  advancing

geniality  of  the  environment  gave  the  coup-de-
grace to  the  sub-Arctic  fauna  and  flora,  it  also
supplied  meteorological  conditions  favourable
to  fruit-growing,  the  cultivation  of  cereals,
and  the  rearing  of  domestic  animals.  In


BRITISH  ETHNOLOGY


251


- short,  the  mam  elements  of  Neolithic  civiliza-
t tion,  including  the  disposal  of  the  dead  in
c caverns,  or  artificially  constructed  megalithic
c chambers,  were  established  in  various  parts
i of  Europe,  even  before  the  final  close  of
] Palaeolithic  civilization.

We  have  seen  that  the  so-called  Hiatus
theory  has  been  disproved  on  the  Continent
by  the  discovery  of  a number  of  inhabited
sites  (caves,  rock-shelters,  shell-mounds,  hut-
dwellings,  etc.)  showing  by  the  character  of
the  relics  found  in  their  debris  that  there  had
been  no  break  in  the  continuity  of  human
occupation  from  late  Palaeolithic  to  Neolithic
t times.  The  existence  of  such  transition
stations  within  the  British  Isles  is,  perhaps,
not  yet  sufficiently  pronounced  to  entitle
archaeologists  to  accept  this  opinion  as  appli-
cable to  Britain.  The  submergence  of  the
land  in  the  south  of  England,  which  has  been
advanced  in  these  pages  to  partly  account
for  the  rarity  of  the  evidential  materials  in
support  of  the  continuity  of  human  life  in
Britain,  requires  more  elucidation  than  the
space  at  my  disposal  allowed.  But  if  the
theory  be  well  founded,  more  convincing
facts  will,  no  doubt,  be  soon  forthcoming.
It  is  probable  that  the  last  phase  of  the
Palaeolithic  civilization  came  to  a close  earlier
in  Britain  than  in  France,  in  consequence  of
the  warmer  climate  of  the  former  which  came
into  action  as  soon  as  the  British  area  became
an  island,  and  was  possibly  accelerated  by  the


252


PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN


Gulf  Stream.  Under  these  circumstances  the
reindeer  would  instinctively  move  northwards
until  it  reached  the  north  of  Scotland  where,
according  to  historical  evidence,  it  lived  up
to  the  twelfth  century  a.d.  What  is  more
natural  than  to  suppose  that  some  of  the
Palaeolithic  people  of  the  south  of  England
followed  the  dwindling  herds  of  this  animal
as  far  as  Caithness,  where  they  have  left  some
of  their  skeletons  and  traces  of  their  trans-
formed culture  habits  in  the  pre-Neolithic
shell-heaps  described  by  Laing  and  Huxley.
Others  of  these  “ river-bed  ” wanderers  found
their  way  into  the  inland  sea  in  the  upper
reaches  of  the  Forth  valley,  where  they  came
in  contact  with  the  famous  school  of  stranded
whales.  Others  pushed  on  till  they  reached
the  west  highland  lochs  and  islands,  where
they  obtained  abundance  of  food  supplies  in
the  luxuriant  marine  and  land  faunas  of  that
district.  No  polished  stone  implements,  or
any  worked  objects  characteristic  of  the
Neolithic  civilization,  have  hitherto  been
found  on  any  of  the  sites  inhabited  by  these
primitive  people.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


J.  C.  Prichard,  Natural  History  of  Man  (1843)  ; Boucher  de
Perthes,  Antiquitis  celtiques  et  antidiluviemn.es  (1847-1864)  ;
Sir  D.  Wilson,  Prehistoric  Annals  of  Scotland  (1857,  2nd  ed.
1863)  and  Prehistoric  Man  (1862,  2nd  ed.  1876)  ; T.  Bateman,
Ten  Years'  Diggings  in  Celtic  and  Saxon  Grave  Hills  (1848-
1858)  ; T.  H.  Huxley,  Man's  Place  in  Nature  (1863)  ; Sir
Charles  Lyell,  Antiquity  of  Mam,  (1863,  several  eds.)  , E.  B.
Tylor  Early  History  of  Man  (1865),  I'rimi/.ive  Culture  (18/1)
and  Anthropology  (1881);  Lord  Avebury,  Prehistcmc  Times
(1865,  6th  ed.  in  1900)  and  Origin  of  Civilization  (1870,  6th  ed.
in  1902)  ; Lartetand  Christy,  Reliquiw  Aquitanicce  (1865—1875)  ;

F Keller  The  Lake-dwellings  of  Switzerland  (1866,  2nd  ed.
1878)  ; S.  Laing  and  T.  H.  Huxley,  Prehistoric  Remains  of
Caithness  (1866);  W.  Pengelly,  Literature  of  Kents  Cavern
(1868)  ■ Baron  von  Sacken,  Das  Grabfeld  von  Hallstatt  (1868)  ,
L.  Jewitt,  Grave  Mounds  and  their  Contents  (18/0)  , Charles
Darwin,  The  Descent  of  Man  (1871,  several  eds.)  ; E.  Dupont,
L'  Homme  pendant  les  Ages  de  la  Pierre  (2nd  ed.  1872)  ; Sir  J.
Evans,  Ancient  Stone  Implements  (1872)  and  Ancient  Bronze
Implements  of  Britain  (1881) : J.  Fergusson,  Rude  Stone  Monu-
ments in  all  Countries  (1872);  A.  de  Quatrefages,  Human
Species  (English  ed.  1879)  ; W.  Boyd  Dawkins,  Care  Hunting
(1874)  and  Early  Man  in  Britain  (1880)  ; Greenwell  and
Rolleaton,  British  Barrows  (1877)  ; J.  Geikie,  Prehistoric
Europe  (1880)  ; G.  and  Ad.  de  Mortillet,  Le  Prihistorique
(1883  3rd  ed.  in  1900)  ; J.  Anderson,  Scotland  in  Pagan  Times,
(1886)  ' E Voufra,  Les  Ilelvitcs  a,  la  Tine  (1885)  ; V.  Gross,
La  Tine  • un  oppidum  helvite  (1886)  ; A.  Bertrand,  Archiologie
eeltique  et  gauloise  (1889)  ; E.  Oartailhw,  La  France  prihw-
torique  (1889)  ; R.  Munro,  The  Lake-dwellings  of  Europe  (1890)
and  Prehistoric  Scotland  (1899);  A.  Bertrand  and  S.  Remach,
Les  Celtcs  dans  les  rallies  du  P6  et  du  Danube  (1894)  ; A.  H.
Keane,  Ethnology  (2nd  ed.  1896)  and  Man  Past  and  Present
(1899)  ; A.  C.  Haddon,  Study  of  Man  l 1897)  ; W.  Ripley,  The
Races  of  Europe  (1900)  ; S.  Reinach,  Epoque  des  alluvions  et  des
car  ernes  (1899)  and  Guide  illustri  du  music  de  Saint  Germain
(1908)  • B.  C.  A.  Windle,  Remains  of  the  Prehistoric  Age  in
Enaland  (1904)  ; E.  Haeckel,  Evolution  of  Man  (1906,  trans-
lated from  the  5th  ed.)  ; R.  Mortimer,  Forty  Years'  Researches

253


254


INDEX


in  Burial  Mounds  in  Yorkshire  ( circa  1907)  ; J.  Declielette,
Manual  d'archeologie  prdhistorique  celtique  et  gallo-romaine
(1908)  ; W.  J.  Sollas,  Ancient  Hunters  and  their  Modern  Repre-
sentatives (1911)  ; A.  Keith,  Ancient  Types  of  Man  (1911)  ;
W.  L.  H.  Duckworth,  Prehistoric  Man  (1912) ; R.  Munro,
Palaeolithic  Man  and  Terramara  Settlements  in  Europe  (1912)  ;
J.  Abercromby,  A Study  of  the  Bronze  Age  Pottery  of  Britain
and  Ireland  (1912)  ; A.  Bulleid  and  H.  St.  George  Gray,
The  Lake-village  of  Glastonbury  (1911-1913)  ; The  series  of
British  Museum  Guides  to  the  Stone,  Bronze  and  Iron  Ages
(1902-1905)  ; Clement  Reid,  Submerged  Forests  { 1913).

The  above  are  merely  a few  of  the  more  accessible  and  indis-
pensable works  on  Anthropology  and  Prehistoric  Archaeology  :
but  the  student  who  wishes  to  keep  in  touch  with  modern
discoveries  will  have  to  be  conversant  with  the  Proceedings  and
Publications  of  the  principal  Societies  on  these  subjects.

The  following  volumes  in  the  Home  University  Library
should  be  read  along  unth  this  one  : A.  Keith,  The  Human
Body  ; R.  R.  Aiarett,  Anthropology  ; J.  L.  Myres,  The  Dawn  of
History.


INDEX


Abercromby,  Thb  Hon.  John,
247

Acheuilen  epoch,  88
Ages  of  stone,  bronze,  iron  and
copper,  184
Alignments,  202
Altamira,  cave  of,  65
Anderson.  Dr.  Joseph,  120,  174
Animals,  life  histories  of,  12

, locomotion  of,  18

Anthropology,  methods  of  investi-
gation of,  26
Aurignacien  epoch,  90
Avebury,  stone  circlo  at,  188
Aziliau  harpoons,  106-123

Barrows,  187,  197
Bdton  dt commandement,  96
Baumes-Ghaudes,  cavern  of,  245
Beehive  huts,  208
Belgian  caverns,  57
Boule,  Professor,  77,  109
Brain,  development  of,  24
Breuil,  Professor,  07,  98,  182


Britain  (prehistoric)  defined,  7

its  land  and  animals,  9

joined  to  continent,  9,  101

Broca,  Dr.,  244

Bronze  Age,  art  of,  153-155

, implements  of,  147-150

, ornaments,  152

, weapons,  150-152

Brythons,  the,  248
Buekland,  Dr.,  47
Bulleid,  Mr.  Arthur,  227
Burial  after  cremation,  200

by  inhumation,  185,  199

Burn  Moor,  stone  circle  at,  195
Burnard,  Mr.  Robert,  218
Busk,  Mr.,  239

CaitUal-nan-Gillea  n,  117
Callemish  stone  circle,  193
Camps  and  Forts,  222
Cartailhac,  M.  E.,  98,  109
Caverns  with  wall  pictures,  97
Cheltee>i  epoch,  87
Chellcs,  fauna  of,  67


INDEX


255


Chin,  development  of,  25
Christy,  Mr.  Henry,  02,  68,  SO,  93,
94

Clava,  stone  monuments  at,  196
Clinch,  Mr.  George,  221
Closmadeuc,  M.,  133
Coffins,  1S5

Cogul,  fresco  on  rock  of,  182
Conwell,  Mr.  E.  A.,  173
Cresswell  caves,  47
Cro-Magnon  race,  81-83
Cromlechs,  188-197
Crowther-Beynon,  Mr.,  23»

Culture  of  Paleolithic  people,  86-
100

Dartmoor,  antiquities  of,  217
Darwin’s  Origin  of  Spirits,  30
Dawson,  Mr.  C.,  52
* D^chelette,  M.  Joseph,  83
Deuise,  fossil  man  of,  35
Desor,  Professor,  166
Dolmens,  197

Druimvargie  rock-shelter,  117
Dupont,  M.  E.,  58,  242,  248

Early  discoveries,  28
Elevation  of  the  land,  16
Epochs — Chellien,  87  ; Achtulitn,
88;  Moustirien,  89 ; Aurignacun,
90  ; Holutricn,  91  ; MngdaUnit n,
92  ; Tourassirn,  100
Erect  attitude,  19
Ethnology,  22S-252
Evans,  Sir  Arthur,  170,  171

, Sir  John,  148,  161

Evolution  of  mail,  22

Facial  bones,  retrooesaion  of,  24
Falconer,  Dr.  Hugh,  31
Fergusson,  Mr.  James,  190
Fondouce,  M.  C.,  104
Franks,  Sir  A.  W.,  29,  152,  188,
169

Galley  Hill  skud,  51
Galloway,  Mr.  W.,  120
Garson,  Dr.  G.,  51
Gatty,  Rev.  U.  A.,  130
Geikie,  Professor  James,  69
Giant  graves,  1S7
Gladstone,  Dr.,  145
Glastonbury  Lake-village,  quoted,
175

Gowland,  Dr.,  on  Stonehenge,  191
Graves,  stone-lined,  186


Gray,  Mr.  St.  George,  227
Greonwell,  Canon  W.,  130,  144,  102
Grime's  Graves  and  Cissbury,  138
Grimspound,  218
Gundtstiup  bowl,  171

Hallstatt,  Civilization  of,  160-104
Hamard,  L’Abbe,  133
Hand,  development  of,  29
Harpoons,  94,  106-123
HervO,  M.  Georges,  74
Hinton,  Mr.,  234
Holywood  circle,  196
Homo  heulelbergensU,  85,  86
Homo  moustrriensis,  77,  181
Hut-circles,  etc.,  in  Cornwall,  212-
217

Huxley,  Professor,  38,  238,  239,
340,  246

Ioe  age,  its  effects,  14
Inhabited  sites,  205-228
Interglacial  periods,  14
Iron  age,  165-178

Keith,  Dr.  Arthur,  130,  231

, on  Tilbury  man’s  age,  231

, Types  oj  Man,  quotation  irom,

233

Keller,  Dr.  Ferdinand,  165
Kent '8  Cavern,  30,  44
Kirkdale  Hyiena  Den,  47
Kjjikkenmfiddiiigs,  48,  111,  237
Klaatsch,  Professor,  76,  181

Lake-dwellings,  225
Lake-villages  of  Glastonbury  and
Meare,  226

Lartet,  Mr.  Ed.,  01,  62,  63,  89,  93,
103,  243

I .ate  Celtic  Period,  168-178
La  T6ne  Civilization,  164-168
Leach,  Mr.  A.  L.,  126
Levallois,  Le  grand  Mat,  78,  89
L’Homme-Mort,  cavern  of,  244
Life,  origin  of,  11
Little  Salkeld  circle,  195
Lockyer,  Sir  Noiman,  192
Lyell’s  Antiquity  of  Man,  40,  57,  90

Mac  Arthur  Cave,  114
MacKnery,  Rev.  J.,  30
Magdalinien  race,  79—83  ; epoch,  92
Man,  a toolmaker,  22
Man  of  the  River  Drift  Period,  OS-
72


256


INDEX


Martin,  Dr.  H.,  77,  78
Mas-d'Azil,  105  el  seq.

Hay  bo  rough,  ring-mound  of,  195
Hegalitliic  chambers,  186,  198
Menhirs,  201
Her  de  gldce , 15
Mortillet,  G de,  73,  86,  103
Mortimer,  Mr.  J.  R„  239
Moulin -Quignon  Jaw,  82
ilomlerien  epoch,  89
Mu nro  Lectures , quoted,  40,  236

Naulctte  jaw,  60
Neanderthal  skeleton.  36,  76
Neanderthal-Spy  race,  74-79
Neolithic  Age,  101
Neolithic  and  Bronze  Age  people,
*41-248

Newton,  Mr.  E.  T.,  51
Niiescli,  Dr.,  ill

Odin,  stone  of,  194
Oppidum,  La  Tene,  166,  177
Origin  of  Species,  39
Owen,  Professor,  50

Palaeolithic  Man  in  Britain,  IT

characters  of,  18

Pengelly,  Mr.,  64,  124
Perthes,  Boucher  de,  29,  31
Petrie,  Dr.,  225
Piette,  M.  Ed.,  9S,  105,  103
Piltdown  skeleton,  26,  52,  70,  88
Pit-dwellings,  130,  221
Pitt-Rivers,  General,  172,  224
Plants,  evolution  of,  12
Pleistooene  fauna  (in  Ireland),  49
Polybius,  quoted,  157
Pottery,  sepulchral,  200,  201
“ Prehistoric  Britain  ” defined,  T
Prehistoric  Times,  quoted,  188
Prestwick,  Lady,  32
Propuheur,  93
Pruner-Bey,  Dr.,  248

Race  de  Grimaldi,  83,  84
Reid,  Mr.  Clement,  74,  231,  238
Reilliac,  Grolte  de,  109
Relation  of  man  to  apes,  21
Religiosity,  178-188
Ring  of  Brogar,  194
River-bed  race,  228—241
Rocking  stones,  203
Rolloston,  Professor,  quoted,  239
Rollrich,  circle  of,  195
Rutot,  M.  A.,  59,  78


Sacken,  Baron  von,  160
St.  David's  Head,  rampart  at.  220
Salmon,  M.  Philippe,  112,  243
Schmerling,  Dr.,  30
Schoetensack,  Professor,  85
Schwab,  Col.,  166
Schwtizersbild  rock-shelter,  111
Shetland  s' one  knives,  139
Sinel,  Mr.  J.,  124,  126
Smith,  Mr.  Reginald,  189

, Mr.  Worthington  G.,  S6

Solutreen  epoch,  91
Spirals  distribution  of,  155
Spurrell,  Mr.  F.  C.  J. , 50,  56
Spy  skeletons,  75
Stanton  Drew,  circles  at,  193
Stennis  standing  stones,  194
Stone  Age,  Implements,  136

, Weapons,  140

■,  Drees  and  Ornaments,  142

Stonehenge,  190

Strabo,  quoted,  180

Stranded  whales,  121

Stukely,  Dr.,  190

Submergence  of  land,  122-183,  132

Tacitus,  quoted,  211

Tertre-Guerin,  cavern  of,  245

Thurnam  and  Davies,  239,  241,  249

Tilbury  man,  49,  231,  232

Tourassien  epoch,  109

Towers  of  Silence,  ISO

Tranchet,  the,  112

Treceiri,  Fort  of,  219

Tumuli,  197,  19S

Turner,  8ir  W.,  121

Tylor,  Dr.  E.  B.,  179

Underground  dwellings,  209

Verneau,  Dr.  R.,  S3,  84
Vestigial  organs,  22
Vitrified  Forts,  224
Vouga,  M.  E.,  165,  166

Walton-on- Naze,  submerged  habit
able  sites  at,  1 28 ; submerge*
burial  at,  230,  232
Warren,  Mr.  S.  Hazzledine,  128
Wilde,  Sir  W„  150,  239
Wilson,  Sir  Daniel,  238
Woodward,  Dr.  A.  Smith,  52,  70
Wookey  Hole,  48
Worlehury,  pit-dwellings  at,  219


Richard  Clay  £ Sons,  Limited,  London  and  Bungay.


The


Home

Library


University

of  Modern
Knowledge


Jd  Comprehensive  Series  of  New
and  Specially  Written  fd°°ks


editors :


Prof.  GILBERT  MURRAY,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.,  F.B.A.
HERBERT  FISHER,  LL.D.,  F.B.A.

Prof.  J.  ARTHUR  THOMSON,  M.A.

Prof.  WM.  T.  BREWSTER,  M.A.


1/-  net
in  cloth


256  Pages


2/6  net
in  leather


3,  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

By  Hilaire  Belloc,  M.A.  (With  Maps.)  “ It  is  coloured  with  all
the  militancy  of  the  author's  temperament." — Daily  News.

4.  HISTORY  OF  WAR  AND  PEACE

By  G.  H.  Perris.  The  Rt.  Hon.  James  Brvce  writes:  “I  have  read  it
with  much  interest  and  pleasure,  admiring  the  skill  with  which  you  have
managed  to  compress  so  many  facts  and  views  into  so  small  a volume.”

8.  POLAR  EXPLORATION

By  Dr  W.  S.  Bruce,  F.R.S.E.,  Leader  of  the  “ Scotia"  Expedition.  (With
Maps.)  “ A very  freshly  written  and  interesting  narrative.” — The  Times.

12.  THE  OPENING-UP  OF  AFRICA^

By  Sir  H.  H.  Johnston,  G.C.M.G.,  F.Z.S.  (With  Maps.)  “The  Home
University  Library  is  much  enriched  by  this  excellent  work.” — Daily  Mail.

1 3.  MED  I PE  VA  L EUROPE

By  H.  W.  C.  Davis,  M.A.  (With  Maps.)  “ One  more  illustration  of  the
fact  that  it  takes  a complete  master  of  the  subject  to  write  briefly  upon
it.” — Manchester  Guardian.


14-  THE  PAPACY  & MODERN  TIMES  (1303-1870)

By  William  Barry,  D.D.  “Dr  Barry  has  a wide  range  of  knowledge
and  an  artist’s  power  of  selection.” — M anchester  Guardian .

23.  HISTORY  OF  OUR  TIME  (1885-1911)

By  G.  P.  Gooch,  M.A.  “ Mr  Gooch  contrives  to  breathe  vitality  into  his  story,
and  to  give  us  the  flesh  as  well  as  the  bones  of  recent  happenings.” — Observer ,

25.  THE  CIVILISATION  OF  CHINA

By  H.  A.  Giles,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Chinese  at  Cambridge.  “In  all  the
mass  of  facts,  Professor  Giles  never  becomes  dull.  He  is  always  ready  with  a
ghost  story  or  a street  adventure  for  the  reader’s  recreation.” — Spectator.

29.  THE  DAWN  OF  HISTORY

By  J.  L.  Myres,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  Wykeham  Professor  of  Ancient  History,  Oxford.
“ There  is  not  a page  in  it  that  is  not  suggestive.” — Manchester  Guardian.

33.  THE  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND
A Study  in  Political  Evolution

By  Prof.  A.  F.  Pollard,  M.A.  With  a Chronological  Table.  “It  takes  its
place  at  once  among  the  authoritative  works  on  English  history." — Observer.

34.  CANADA

By  A.  G.  Bradley.  “ The  volume  makes  an  immediate  appeal  to  the  man  who
wants  to  know  something  vivid  and  true  about  Canada." — Canadian  Gazette.

37.  PEOPLES  6"  PROBLEMS  OF  INDIA

By  Sir  T.  W.  Holderness,  K.C.S.I.,  Permanent  Under-Secretary  of  State
of  the  India  Office.  “ Just  the  book  which  newspaper  readers  require  to-day,
and  a marvel  of  comprehensiveness.” — Pall  Mall  Gazette.

42.  ROME

By  W.  Warde  Fowler,  M.A.  “ A masterly  sketch  of  Roman  character  and
of  what  it  did  for  the  world.” — The  Spectator.

48.  THE  AMERICAN  CIVIL  WAR

By  F.  L.  Paxson,  Professor  of  American  History,  Wisconsin  University.
(With  Maps.)  “ A stirring  study.” — The  Guardian.

51.  WARFARE  IN  BRITAIN

By  Hilaire  Belloc,  M.A.  “ Rich  in  suggestion  for  the  historical  student.”
— Edinburgh  Evening  News.

55.  MASTER  MARINERS

By  J.  R.  Spears.  “A  continuous  story  of  shipping  progress  and  adventure.  ..
It  reads  like  a romance.” — Glasgow  Herald.

61.  NAPOLEON

By  Herbert  Fisher,  LL.D.,  F.B.A.,  Vice-Chancellor  of  Sheffield  University.
(With  Maps.)  The  story  of  the  great  Bonaparte’s  youth,  his  career,  and  his
downfall,  with  some  sayings  of  Napoleon,  a genealogy,  and  a bibliography.

66.  THE  NAVY  AiVD  SEA  POWER

By  David  Hannay.  The  author  traces  the  growth  of  naval  power  from  early
times,  and  discusses  its  principles  and  effects  upon  the  history  of  the  Western  world.

71.  GERMANY  OF  TO-DAY

By  Charles  Tower.  “ It  would  be  difficult  to  name  any  better  summary.” —
Daily  News.

82.  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

By  Robert  Munro,  M.A.,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.E.  (Illustrated.)

2


Literature  and  *Art


2.  SHAKESPEARE

By  John  Masefield.  “ The  book  is  a joy.  We  have  had  half-a-dozen  more
learned  books  on  Shakespeare  in  the  last  few  years,  but  not  one  so  wise.” —
Manchester  Guardian.

27.  ENGLISH  LITERATURE:  MODERN

By  G.  H.  Mair,  M.A.  “ Altogethera  fresh  and  individual  book." — Observer.

35.  LANDMARKS  IN  FRENCH  LITERATURE

By  G.  L.  Strachey.  “ It  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  a better  account  of
French  Literature  could  be  given  in  250  small  pages.” — The  Times.

39.  ARCHITECTURE

By  Prof.  W.  R.  Lethaby.  (Over  forty  Illustrations.)  “ Popular  guide-books
to  architecture  are,  as  a rule,  not  worth  much.  This  volume  is  a welcome  excep-
tion.”— Building  News.  “ Delightfully  bright  reading.” — Christian  World.

43.  ENGLISH  LITERATURE-.  MEDIAL VAL

By  Prof.  W.  P.  Ker,  M.A.  “ Prof.  Ker.oneof  the  soundest  scholars  in  English
we  have,  is  the  very  man  to  put  an  outline  of  English  Mediaeval  Literature
before  the  uninstructed  public.  His  knowledge  and  taste  are  unimpeachable,
and  his  style  is  effective,  simple,  yet  never  dry.” — The  Athenceum

45.  THE  ENGLISH  LANGUAGE

By  L.  Pearsall  Smith,  M.A.  “A  wholly  fascinating  study  of  the  different
streams  that  went  to  the  making  of  the  great  river  of  the  English  speech." —
Daily  News.

52.  GREAT  WRITERS  OF  AMERICA

By  Prof.  J.  Erskine  and  Prol.  W.  P.  Trent.  “An  admirable  summary,  from
Franklin  to  Mark  Twain,  enlivened  by  a dry  humour.” — Athenceum.

63.  PAINTERS  AND  PAINTING

By  Sir  Frederick  Wedmore.  (With  16  half-tone  illustrations.)  From  the
Primitives  to  the  Impressionists.

64.  DR  JOHNSON  AND  HIS  CIRCLE

By  John  Bailey,  M.A.  “ A most  delightful  essay.” — Christian  World.

65.  THE  LITERATURE  OF  GERMANY

By  Professor  J.  G.  Robertson,  M.A.,  Ph  D.  “Under  the  author’s  skilful
treatment  the  subject  shows  life  and  continuity.  ’ — Athenceum.

70.  THE  VICTORIAN  AGE  IN  LITERATURE

By  G.  IC.  Chesterton.  “ The  book  is  everywhere  immensely  alive,  and  no
one  will  put  it  down  without  a sense  of  having  taken  a tonic  or  received  a series
of  electric  shocks." — The  limes.

73.  THE  WRITING  OF  ENGLISH.

By  W.  T.  Brewster,  A.M.,  Professor  of  English  in  Columbia  University.
“ Sensible  in  its  teaching,  and  not  over-rigidly  conventional  in  its  manner.” —
Manchester  Guardian.

75.  ANCIENT  ART  AND  RITUAL.

By  Jane  E.  Harrison,  LL.D.,  D.Litt.  “ Charming  in  style  and  learned  in
manner." — Daily  News.


3


76.  EURIPIDES  AND  HIS  AGE

By  Gilbert  Murray,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.,  F.B.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek  at
Oxford.  “ A beautiful  piece  of  work.  . . . Just  in  the  fulness  of  time,  and
exactly  in  the  right  place.  . . . Euripides  has  come  into  his  own.” — The  Nation.


Science


7.  MODERN  GEOGRAPHY

By  Dr  Marion  Newbigin.  (Illustrated.)  "Geography,  again  : what  a dull,
tedious  study  that  was  wont  to  be  1 . . . But  Miss  Marion  Newbigin  invests  its
dry  bones  with  the  flesh  and  blood  of  romantic  interest." — Daily  Telegraph.

9.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  PLANTS

By  Dr  D.  H.  Scott,  M.  A.,  F.R.S.,  late  Hon.  Keeper  of  the  Jodrell  Laboratory,
Kew.  (Fully  illustrated.)  “The  information  is  as  trustworthy  as  first-hand
knowledge  can  make  it.  . . . Dr  Scott’s  candid  and  familiar  style  makes  the
difficult  subject  both  fascinating  and  easy.” — Gardeners'  Chronicle.

17.  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE

By  W.  Leslie  Mackenzie,  M.D.,  Local  Government  Board,  Edinburgh.
“ Dr  Mackenzie  adds  to  a thorough  grasp  of  the  problems  an  illuminating  style,
and  an  arresting  manner  of  treating  a subject  often  dull  and  sometimes
unsavoury.” — Economist.

18.  INTRODUCTION  TO  MATHEMATICS

By  A.  N.  Whitehead,  Sc.D.,  F.R.S.  (With  Diagrams.)  “Mr  Whitehead
has  discharged  with  conspicuous  success  the  task  he  is  so  exceptionally  qualified
to  undertake.  For  he  is  one  of  our  great  authorities  upon  the  foundations  of
the  science." — Westminster  Gazette.

19.  THE  ANIMAL  WORLD

By  Professor  F.  W.  Gamble,  D.Sc.,  F.R.S.  With  Introduction  by  Sir  Oliver
Lodge.  (Many  Illustrations.)  “ A delightful  and  instructive  epitome  of  animal
(and  vegetable)  life.  ...  A fascinating  and  suggestive  survey." — Morning  Post.

20.  EVOLUTION

By  Professor  J.  Arthur  Thomson  and  Professor  Patrick  Geddes.  “A
many-coloured  and  romantic  panorama,  opening  up,  like  no  other  book  we
know,  a rational  vision  of  world-development.” — Belfast  News-Letter.

22.  CRIME  AND  INSANITY

By  Dr  C.  A.  Mercier.  “Furnishes  much  valuable  information  from  one
occupying  the  highest  position  among  medico-legal  psychologists." — Asylum
News.

28.  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

By  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Physics,  Royal  College  of
Science,  Dublin,  1873-1910.  "What  he  has  to  say  on  thought-reading,
hypnolism,  telepathy,  crystal- vision,  spiritualism,  divinings,  and  so  on,  will  be
read  with  avidity.” — Dundee  Courier.

31.  ASTRONOMY

By  A.  R.  Hinks,  M.A.,  Chief  Assistant,  Cambridge  Observatory.  “ Original
in  thought,  eclectic  in  substance,  and  critical  in  treatment.  . . . No  better
little  book  is  available.” — School  World.

4


^2.  INTRODUCTION  TO  SCIENCE

By  I.  Arthur  Thomson,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Natural  History,  Aberdeen
University.  “ Professor  Thomson’s  delightful  literary  style  is  well  known  ; and
here  he  discourses  freshly  and  easily  on  the  methods  of  science  and  its  relations
with  philosophy,  art,  religion,  and  practical  li  ie..''— Aberdeen  Journal.

336.  CLIMATE  AND  WEATHER

" By  Prof.  H.  N.  Dickson,  D.Sc.Oxon.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.E.,  President  of  the
Royal  Meteorological  Society.  (With  Diagrams.)  ‘‘The  author  has  succeeded
in  presenting  in  a very  lucid  and  agreeable  manner  the  causes  of  the  movements
of  the  atmosphere  and  of  the  more  stable  winds.'  Manchester  Guar  atari.

:4i.  ANTHROPOLOGY

By  R.  R.  Marett,  M.A.,  Reader  in  Social  Anthropology  in  Oxford  University.

“ An  absolutely  perfect  handbook,  so  clear  that  a child  could  understand  it,  so
fascinating  and  human  that  it  beats  fiction  ‘ to  a frazzle.”’— Morning  Leader.

ua.  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  PHYSIOLOGY

By  Prof  J.  G.  McKenurick,  M.D.  “It  is  a delightful  and  wonderfully
comprehensive  handling  of  a subject  which,  while  of  importance  to  all,  does
not  readily  lend  itself  to  untechnical  explanation.  ...  Upon  every  page  of  it
is  stamped  the  impress  of  a creative  imagination.  — Glasgow  Herald.

46.  MATTER  AND  ENERGY

Bv  F Soddy,  M.A.,  F.R4L  “Prof.  Soddy  has  successfully  accomplished
the  very  difficult  task  of  making  physics  of  absorbing  interest  on  popular

4 1 PSYCHOLOGY,  THE  STUDY  OF  BEHAVIOUR

' Bv  Prof.  W.  McDougall,  F.R.S.,  M.B.  “A  happy  example  of  the  non-
technical  handling  of  an  unwieldy  science,  suggesting  rather  than  dogmatising.
It  should  whet  appetites  for  deeper  study.” — Christian  World .

53.  THE  MAKING  OF  THE  EARTH

~ Bv  Prof.  J.  W.  Gregory,  F.R.S.  (With  38  Maps  and  Figures.)  “A
fascinating  little  volume.  . . . Among  the  many  good  things  contained  in  the
series  this  takes  a high  place.” — The  Athenaurn.

t7.  THE  HUMAN  BODY

' Bv  A.  Keith,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  Conservator  of  Museum  and  Hunterian  Professor,
Royal  College  of  Surgeons.  (Illustrated.)  “ It  literally  makes  the  dry  bones
to  live.  It  will  certainly  take  a high  place  among  the  classics  of  popular
science.” — Manchester  Guardian.

e;8.  ELECTRICITY

~ Bv  Gisbekt  Rapp,  D.Eng..  Professor  of  Electrical  Engineering  in  the  Umver-
sky  of  Birmingham.  (Illustrated.)  “ It  will  be  appreciated  greatly  by  learners
and  by  the  great  number  of  amateurs  who  are  interested  in  what  is  one  of  the
most  fascinating  of  scientific  studies.’  — Glasgow  Her  aid.

6-  THE  ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  LIFE

' By  Dr  Benjamin  Mookk,  Prolessor  of  Bio-Chem.strj j,  Unwenity  College,
Liverpool.  “ Stimulating,  learned,  lucid.  —Liverpool  Courier.

67.  CHEMISTRY  . L . ,

SSl’th.  w.,  i»  .Serial  science  1.  developed,  ,nd  the  s»ge  U he,
reached.

— L. — ^ ^ — rr— j.,  c-  r d c CTllustrated.)  “ Professor  Farmer  has

By  Prof.  J.  B.  Farmer,  D.Sc.,  F.R.S.  ( , . nhvsioloev  and  also  to

in  the  realms  of  morphology  and  of  heredity.  S

5


78.  THE  OCEAN

A General  Account  of  the  Science  of  the  Sea.  By  Sir  John  Murray  K C R

79-  NERVES

SsSSSSaS?i


15-  MOHAMMEDANISM

~"worthr°off  wisdomMARGOA°HUerH’  D'L!tt'  1'  This  gener0US  sh!lline's

by  an  illuminative  pVofess^r  ”-^Xf/US’  resPonsible  tractate

4°.  THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY


A book  that  the  1 man  in  the
. Consistently  lucid  and  non-


By  the  Hon.  Bertrand  Russell,  F.R.S
street,  will  recognise  at  once  to  be  a boon
technical  throughout. ''—Christian  World.

47.  BUDDHISM

~ “y  Mrs,RHYS  Davids,  M.A.  “ The  author  presents  very  attractively  as  well
dly  Buddhism  as  the  scholars  of  the

50.  NONCONFORMITY:  Its  ORIGIN  and  PROGRESS

By  Principal  W B.  Selbie,  M.A.  -The  historical  part  ls  brilliant  in  its
selflo  be  an ‘id  ^ propom°n;  ancJ  In  the  later  chapters  Dr  Selbie  proves  him-
54  ETHICS  CXPOnent  of  sound  and  moderate  views. ”— Christian  World.

“A  verv'lnnvTfh’  MvA\'  Le,cturer  !n  Moral  Science  in  Cambridge  University.
-ChtZtn  WorhL1  $ y reaSOned  outline  of  the  >°Sic  of  good  conduct ”

56.  THE  MAKING  OF  THE  NEW  TES  TA  ME  NT

wLfvr°LB-  v’  BACrN’  LL\Df’  D D-  “ Professor  Bacon  has  boldly,' and
wisely,  taken  his  own  line,  and  has  produced,  as  a result,  an  extraordinarilv
vivid,  stimulating,  and  lucid  book.” — Manchester  Guardian.  y

60.  M/SS/ONS:  THEIR  RISE  and  DE  VELOPMENT

By  Mrs  Creighton^  “Very  interestingly  done.  ...  Its  style  is  simole
irect,  unhackneyed,  and  should  find  appreciation  where  a more  fervently
pious  style  of  writing  repels.  —Methodist  Recorder.  y

68.  COMPARATIVE  RELIGION
By  prof.J.EsTLiNCARPENTER,D  Litt.,PrincipaIofManchesterColleee. Oxford.
^c)\ri^t)an\Vorld  % hand  * W6alth  learn*nS  and  independent  thought."
74-  A HISTORY  OF  FREEDOM  OF  THOUGHT

5y  J/  .j-  Bu?,y1  V11','0’’  LL' ReS'us  Professor  of  Modern  History  at
— TheOAserver^  *“ * masterplece’  which  every  thinking  man  will  enjoy.”

84.  LITERATURE  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT

~ ofyrlTr?f'  vE°r?if  n???  DD'  LL.D.,  cf  Harvard.  A detailed  examination
of  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament  in  the  light  of  the  most  recent  research.

6


Social  Science


i.  PARLIAMENT

Its  History,  Constitution,  and  Practice.  By  Sir  Courtenay  P.  Ilbert,
G.C.B.,  K.C.S.I.,  Clerk  of  the  House  of  Commons.  “ The  best  book  on  the
history  and  practice  of  the  House  of  Commons  since  Bagehot  s ‘Constitution.

— Yorkshire  Post .

5.  THE  STOCK  EXCHANGE

By  F.  W.  Hirst,  Editor  of  “The  Economist.”  “To  an  unfinancial  mind  must
be  a revelation.  . . . The  book  is  as  clear,  vigorous,  and  sane  as  Bagehot’s  ‘ Lom-
bard Street,’  than  which  there  is  no  higher  compliment."— Morning  Leader.

6.  IRISH  NATIONALITY

By  Mrs  J.  R.  Green.  “ As  glowing  as  it  is  learned.  No  book  could  be  more
timely.” — Daily  News.

io.  THE  SOCIALIST  MOVEMENT

By  J.  Ramsay  MacDonald,  M.P.  “Admirably  adapted  for  the  purpose  of
exposition.” — The  Times.

ii.  CONSERVATISM

By  Lord  Hugh  Cecil,  M.A.,  M.P.  “One  of  those  great  little  books  which
seldom  appear  more  than  once  in  a generation.” — Morning  Post.

1 6.  THE  SCIENCE  OF  WEALTH

By  J.  A.  Hobson,  M.A.  “ Mr  J.  A.  Hobson  holds  an  unique  position  among
living  economists.  . . . Original,  reasonable,  and  illuminating.’ — The  Nation.

21.  LIBERALISM

By  L.  T.  Hobhouse,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Sociology  in  the  University  of  London.
“A  book  of  rare  quality.  . . . We  have  nothing  but  praise  for  the  rapid  and
masterly  summaries  of  the  arguments  from  first  principles  which  form  a large
part  of  this  book.” — IVestminster  Gazette.

24.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  INDUSTRY

By  D.  H.  Macgregor,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Political  Economy  in  the  University
of  Leeds.  “ A volume  so  dispassionate  in  terms  may  be  read  with  profit  by  all
interested  in  the  present  state  of  unrest.’’— Aberdeen  Journal.

26.  AGRICULTURE

By  Prof.  W.  Somerville,  F.L.S.  “ It  makes  the  results  of  laboratory  work
at  the  University  accessible  to  the  practical  farmer.”— Athenaum.

30.  ELEMENTS  OF  ENGLISH  LA  W

By  W.  M.  Geldart,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  Vinerian  Professor  of  English  Law  at
Oxford.  “ Contains  a very  clear  account  of  the  elementary  principles  under-
lying the  rules  of  English  Law.” — Scots  Law  Titties .

38.  THE  SCHOOL:  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Education.
By  J.  J.  Findlay,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Education  in  Manchester
University.  “ An  amazingly  comprehensive  volume.  ...  It  is  a remarkable
performance,  distinguished  in  its  crisp,  striking  phraseology  as  well  as  its
inclusiveness  of  subject-matter.” — Morning  Post.

59.  ELEMENTS  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY

By  S.  J.  Chapman,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Political  Economy  in  Manchester
University.  “ Its  importance  is  not  to  be  measured  by  its  price.  Probably
the  best  recent  critical  exposition  of  the  analytical  method  in  economic
science.” — Glasgow  Herald .


7


6g.  7 HE  NEWSPAPER  By  G.  Binney  Dibblee,  M.A.  (Illus-  ■

; trated.)  The  best  account  extant  of  the

organisation  of  the  newspaper  press,  at  home  and  abroad.

77.  SHELLEY , GODWIN, , AND  THEIR  CIRCLE

By  H.  N.  Brailsford,  M.A.  “ Mr  Brailsford  sketches  vividly  the  influence  of  '
the  French  Revolution  on  Shelley’s  and  Godwin’s  England;  and  the  charm  and  j
strength  of  his  style  make  his  book  an  authentic  contribution  to  literature.” — 1
The  Bookman.

So.  CO-PARTNERSHIP  AND  PROFIT-SHARING  I

By  Aneurin  Williams,  M.A.— “ A judicious  but  enthusiastic  history,  with  much  1
interesting  speculation  on  the  future  of  Co-partnership." — Christian  World

8 1.  PROBLEMS  OF  VILLAGE  LIFE

By  E.  N.  Bennett,  M.A.  Discusses  the  leading  aspects  of  the  British  land  1
problem,  including  housing,  small  holdings,  rural  credit,  and  the  minimum  wage.

83.  COMMON-SENSE  IN  LA  W By  Prof.  P.  Vinogradoff,  I
— D.C.L.

85.  UNEMPLO  YMENP  By  Prof.  A.  C.  Pigou,  M.A.

In  Preparation

ANCIENT  EGYPT.  By  F.  Ll.  Griffith,  M.A.

THE  ANCIENT  EAST.  By  D.  G.  Hogarth,  M.A.,  F.B  A
A SHOE  T HISTOR  V OF  EUROPE.  By  Herbert  Fisher  LL  D
THE  BYZANTINE  EMPIRE.  By  Norman  H.  Baynes.

THE  REFORMATION.  By  President  Lindsay,  LL.D.

A SHOR  T HIS  TOR  Y OF  R USSIA . By  Prof.  M ilyoukov.

MODERN  TURKEY.  By  D.  G.  Hogarth,  M.A.

FRANCE  OF  TO-DAY.  By  Albert  Thomas.

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.  By  Prof.  R.  S.  Rait,  M.A.

LA  TIN  AMERICA.  By  Prof.  W.  R.  Shepherd.

HISTORY  AND  LITERATURE  OF  SPAIN.  By  J.  Fitzmaurice-
Kelly,  F.B. A.,  Litt.D.

LA  TIN  LIT  ERA  TURE.  By  Prof.  J.  S.  Phillimore.

THE  RENAISSANCE.  By  Miss  Edith  Sichel.

ITALIAN  ART  OF  THE  RENAISSANCE.  By  Roger  E.  Fry.
LITERARY  TASTE.  By  Thomas  Seccombe.

CHA  UCER  AND  HIS  TIME.  By  Miss  G.  E.  Hadow.

WILLIAM  MORRIS  AND  HIS  CIRCLE.  By  A.  Clutton  Brock.
SCANDINA  VI AN  HISTORY  LITERA  TURE.  By  T.C.  Snow.

THE  MINERAL  WORLD.  By  Sir  T.  H.  Holland,  K.C.I.E.,  D.Sc.

SEX.  By  Prof.  J.  A.  Thomson  and  Prof.  Patrick  Geddes.

THE  GROWTH  OF  EUROPE.  By  Prof.  Grenville  Cole.

BETWEEN  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENTS.  By  Canon
R.  H.  Charles,  D.D.

A HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY.  By  Clement  Webb,  M.A.

POLITICAL  THOUGHT  IN  ENGLAND:  From  Bacon  to  Lccke.

By  G.  P.  Gooch,  M.A.

POLITICAL  THOUGHT  IN  ENGLAND:  From  Bentham  to  /.  S’.

Mill.  By  Prof.  W.  I..  Davidson.

POLIIICAL  THOUGHT  IN  ENGLAND:  From  Herbert  Spencer

to  To-day.  By  Ernest  Barker,  M.A.

THE  CRIMINAL  AND  THE  COMMUNITY.  By  Viscount  St.  Cyres
THE  CIVIL  SERVICE.  By  Graham  Wallas,  M.A.

THE  SOCIAL  SETTLEMENT.  By  Jane  Addams  and  R.  A.  Woods.
GREA  T INVENTIONS.  By  Prof.  J.  L.  Myres,  M.A.,  F.S.  A.

TOWN  P LANN1 NG.  By  Raymond  Unwin.

London:  WILLIAMS  AND  NORGATE

And  of  all  Bookshops  and  Bookstalls.
