Siluria (Roderick Murchison, 1854)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan of the 1854 first edition (https://archive.org/details/siluriahistoryof00murc_0). Roderick Murchison (1792-1871) - the Silurian system: the founding text of Paleozoic stratigraphy.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LIBRARY  OF 
WELLESLEY  COLLEGE 


PURCHASED  FROM 
HOESK)ED 


4 


I 

I 


S  I  L  U  R  I  A. 


THE 


HISTORY  OF  THE  OLDEST  KNOWN  ROCKS 


CONTAINING 


ORGANIC  REMAINS. 


WITH  A  BRIEF  SKETCH  OF  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  GOLD 
OYER  THE  EARTH. 


BY 


SIR  RODERICK  IMPEY  MURCHISON, 

G.C.S^S.;  D.C.L.;  M.A.;  F.R.S. ;  F.L.S.;  HON.  MEM.  R.S.  ED^';  R.LA.; 

EX-PRESIDENT  OF  THE  GEOLOGICAL  AND  ROYAL  GEOGRAPHICAL  SOCIETIES  OF  LONDON  ;  TRUSTEE  OF 
THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM  ;  HON.  MEMBER  OF  THE  ACADEMIES  AND  NAT.  HIST.  SOCIETIES 
OF  ST.  PETERSBURG,  MOSCOW,  BERLIN,  BRESLAU,  COPENHAGEN,  HOLLAND,  SWITZERLAND,  TURIN, 
BOSTON,  NEW  YORK,  PHILADELPHIA,  ETC.  ETC.  ;  AND 
CORR.  INSTITUTE  OF  FRANCE. 


"  Where  were  we  when  these  grains  of  sand  were  assorted  ?  Compared  with  their  date,  the  fall 
of  Babylon  has  just  happened,  and  the  Creation  of  man  is  an  event  of  yesterday! " 

Geology,  Rev.  D.  King,  4th  edit.  p.  116. 


JOHN 


LONDON: 
MURRAY,  ALBEMARLE 
1854. 


STREET. 


London: 


A.  and  G.  A-Spottiswoodb, 
New-Street-Square. 


Btbi'cati'on. 


TO 

SIR  HENRY  THOMAS  DE  LA  BECHE,  C.B.  F.R.S. 

DIRECTOR  GENERAL  OF  H.  M.  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY,  &C.  &C.  &C. 

To  YOU,  my  clear  De  la  Beche,  who,  by  your  labours  and 
those  of  your  associates,  have  demonstrated  the  wide  ex- 
tension of  the  Silurian  Kocks  in  the  British  Isles,  I  dedicate 
this  work ;  referring  my  readers  to  the  instructive  National 
Geological  Museum  of  your  foundation,  for  (^omplete  evidence 
of  the  truths  I  have  endeavoured  to  sustain. 

EODEEICK  IMPEY  MURCHISON. 

Mmj  1.  1854. 


PREPACB. 


The  design  of  this  work  is  sufficiently  explained  in  the  Introductory 
Chapter.  I  would  here,  however,  make  a  few  additional  remarks,  if  only 
to  express  my  great  obligations  to  some  of  the  authors  referred  to  in  the 
subsequent  pages.  And  first  to  my  friend,  Mr.  J.  W.  Salter,  for  his  assistance 
and  advice  in  describing,  grouping,  and  comparing  the  fossils,  all  the 
most  characteristic  forms  of  which  he  has  himself  selected  and  drawn  on 
wood.  These  woodcuts  contain  small  figures  either  of  species  which 
have  been  discovered  in  the  Silurian  rocks  of  Britain  since  my  former 
work  was  published,  or  of  which  better  specimens  have  been  obtained. 
The  original  typical  forms  so  admirably  delineated,  according  to  their 
natural  size,  by  Mr.  James  De  C.  Sowerby,  in  the  '  Silurian  System,' 
have  been  transferred  from  his  etchings  on  copper  to  lithographic  stones; 
and  being  classified  and  re-arranged,  are  presented  in  thirty-seven  plates 
at  the  end  of  this  volume.  In  regard  to  its  illustrations,  therefore,  the 
'  Siluria'  now  ofiered  to  the  public  is  a  faithful  outline  of  my  previous 
labours  and  also  of  our  present  knowledge  of  the  older  palaeozoic  rocks, 
as  registered  in  the  noble  series  of  organic  life  collected  in  the  Government 
Museum  of  Practical  Geology. 

The  chief  deficiency  in  this  part  of  the  work,  which  my  old  friends  will 
remark,  is  the  absence  of  the  beautiful  lithographs  of  the  Corals  of  the 
'  Silurian  System,'  drawn  under  the  superintendence  of  my  able  associate, 
Mr.  Lonsdale,  and  so  lucidly  described  by  him.  These  zoophytes  not  having 
been  etched  on  copper,  like  the  other  organic  remains,  could  not  be  trans- 
ferred ;  and  a  selection  has,  therefore,  been  made  of  the  most  typical  forms 
only,  as  represented  in  certain  woodcuts.  In  naming  and  describing  them, 
a  few  errata,  alluded  to  in  the  volume,  would  have  been  avoided,  had  I 

A  3 


vi 


PREFACE. 


submitted  the  proofs,  while  going  through  the  press,  to  the  critical  eye  of 
the  same  valued  friend,  whose  assistance  was  of  so  much  service  to  me  in 
preparing  the  original  *  Silurian  System,'  and  who,  notwithstanding  his  state 
of  health  and  absence  from  London,  has  kindly  enabled  me  to  make  those 
corrections. 

But  passing  over  these  and  other  defects,  which  might  have  been  avoided 
had  I  been  less  engaged  in  different  occupations,  I  trust  that  my  main 
object  will  have  been  obtained,  in  presenting  a  clear,  general  view  of  the 
succession  of  primeval  life,  and  in  rendering  the  earlier  pages  of  geological 
history  accessible  to  many  readers. 

To  render  the  work  a  vade  mecum  of  geologists,  on  which  foreigners,  as 
well  as  my  countrymen,  might  depend,  a  coloured  map  is  annexed,  which 
is  simply  a  reduction  of  the  geological  map  of  Wales  and  the  adjacent  region 
of  Britain  prepared  by  Professor  Ramsay  and  the  Government  Surveyors, 
under  Sir  H.  T.  De  la  Beche,  and  wherein  the  order  of  the  Silurian  Rocks 
and  their  relations  to  overlying  deposits  are  best  displayed.  The  reader 
who  may  wish  to  examine  the  details  of  any  one  district,  has  only  to  look  at 
the  large  figures  inscribed  on  this  map,  which  refer  him  to  each  sheet, 
illustrated  in  detail  by  the  Government  geologists.  The  friends  who  sup- 
ported me  when  I  ventured  to  prepare  my  original  map  of  the  Silurian 
region  (at  a  time  when  a  large  portion  of  the  country  had  not  even  been 
represented  in  the  Ordnance  maps)  will  observe  that  the  main  features  of 
the  range  of  the  Silurian  Rocks  (Lower  and  Upper),  and  their  relations 
to  overlying  deposits,  remain  as  I  had  traced  them.  The  fundamental 
change  made  by  my  successors  is,  that  nearly  all  the  Welsh  country 
coloured  in  my  original  map  as  the  Cambrian  of  Sedgwick,  and  supposed 
to  be  occupied  by  rocks  lower  than  those  I  described  has  been  shown  to 
be  composed  of  their  exact  equivalents.  In  other  words,  the  tract  ex- 
tending westwards  from  the  Longmynd,  which  I  long  •  ago  reduced  to 
order,  as  best  exhibiting  the  Cambrian  and  Lower  Silurian  types  of  Shrop- 
shire and  Montgomeryshire,  contains  the  same  geological  series  as  the 
mountains  of  N.  Wales ;  the  Cambrian  rocks  and  the  equivalent  of  the 
Lingula  flags,  (lowest  Silurian  of  the  Survey),  both  inclusive. 

It  has  truly  been  a  subject  of  deep  regret  to  me,  that  an  old  and 
cherished  friend,  with  whom  I  had  long  worked  in  foreign  as  well  as 
British  lands,  and  whose  powerful  mind  and  brilliant  eloquence  have 
thrown  so  much  light  on  the  science  which  we  mutually  cultivate,  should, 
of  late  years,  have  so  strenuously  objected  to  this  application  of  the  term 
Lower  Silurian.    But  here  the  reader  must  remember,  that  the  question 


PREFACE. 


Vll 


has  been  determined  by  many  competent  and  independent  authorities,  all 
of  them  equally  the  friends  of  my  distinguished  associate  as  of  myself. 
They  have,  in  short,  extended  to  the  more  complicated  regions  of  Wales,  the 
cession  which  I  originally  described  in  memoirs,  map,  and  sections,  illus- 
trative of  the  adjacent  Silurian  counties.* 

Indicating,  as  I  have  always  done,  a  great  difference  in  the  organic  re- 
mains of  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian,  I  firmly  adhere  to  my  old  view  of  the 
union  of  these  two  groups  in  one  system  of  life.  Aloof  from  their  common 
fades,  a  careful  revision  of  all  the  Silurian  fossils  in  the  Government 
Museum,  collected  from  various  parts  of  the  British  Isles,  has  led  the 
palaeontologists  of  that  institution  to  the  belief,  that  nearly  one  hundred 
species  are  common  to  the  Lower  and  Upper  divisions  of  the  Silurian 
system ;  even  excluding  the  Upper  Caradoc,  or  intermediate  zone,  from 
the  estimate.  [See  also  the  work,  '  The  Palaeozoic  Fossils  of  the  Cambridge 
Museum,'  and  the  Tabular  List,  with  comments,  in  the  Appendices  A.,  B.] 

Those  persons  who  may  wish  to  trace  the  historical  evidences  relating  to 
the  original  researches,  \^ill  do  well  to  read  a  condensed  sketch  by  that 
sound  geologist,  one  of  my  first  instructors.  Dr.  Fittonf,  who  clearly  ex- 
posed the  state  of  the  subject  in  the  year  1841,  correctly  noticing  the 
effect  also  produced  by  other  early  labourers  in  the  same  field,  among 
whom  my  most  efficient  coadjutor  was  the  Rev.  T.  T.  Lewis,  of  Aymestry. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  addition  to  the  various  communications  by  Professor 
Sedgwick  and  myself,  practical  geologists  will  peruse  with  interest  the 
memoirs  of  Bowman,  Sharpe,  and  otlier  authors  published  in  the  Pro- 
ceedings and  Journal  of  the  Geological  Society  of  London  ;  as  well  as  the 
work  of  Professor  Phillips  '  On  the  Malvern  and  Abberley  Hills,'  a  truly 
philosophical  view  of  that  Silurian  region. 

One  of  the  most  successful  efforts  to  apply  the  true  palaeozoic  succession 
to  a  distant  part  of  Europe  was  made  by  my  eminent  and  lamented  friend 
Leopold  von  Buch  J,  who,  simply  by  comparing  fossils  sent  to  him  by 
General  Tcheffkine  with  the  types  published  in  my  former  work,  demon- 
strated that  true  Silurian  rocks  were  developed  in  various  parts  of  Russia. 
The  work  on  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  by  my  associates  de  Yer- 
neuil,  von  Keyserling,  and  myself,  was,  however  (I  hope  I  may  say  it 

*  See  some  good  general  recent  observations  bearing  on  this  question,  by  J.B.  Jukes,  F.R.S., 
(Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Dublin,  vol.  vi.,  President's  Discourse,  p.  88.). 

t  Edinburgh  Review,  April,  1841,  vol.  cxlvii.  p.  1, ;  see  also  Quarterly  Review,  1839,  vol. 
Ixiv.,  p.  102. 

+  Beitrage  Gebirgs-formationen  in  Russland,  Berlin,  1840. 

A  4 


viii 


PREFACE. 


without  presumption),  the  first  which,  in  extending  those  results  to  the 
north-western  edge  of  Asia,  developed  a  complete  ascending  series  over 
the  larger  half  of  Europe,  from  the  oldest  known  fossiliferous  strata  to  the 
youngest  tertiary  deposits. 

In  perusing  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  chapters,  which  indicate  the 
parallelism  of  the  palaeozoic  rocks  of  France,  Spain,  and  the  United  States 
of  America  to  those  of  Britain,  geologists  will  at  once  recognize  the  vast 
amount  of  knowledge  which  has  been  contributed  by  my  dear  and  en- 
lightened companion,  M.  Edouard  de  VerneuiL 

To  my  other  numerous  foreign  contemporaries,  and  especially  to  M.  Bar- 
rande,  who  have  seen  reason  to  apply  to  their  own  lands  the  classification 
and  nomenclature  first  elaborated  in  the  ancient  kingdom  of  the  Silures, 
I  also  tender  my  grateful  acknowledgments.  May  the  following  pages  not 
be  without  use  in  stimulating  them  to  bring  the  older  rocks  of  their  re- 
spective countries  into  a  closer  comparison  with  our  British  types,  than  I 
have  been  able  to  effect  in  the  present  outline! 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  1. 

Page 

Introduction — Original  Silurian  Researches. — Design  of  this  work    -  1 


CHAP.  11. 

Base  of  the  Silurian  Rocks,  and  Earliest  Zone  of  former  Life. 

Outlines,  Structure,  and  Order  of  the  older  Rocks.  —  Earliest  Crystalline  Rocks.  — 
The  lowest  Deposits  in  which  a  true  Sedimentary  Origin  is  seen  are  usually  void 
of  Signs  of  former  Life. 

Order  of  Succession  from  such  Unfossiliferous  Strata  upwards  to  the  lowest  Zone  in 
which  Fossil  Remains  have  been  detected  in  Great  Britain        -      -       -      -  17 


CHAP.  III. 

Lower  Silurian  Rocks  —  continued. 

The  Llandeilo  Formation,  its  Slates,  Schists,  Sandstones,  Limestones,  and  Interpo- 
lated Igneous  Rocks.    (2*  and  2  of  Map  and  Coloured  Sections.)     -       -       -  45 


CHAP.  IV. 

Lower  Silurian  Rocks  —  continued. 
The  Caradoc  Forsiation. 

Caradoc  Sandstone  as  developed  in  North  "Wales  and  Radnorshire.    Types  of  the 

Formation  in  Shropshire,  Herefordshire,  &c. 
The  Caradoc  strictly  united  with  the  lower  Deposits  by  its  Structure  and  Fossil 

Contents  78 


X 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS- 


CHAP.  V. 

Upper  Silurian  Rocks. 

Page 

General  Character  of  the  Upper  Silurian  Rocks,  as  divided  into  the  Wenlock  and 
Ludlow  Formations 

The  Wenlock  Formation  of  Shale  and  Limestone,  with  its  chief  Fossils,  described 
in  ascending  Order       -  lOO 

CHAP.  VI. 

Upper  Silurian  Rocks  —  continued. 

The  Ludlow  Formation,  General  Character  of.  Its  Subdivision  in  the  Typical  Dis- 
tricts, into  Lower  Ludlow  Rocks,  Aymestrj  Limestone,  and  Upper  Ludlow 
Rocks  -  124 

CHAP.  VIL 

Silurian  Rocks  of  Britain  beyond  the  Typical  Region  of  England  and 
Wales,  as  seen  in  Cornwall,  the  North-west  of  England,  Scotland, 
AND  Ireland  144 

CHAP.  VIII. 

Organic  Remains  of  the  Lower  Silurian  Rocks        -      -      -       -      -  176 

CHAP.  IX. 

Fossils  of  the  Upper  Silurian  Rocks  207 

CHAP.  X. 

The  Devonian  Rocks,  or  Old  Red  Sandstone,  as  Exhibited  in  the  British 

Isles  "241- 

CHAP.  XI. 

Carboniferous  Rocks. 

Great  Primeval  Flora  the  Source  of  the  Old  Coal  Deposits.  —  General  View  of  these 
Deposits  and  their  Organic  Remains  in  the  British  Isles   267- 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


xi 


CHAP.  XII. 

Permian  Kocks. 

Page 

Changes  of  the  Surface  before  the  Permian  Deposits  were  accumulated.  —  Origin  of 
the  Term  Permian  as  applied  to  the  highest  Group  of  Primeval  Deposits.  —  The 
Permian  Rocks  of  Russia,  Germany,  and  England.  —  The  Organic  Remains  of 
the  Group    289 


CHAP.  XIII. 

General,  View  of  the  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  Rocks  of 
Scandinavia  and  Russia    -      -       -       -      -       -      -       -       -      -  316 


CHAP.  XIV. 

Primeval  Succession  in  Germany  and  Belgium. 

General  Sketch  of  the  Character  of  the  Older  Rocks  extending  westwards  from  Po- 
land and  Turkey  in  Europe  into  the  Alps  and  Carpathians.  Devonian,  Carboni- 
ferous, and  Permian  Rocks  of  Sile?ia  and  Moravia.  Silurian  Rocks  (Lower  and 
Upper)  of  Bohemia.  Lower  Silurian,  Devonian,  Carboniferous,  and  Permian 
Rocks  of  Saxony,  the  Thiiringerwald,  &c.  General  View  of  the  Succession  of 
Devonian  and  Carboniferous  Rocks  in  the  Rhenish  Provinces  and  Belgium        -  336 


CHAP.  XV. 

Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  Rocks  of  France,  Spain,  Portu- 

GAi.,  AND  Sardinia  333      4  ^  ^ 


CHAP.  XVI. 

Succession  of  Primeval  Rocks  in  America. 

Order  of  the  Palaeozoic  Strata  in  South  America,  the  United  States,  and  British 
North  America  ,.  408 


CHAP.  XVII. 


On  the  Original  Formation  of  Gold,  and  its  Subsequent  Distribution 
IN  Debris  over  Parts  of  the  Earth's  Surface      -      «.      -      -  -431 


xii 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


CHAP.  XVIII. 

Conclusion. 

Page 

Kecapitulation  —  General  View  of  the  Succession  of  Life  from  a  Beginning  as 
based  on  positive  Observation  —  The  Progress  of  Creation  —  Theoretical  Specu- 


lations distinguished  from  absolute  Geological  Eesults  459 

APPENDIX. 

A.  Vertical  Range  of  Silurian  Fossils        -  -       -  485 

B.  Recent  Surveys  of  the  British  Silurian  Rocks        -       -       -       -       -  -490 

C.  Traces  of  Vegetable  Matter  in  the  Silurian  and  older  Rocks   -       -       -      -  492 

D.  Unconformity  in  Ireland  of  the  Longmynd  or  Bottom  Rocks  ('  Cambrian '  of  the 

Survey)  to  the  Lovs^er  Silurian  493 

E.  Barrande's  Silurian  System  in  Bohemia  -------       -  493 

F.  Depth  of  the  Primeval  Seas,  and  Colouring  of  the  Shells  of  the  Mollusca  which 

lived  in  them  -  -495 

G.  Extension  of  Silurian  Rocks  in  Spain    -       -       -       -     .  -       -       -       -  ib. 

H.  Foraminifera  in  the  Silurian  Rocks       -       -       -       -       -       -       -  -496 

I.  Supposed  Anomaly  at  Neffiez  in  France  explained  -       -       -       -  -1-497 

K.  Australian  Gold  -       -  ib. 

It.  Produce  of  Silver  ib. 

M.  Silurian  Rocks  in  Silesia  ---------- 

N.  Palaeozoic  Rocks  in  Asia  Minor  498 

O.  Discoveries  along  the  Flanks  of  the  Malvern  Hills  -  -  -  .  -  -  ib. 
P.  Other  Reptilian  Remains  in  the  Permian  Rocks  of  Russia  -  -  -  .  ib. 
Q.  On  the  foraaer  Changes  of  the  Alps  -  -499 

INDEX  -----  *    -  507 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Geological  Map  --------  Frontispiece 


WOODCUTS. 


Page 

General  Order  of  the  Primeval  Rocks  22 
Contorted  Schists  at  the  South  Stack 

Lighthouse,  Anglesea        -  -  24 

The  Longmynd         -  -  -  26 

Section  from  the  Longmynd  on  the 
E.S.E.  across  the  Stiper  Stones  to 
the  Tract  of  Shelve  and  Corndon  on 
the  W.N. W.         -  -  -  29 

Pass  of  Llanberis   from  the  Lower 

Lake         -  -  -  -  30 

Oldhamia  •  antiqua,  from  Bray  Head, 

Ireland      -  -  -  -  32 

Slaty  Cleavage  and  Bedding  -  -  34 

The  Western  Face  of  the  Stiper  Stones  37 
The  Eastern  Face  of  the  Stiper  Stones  ih. 
Section  of  Rocks  at  Barmouth  -  40 

Lingula  Flags,  North  Wales  -  -  42 

Hymenocaris  vermicauda,  Salter.  Lin- 
gula Flags,  Dolgelly  -  -  42 
Paradoxides  Forchhammeri,  Angelin? 

Black  Schists  of  North  Wales  -  43 
Trilobites  from  the  Black  Schists  of 

the  Malverns         -  •  -  43 

Lovfer  Silurian  Graptolites    -  -  46 

Section   at  Llandewi   Felfrey,  Pem- 
brokeshire -  -  -  -  49 
Whittery    Quarries    in  Harrington 

Dingle       -  -  -  -  55 

Volcanic  Breccia       -  -  -  56 

Ideal  Representation  of  the  Manner  in 
which  submarine  Volcanic  Dejec- 
tions were  formed  in  the  Lov/er 
Silurian  Period      .  -  -  ih. 

Lower  Silyrian  and  bedded  Trap,  tra- 
versed by  eruptive  Rocks,  the  Corn- 
don Mountain  in  the  Distance        -  57 
Alternations  of  Llandeilo  Flags  and 

Schists  with  Volcanic  Grits  -  ib. 

View   of  the    Breidden    Hills  near 

Welshpool,  from  Powis  Castle  -  59 
Section  across  the  Breidden  Hills  -  60 
Section  across  the  Gelli  Hills  -  -  61 

Lower  Silurian  Rocks  in  Abereiddy 

Bay  -  -  -  -  64 

Llandeilo  Schists  in  Musclewick  Bay  -  65 
View  of  Skomer  Isles,  seen  from  the 
Mainland  -  -  -  -  66 


Page 

Silurian  Rocks  of  Marloes  Bay,  Pem- 
broke, dipping  under  the  Old  Red 
Sandstone  of  Hook  Point  -  -  66 

Section   at  Llandewi  Felfrey,  Pem- 
brokeshire -  -  ~  -  68 
View  from  Dynevor  Park,  Llandeilo, 
looking  to  the  Hills  above  Golden 
Grove        -           -           -  -  69 
Noeth  Griig  -           -          -  -  72 
Section  near  I^langadock.    From  the 
Lower    Silurian   to   the  Old  Red 
Sandstone  -           -           -  -  73 
Section   near  Llandeilo.     From  the 
Lower  Silurian  to  the  Edge  of  the 
great  South-Welsh  Coal-field         -  ih. 
Llanwrtyd  Wells       -          -  -  75 
Cader  Idris   -           -           -           -  77 
Llandeilo  Schists  supporting  Caradoc 

Sandstone  -  -  -  -  79 

Pegwn's  Fawr,  Borders  of  Radnor  and 

Montgomery  -  -  -  80 

The  Caradoc  Range  -  -  -  81 

Relations  of  Caradoc  Sandstone  to  the 

Upper  Silurian  Rocks  in  Shropshire  82 
Caradoc  Fossils         -  -  -  86 

Upper  Caradoc  Fossils  -  -  87 

Section  at  Corton       -  -  -  90 

Unconformable  Relations  of  Llandeilo 
Flags  and  Upper  Silurian,  near 
Builth       -  .  .  _  ih. 

View  of  the  Malvern  Hills  from  the 

West         -  -  -  -  92 

Section   from   the  Malvern  Hills  to 

Ledbury     -  -  -  -  94 

General  Order  of  the  Upper  Silurian 
Rocks  between  the  Caradoc  Sand- 
stone beneath,  and  the  Old  Red 
Sandstone  above  them         -  -  102 

Lower  Wenlock  at  Corton,  near  Pres- 

teign         -  ■•  -  103 

Altered  Amorphous  Limestone  of  Nash 

Scar  -  -  .  .  ih. 

Section  at  Yat  Hill  and  Hanter  Hill  -  104 
View   from    Stanner    Rocks  (Ousal 
Wood,   Hanter  Hill,  and  Hergest 
Ridge  being  successively  seen  in  the 
Distance)  -  -  -  -  105 


xiv 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Page 

Section  across  the  elevated  Valley  of 
Wool  hope  -  -  -  -  106 

Trilobites  of  the  Lower  Wenlock  or 
Woolhope  Limestone         -  -  108 

View  of  Wenlock  Edge,  as  seen  from 
the  Hills  of  Ludlow  Rock  on  the 
S.W.         -  -  -  113 

Old  Quanies  in  the  Wenlock  Lime- 
stone        -  -  -  -  11 4 

Dudley,  from  the  Wren's  Nest  -  1 1 6 

Section  across  the  Wren's  Nest  -  117 

The  South  End  of  the  Wren's  Nest    -  ib. 

Corals  of  the  Wenlock  Limestone      -  119 

120,  121 

Ludlow  Castle  -  -  -  125 

Section  across  the  Ludlow  Promontory  126 
Whiteway  Head        -  -  -  130 

The  Palmer's  Cairn  Landslip  -  131 

Upper  Ludlow  Rocks   at  the  Bone 

Well         -  -  -  -  134 

Brecon  Anticlinal  of  Ludlow  Rocks, 

throwing  off  Old  Red  Sandstone    -  141 
View  of  the  Cliffs  near  St.  Abb's  Head  150 
Silurian  Rocks  of  the  South  of  Scot- 
land -  -  -  -  152 
Section  across  the  Bins  of  Connemara, 

and  Killery  Harbour         -  -  169 

I,ower  Silurian  Zoophytes     -  -  178 

Lower  Silurian  Crinoid        -  -  180 

Lower  Silurian  Cystideans     -  -  181 

Lower  Silurian  Star-fish         -  -  182 

Lower  Silurian  Orthides       -  -  184 

Lower  Silurian  Brachiopods  - 

185,  186,  187,  189 
Lamellibranchiata     -  -  -  191 

Gasteropoda  -  -  -  -  193 

Heteropod  and  Pteropod  Mollusca  -  196 
Cephalopoda  -  -  -  -  197 

Cephalopods  -  -  -  -  199 

Annelids  ;  or  marine  Worm-tracks  -  ib. 
Trilobites  typical  of  the  Lower  Silu- 
rian Rocks  -  -  -  201 
Trinucleus  concentricus,  three  Speci- 
mens, distorted  by  Slaty  Cleavage  -  203 
Other  Lower  Silurian  Trilobites  -  204 
Section    of    Stromatopora  striatella, 

D'Orb.      -  -  -  -  210 

Corals  of  the  Upper  Silurian  Rocks  .  212 
Cup  Corals  of  the  Wenlock  Limestone  213 
Upper  Silurian  Bryozoa        -  -  215 

Ptilodictya  scalpellum,  Lonsdale  -  216 
Cystideae  of  the  Wenlock  Limestone  -  217 
Crinoidea  of  the  Dudley  Limestone  -  21 9 
Upper  Silurian  Starfish         -  -  221 

Upper  Silurian  Brachiopoda  -  -  222 

Upper  Silurian  Brachiopoda  -  -  224 

Upper  Silurian  Lamellibranchiata 

225,  226 

Upper  Silurian  Cephalopods  -  -  231 

Upper  Silurian  Crustacea      -  -  234 

Wenlock  Limestone  Trilobites  -  235 

View  from  the  Slaty  Lower  Silurian 
Rocks    near    Llanwrtyd,  Brecon, 


^  Page 
overlookmg  rounded  Hills  of  Upper 
Silurian  ;  with  Mountains  of  Old 
Red  Sandstone  in  the  distance,  the 
latter  being  defined  by  the  untinted 
outline       -  -  _  -  ib. 

Section  from  the  Top  of  the  Silurian 
Rocks,  on  the  N.W.,  across  the  whole 
area  of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone,  to 
the  bottom  beds  of  the  S.  Welsh 
Coal  Field,  on  the  S  E.      -  -  243 

Section  across  the  Old  Red  of  Forfar- 
shire -  248 
Mountains  of  the  West  Coast  of  the 

Highlands  -  -  _  249 

Old  Red  Sandstone  Fish       -  -  251 

Old  Red  Fish  -  -  -  252 

Old  Red  Ganoid  Fish  -  -  253 

Reptile  of  the  Upper  Old  Red  -  254 
Old  Red  Sandstone  Plant      -  -  255 

Section  across  North  Devon  -  -  256 

Shells  of  the  Lower  Devonian  Lime- 
stone        -  261 
Shells  of  the  Upper  Devonian  Lime- 
stone        -  -  -  263 
Ideal  View  of  the  Vegetation  of  the 

Carboniferous  Era  -  -  -  268 

General  Relations  of  the  Carboniferous 
Rocks  in  the  Central  and  Southern 
Parts  of  England  -  -  -  270 

Stackpole  Cliffs  of  Carboniferous  Lime- 
stone        -  -  -  -  271 
Stackpole  Rock        -           -           -  272 
General  Order  in  Pembrokeshire       -  ib. 
Section  across  the    Cornbrook  Coal 

Basin  of  the  Clee  Hills      -  -  273 

Slash  of  Culm  -  -  -  275 

Limulus  rotundatus,  Prestwich  -  281 
Coral  of  the  Mountain  Limestone  -  282 
Some    Fossils   of  the  Carboniferous 

Limestone  -  283 

Insect  and  Shells  of  the  Coal  -  -  284 

Fern  from  Coal  of  Coalbrook  Dale  -  285 
Uppermost  Limestone  of  the  Coal 

285,  286 

The  Gurmaya  Hills  of  the  South  Ural 

Mountains-  -  295 

Section  of  the  West    Flank   of  the 

South  Ural  -  -  -  296 

Permian  Rocks  of  Britain     -  -  300 

Relations  of  Permian  Rocks  to  the 

Coal  near  Hales  Owen      -    *       -  301 
Position  of  the  Permian  Rocks  in 

Shropshire  -  -  _  303 

Permian  Plants,  &c.  -  -  -  3O6 

Permian  Shells         -  .  .  309 

Permian  Fish  -  -  -  312 

Lower  Silurian  Strata  of  Sweden  re- 
posing on  Gneiss    -  -  -  318 
Oldest  Silurian  Strata  of  Sweden  rest- 
ing on  Granite       -           -          -  318 
Succession  in  Norway            -           -  319 
Succession  in  Norway  (continued  to 
the  east)    -           -           -           .  320 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


XV 


Page 

Lower    Silurian    Rocks— Cliffs  near 

Waiwara    -  -  -  -  J^24 

Asaphus  expansus,  var.  cornutus,  from 

the  St,  Petersburg!!  Limestone       -  ib. 
Orthoceras  duplex,    Wahlenberg      -  326 
Ravine  of  the  Belaia  in  the  Valdai 

Hills         -  .  -  -  328 

Devonian  and  Carboniferous  Rocks  in 

the  Gorge  of  the  Tchussovaya  River  330 
Generalized  Section  across  the  Silurian 

Basin  of  Central  Bohemia  -  -  342 

Inversion  in  the  Eifel  explained  -  377 
Inverted  Strata  South  of  Brllon  -  378 
Section  from  Sille  le  Guillaume  to 

Sabl^         -  -  -  -  385 


Page 

Ideal  Section  across  the  iVppalachian 

Chain        -  -  .  .  424 

General  Section  across  the  Older  Rocks 
of  Lower  Canada  near  the  Mouth  of 
the  St.  Lawrence   -  -  -  ib. 

View  from  the  Summit  of  the  Katch- 

kanar,  N.  Ural      -  -  .  43^^ 

Lake  of  Aushkul,  S.  Ural     -  -  441 

Hills  of  Cossatchi-Datchi      -  -  ib. 

Diggings  at  the  Soimanofsk  Mines     -  442 
Gold  Diggings  at  Zarevo  Alexandrofsk  444 
Gold  Shingle  near  Ekaterinburg        -  445 
Ideal  Representation  of  the  Original 
Formation  of  Gold  in  the  Rocks, 
and  its  subsequent  Translation  into 
Heaps  of  Gravel    -  -  -  449 


PLATES    OF   FOSSILS,  ETC. 
[  To  be  placed  at  the  End  of  the  Booh.'] 


I. — IV   Lower  Silurian  Crustacea. 

v.— VIII   „  „  Braehiopoda. 

IX. — X   „         „       Bivalve  and  Univalve  Shells. 

XI   „         „  Cephalopoda. 

XII   „         „       Graptolites  and  '  Incertai  Sedis.' 

XIII. — XV   Upper  Silurian  Crinoidea  and  Annelida. 

XVII. — XIX   „  ,,      Trilobites  and  Crustacea. 

XX. — XXn   „  „      Braehiopoda  and  Lamellibranchiata. 

XXIV. — XXV   „  Gasteropoda,  Pteropoda,  and  Heteropoda. 

XXVI.— XXX ni   Cephalopoda. 

XXXIV   Upper  Ludlow  Rock  (Tilestone). 

XXXV   Fossils  of  Upper  Ludlow  Bone  bed. 

XXXVI.— XXXVII   Fishes  of  Old  Red  Sandstone. 


General  Map  of  PALiEozoic  Formations.    To  face  p.  475. 


*A  8 


ERRATA. 


Preface,  p.  vii.  1.  4.  for  cession,  read  succession. 
Page 

13.  last  line,  et  passim,  for  mezozoic  read 
mesozoie. 

43.  last  line  but  one,  omit,  The  Olenus  occurs 

in  Bohemia. 

44.  1.  3.  omit  traces. 

47.  1.  7.  from  bottom, /or  has,  read  have. 

64.  1.  18.  read  (porphyries  of  Sedgwick),  after 

igneous  rocks. 
68.  1.  4.  from  bottom, /or  ch.  5.,  read  ch.  8. 
74.  Note,  for  PI.  3.,  read  PI.  11. ;  also  ch.  8. 
instead  of  ch.  5. 
1.  20.  dele  Orthis  alternata,  Foss.  8. ;  and 
1.  22.  dele  Asaphus  Powisii,  pi.  2.  See 
p.  98. 

1.  2.  for  B.  ornatus,  Conrad,  read  B.  nodo- 

sus,  Salter. 
1.  5.  for  next  chapter,  read  chap.  8. 
89.  1.  21. /or  sixth,  read  fifth. 
91.  letters  under  Section  near  Builth,  for  c, 
read  d. 

103.  1.  8. /or  girt,  read  grit. 

105.  1.  5. /or  amorphorus,  read  amorphous. 

107.  1.  5.  et  passim,  for  Petraia  bina,  Lonsdale, 

read  Petraia  bina,  sp.  lionsd. 
112.  1.  2.  et  passim,  for  Rhynconella,  read 

Rhynchonella. 
116.  1.  5. /or  extended,  read  extruded. 

118.  1.  4. /or  exterior  nucleus,  read  exterior  of 

the  nucleus. 

119.  1.  7.  from  bottom,  Fav.  cristata,/or  Linn., 

read  Blumenbach. 
121.  Foss.  12.  f.  1.  the  name  omitted  is  Diasto- 

pora?  consimilis  (Aulopora  id.  Sil. 

Syst.)    The  Author  is-indebted  to  Mr. 

Lonsdale  for  this  correction,  and  also 

for  a  suggestion  that  f.  5.  is  a  distinct 

species  from  the  S.  ramulosa,  Goldfuss. 
133.  1.  10. /or  Avicula  reticulata,  read  Pterinea 

Sowerbyi. 

142.  1.  5.  from  bottom  for  fossil,  read  seed- 
vessel  of  a  plant. 
1.  10.  from  bottom,  for  Thelodus  parvi- 
dens,  read  Onchus  Murchisoni. 
158.  1.  I.  for  Trenton,  read  Chazy. 
161.  1.  15. /or  sarcinulata,  read  lata. 

1.  16. /or  Avicular  lineata,  read  Pterinea 
(Avicula)  lineatula. 

163.  1.  7.  from  bottom,  for  comform,  read 

conform. 

164.  note  2.  add  and  vol.  5.  2nd  ser.  p.  1.  seq. 


Page 

167.  L  5.  dele  the  *.  Note.  1.  2. /or  vol.  iv.  old 
ser.,  read  vol.  v.  2nd  ser.  p.  \.  et  seq. 

169.  1.  13.  for  masses  granular,  read  masses  of 
granular. 

In  the  section,  for  letter  o  under  Glen- 
keen,  read  c  ;  and  a  letter  b  should  be 
placed  under  the  dark  rocks  which  rest 
on  the  granite  (*).    See  descr.  p.  172. 

1 72.  1.  10.  for  a,  read  c. 

184.  1.  8.  omit  0.  flabellulum,  f.  1. 

187.  1.  4,  for  last  year,  read  in  1852  (the  page 

■was  printed  in  1853). 

188.  1.  6.  from  bottom  for  PI.  9.,  read  PI.  5. 
192.  1.  2. /or  Foss.  10.,  read  Foss.  23. 

L  7. /or  Foss.  12.  f.  7.,  read  Foss.  7.  f.  12. 

195.  1.  18.  dele  if,  f.  7.  same  species. 

196.  1.  Q.for  triated,  read  striated. 

226.  1.  8.  for  Mytilus  antiquus,  read  Modiola 
antiqua. 

231.  1.  3.  and  12. /or  Foss.  21.,  read  Foss.  25. 
240.  1.  2.  from  bottom,  for  in  which,  read  on 
which. 

244.  1.  19. /or  (p),  read  (/). 

245.  1.  7.  for  usher  into,  reacZ  usher  in. 

252.  1.  8.  for  one  sgeciesis,  read  one  species  is 
256.  1.  3.  of  description,  place  the  (*)  with 

'  Eruptive  granite.' 
1.  5.  transfer  'Club  Mosses'  to  the  Cryp- 

togamte  above. 
259.  1.  6.  dele  in. 

286.  Note,  1.  2, /or  tracts,  read  tracks. 

304.  1.  7.  from  bottom, /or  do  not  sto,  read  do 

not  stop. 

305.  1.  17.  for  that,  read  those. 

308.  1.  2.  after  Polycoelia  dele  the  semicolon. 
310.  I.  9.  for  Keratophoga,  read  Keratophaga. 
315.  P.  S.,  end  of,  for  Ruppendorf,  read  Rup- 
persdorf. 

322.  1.  19. /or  on,  read  in. 

323.  1. 4.  from   bottom,  for  Kutorga,  read 

Kutorga. 

327.  1.  2.  from  bottom,  for  but  the,  read  but 
to  the. 

1.  5.  from  bottom,  for  Devonian  rocks  of 
Russia,  read  Devonian  and  Carboni- 
ferous rocks  of  Russia. 

335.  1.  2.  for  arise,  read  rise. 

371.  L  10.  for  its,  read  the. 

401.  note, /or  1852,  read  1853. 

421.  1.  11.  for  Shurman,  read  Shumard. 

508.  Index,  to  references  to  Dr.  Buckland, 
add  Alps,  500. 


S  I  L  U  R  I  A 


CHAPTER  L 

INTRODUCTION  —  ORIGINAL  SILURIAN  RESEARCHES.  —  DESIGN  OF 

THIS  WORK. 

The  earliest  condition  of  the  earth  is  necessarily  the  darkest  period 
of  its  geological  history.    The  favourite  hypothesis  concerning  the 
origin  of  the  planet,  founded  on  astronomical  and  physical  analogies, 
is,  that  it  assumed  the  form  of  a  flattened  spheroid  from  rotation  on 
its  axis  when  in  a  fluid  state.    Reasoning  upon  this  idea,  and  look- 
ing to  the  structure  of  those  rocks  which  either  lie  at  great  depths 
or  have  been  extruded  from  beneath,  the  geologist  has  inferred  that 
the  crystalline  masses,  including  granites  which  issued  out  from  be- 
low all  other  rocks,  and  constitute  possibly  their  existing  substratum, 
were  at  one  time  in  a  molten  state.    The  theory  of  a  central  heat, 
at  first  sufiiciently  intense  to  maintain  the  whole  terrestrial  mass  in 
a  state  of  fusion,  but  subsequently  so  far  dissipated  by  radiation 
into  space,  as  to  allow  the  superficial  portion  to  become  solid,  has 
been  adopted  by  the  greater  number  of  philosophers  who  have 
grappled  with  the  difficult  problem  of  the  first  conditions  of  our 
planet.    Most  of  them  likewise  have  believed  that  all  the  great  out- 
bursts of  igneous  matter,  by  which  the  crust  has  been  penetrated 
and  its  surface  diversified,  were  merely  outward  signs  of  the  con- 
tinued internal  activity  of  that  primordial  heat,  now  much  repressed 

B 


2  SILURIA.  [Chap.  1. 

by  the  accumulat  ions  of  ages,  and  of  which  our  present  volcanoes  are 
feeble  indications.  If,  then,  the  mathematician  has  correctly  ex- 
plained the  causes  of  the  shape  of  the  globe,  the  geologist  confirms 
his  views  when,  examining  into  the  nature  of  its  oldest  massive 
crystalline  rocks,  he  sees  in  them  clear  proofs  of  the  effects  of  intense 
heat.  This  original  crust  of  the  earth  was  subsequently,  we  may  believe, 
broken  up  by  protruded  masses,  which,  issuing  in  a  melted  condition, 
constituted  the  axes  and  centres  of  mountain  chains.  Each  great 
igneous  eruption  gave  out  substances  that  became,  on  cooling,  solid 
rocks,  which,  when  raised  into  the  atmosphere,  constituted  lands 
that  were  exposed  to  innumerable  wasting  agencies ;  and  thus  afforded 
materials  to  be  spread  out  as  deposits  upon  the  shores  and  bed  of  the 
ocean.  In  these  hypothetical  views  concerning  the  production  of  the 
earliest  sediments  formed  under  water,  we  seem  to  reach  a  primary 
source ;  and  once  admitting  that  large  superficial  areas  were  origi- 
nally occupied  by  igneous  rocks,  we  have  in  them  a  basis  from 
which  the  first  sedimentary  materials  were  obtained. 

The  earlier  eruptions  having  necessarily  occasioned  elevations  at 
some  points  and  collapses  or  depressions  at  others,  such  changes  of 
outline,  aided  by  the  grinding  action  of  water,  would  occasion  the 
formation  of  bands  of  sediment,  which,  adapting  themselves  to  the 
inequalities  of  the  surface,  must  have  been  of  unequal  dimensions  in 
different  parts  of  their  range.  In  this  way  we  may  imagine  how, 
by  a  repetition  of  the  processes  of  elevation  and  denudation,  the 
earliest  exterior  rugosities  of  the  earth  would  be  in  some  places 
increased,  while  in  others  they  would  be  placed  beyond  the  influence 
of  sedimentary  accumulation.  May  we  not  also  infer,  that  the  nu- 
merous molten  rocks  of  great  dimensions  which  were  suddenly 
evolved  from  the  interior  at  subsequent  periods,  must  have  made 
enormous  additions  to  the  solid  crust  of  the  earth,  and  have  con- 
stituted grand  sources  for  the  augmentation  of  new  strata  ? 

Turning  from  the  igneous  rocks  to  crystalline  stratified  deposits. 


Chap.  L]  INTRODUCTORY  VIEW.  3 

we  now  know  that  a  great  portion  of  the  micaceous  schists, 
chloritic  and  quartzose  rocks,  clay-slates,  and  limestones,  once 
called  primary,  were  of  later  origin.  Many  of  these  are  nothing 
more  than  subaqueous  sediments  of  various  epochs,  which  have  been 
altered  and  crystallized  at  periods  long  subsequent  to  their  accumu- 
lation. This  inference  has  been  deduced  from  positive  observation. 
Rocks,  for  example,  have  been  tracked  from  the  districts  where  they 
are  crystalline,  to  spots  where  the  mechanical  and  subaqueous  origin 
of  the  beds  is  obvious,  and  from  the  latter  to  localities  where  the  same 
strata  are  wholly  unchanged,  and  contain  organic  remains.  Transi- 
tions are  thus  seen  from  compact  quartz  rock,  in  which  the  grains 
of  silica  are  scarcely  discoverable  with  a  powerful  lens,  to  strata  in 
which  the  sandy,  gritty,  and  pebbly  particles  bespeak  clearly  that 
the  whole  range  was  originally  accumulated  under  water.  Other 
passages  occur  from  crystalline,  chloritic,  and  micaceous  schists,  to 
those  clay-slates  which  are  little  more  than  consolidated  mud,  and 
from  crystalline  marble  to  common  earthy  limestone,  in  which 
organic  remains  abound.  These  and  similar  metamorphoses  embrace 
the  consideration  of  changes,  like  those,  for  example,  by  which  or- 
dinary limestone  has  been  converted  into  dolomite  and  sulphate  of 
lime  or  gypsum,  or  shale  into  mica-schist,  as  is  seen  in  the  se- 
condary and  tertiary  rocks  of  the  Alps.* 

Elementary  works  will  have,  indeed,  informed  the  student,  that 
such  changes  of  the  original  sediment  have  been  generally  ac- 
counted for  by  the  influence  of  great  heat  proceeding  from  the 
interior  of  the  earth,  and  which  at  different  former  periods  mani- 
fested its  power  in  the  eruption  of  granites,  syenites,  porphyries, 
greenstones,  and  other  substances  formed  by  fusion.  Let  it,  how- 
ever, be  understood,  that  the  prodigious  extent  to  which  the  meta- 
morphism  of  the  original  strata  has  been  carried  in  mountain- 
chains,  and  at  different  periods  through  all  formations,  though  often 

*  See  Alps,  Apennines,  &c.  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  v.  p.  157.  et  seq. 

B  2 


4  SILURTA.  [Chap.1. 

probably  connected  with  such  igneous  outbursts,  must  have  re- 
sulted from  a  far  mightier  agency  than  that  which  was  produc- 
tive of  the  mere  eruptions  of  molten  matter  or  igneous  rocks.  The 
latter  are,  in  fact,  but  partial  excrescences  in  the  vast  spread  of 
the  stratified  crystalline  rocks,  —  symptoms  only  of  the  grand 
changes  which  resulted  from  deep-seated  causes ;  probably  from  the 
combination  of  heat,  steam,  and  electricity,  acting  together  with  an 
intensity  very  powerful  in  former  periods. 

Processes  now  going  on  in  nature  on  a  small  scale,  or  imitated 
artificially  by  man,  may  enable  us  to  comprehend  imperfectly  in 
what  manner  some  of  these  infinitely  grander  ancient  metamorphoses 
were  effected  ;  and  the  experimental  science  of  chemistry,  when  more 
extensively  applied  to  the  analysis  of  rocks,  will,  it  is  hoped,  some 
day  reveal  still  more  important  truths  in  this,  which  is  still  one 
of  the  most  obscure  points  in  the  range  of  geological  phenomena. 

But  speculations  on  such  physical  operations  as  those  which  have 
affected  the  surface  of  the  earth,  are  not  here  called  for.  At  all 
events,  the  earliest  of  the  phenomena,  with  which  alone  we  are  at 
present  concerned,  or  the  first  formation  of  the  known  crust  of  the 
planet,  belongs  to  a  period  in  which  no  definite  order, —  still  less  any 
trace  of  life, —  has  been  deciphered  by  human  labour.* 

The  design  of  this  work  is  much  more  attainable.  Its  aim  is  to 
mark  the  most  ancient  strata  in  which  the  proofs  of  sedimentary 
or  aqueous  action  are  still  visible, — to  note  the  geological  position  of 
those  beds  which  in  various  countries  offer  the  first  ascertained  signs 
of  life,  and  to  develop  the  succession  of  deposits,  where  not  obscured 
by  metamorphism,  that  belong  to  such  protozoic  zones.  In  thus 
adhering  only  to  subjects  capable  of  being  investigated,  it  will 

*  The  reader  who  desires  to  study  the  laws  by  which  the  superficial  tempera- 
ture of  the  earth  has  been  regulated  in  the  immensely  long  subsequent  geolo- 
gical periods,  will  find  them  well  explained  in  the  profound  essay  of  Mr.  W. 
Hopkins,  "  On  the  causes  of  changes  of  climate  at  difierent  geological  periods," 
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  viii.  p.  56. 


Chap.  I.]  SILURIAN  RESEARCHES.  5 

be  seen,  that  geology,  modern  as  she  is  among  the  sciences,  has 
revealed  to  us,  that  during  cycles  long  anterior  to  the  creation  of  the 
human  race,  and  while  the  surface  of  the  globe  was  passing  from  one 
condition  to  another,  whole  races  of  animals — each  group  adapted 
to  the  physical  conditions  in  which  they  lived  —  were  successively 
created  and  exteraiinated.  It  is  to  the  first  stages  only  of  this 
grand  and  long  series  of  former  accumulations,  and  to  the  crea- 
tures entombed  in  them,  that  attention  is  now  directed. 

The  convictions  at  which  I  have  arrived  being  the  result  of  many 
years  of  research,  I  have  been  urged  by  numerous  friends  to  give  a 
condensed,  and,  as  far  as  is  practicable,  a  popular  view  of  the  oldest 
sedimentary  rocks  and  of  their  chief  organic  remains,  and  thus  to 
throw  into  one  moderate-sized  volume  the  essence  of  my  large 
works  *,  as  sustained  by  the  publications  of  many  other  authors. 

Geologists  are  now  pretty  generally  agreed,  that  the  oldest  organic 
remains  which  are  traceable,  pertain  to  the  lower  division  of  the 
rocks  termed  Silurian;  but  before  any  description  of  these  ancient 
deposits,  or  of  those  preceding  them,  is  given,  a  few  words  are 
required,  in  explanation  of  the  researches  by  which  our  acquaintance 
with  the  earliest  vestiges  of  life  and  order  in  the  protozoic  world  has 
been  attained. 

One  of  the  chief  steps  which  led  to  the  present  classification,  as 
admitted  by  my  contemporaries,  was  the  establishment  of  the 
'  Silurian  System '  of  rocks  and  their  imbedded  fossils.  Before  the 
labours  which  terni.inated  in  the  publication  of  the  work  so  named, 
no  one  had  unravelled  the  detailed  sequence  and  characteristic  fossils 
of  any  strata  of  a  higher  antiquity  than  the  Old  Red  Sandstone  ;  and 
even  that  formation  was  only  known  to  be  the  natural  base  of  the 
Carboniferous  or  Mountain  limestone,  and  to  contain  a  few  unde- 
scribed  fossil  fishes.    Not  only  were  the  relations  and  contents  of  all 

*  See  Silurian  System,  Murchison,  1839;  and  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural 
Mountains,  by  Murcliison,  de  Yerneuil,  and  de  Keyserling  (J.  Murray,  1845). 

B  3 


6  SILURIA.  [Chap.  I. 

the  inferior  strata  undefined,  but  even  many  rocks  which  are  now 
known  to  be  younger  than  the  Silurian,  were  then  considered  to 
be  of  much  more  remote  antiquity.  No  one  had  then  surmised, 
that  the  great  series  of  hard  slates  with  limestones  and  fossils,  which 
have  since  been  termed  Devonian,  is  an  equivalent  of  the  Old 
E,ed  Sandstone,  and  younger  than,  as  well  as  distinct  from,  the  de- 
posits of  the  still  older  Silurian  era.  On  the  contrary,  British 
authorities  believed  (and  I  was  myself  so  taught)  that  the  schistose 
and  subcrystalline  rocks  of  Devonshire  and  Cornwall  were  about 
the  most  ancient  of  the  vast  undigested  heaps  of  greywacke.  In 
short,  the  best  geologists*  of  my  early  days  were  accustomed  to 
leave  off  with  such  rocks,  as  constituting  obscure  heaps  of  sedi- 
ment, in  and  below  which  no  succession  of  "  strata  as  identified 
by  their  fossils  "  could  be  detected.  The  result  of  research,  how- 
ever, has  been  the  elimination  of  several  well-defined  groups,  all 
of  which  were  formerly  merged  in  the  unmeaning  German  term 
*  grauwacke.'    (See  Chap.  14.) 

Desirous  of  throwing  light  on  this  dark  subject,  I  consulted  my 
valued  friend  and  instructor.  Dr.  Buckland,  as  to  the  region 
most  likely  to  afford  evidences  of  order,  and  by  his  advice  I 
first  explored,  in  1831,  the  banks  of  the  Wye  between  Hay  and 
Builth.  Discovering  a  considerable  tract  in  Hereford,  Radnor, 
and  Shropshire,  wherein  large  masses  of  grey-coloured  strata  rise 
out  from  beneath  the  Old  Red  Sandstone,  and  contain  fossils  differing 
from  any  which  were  known  in  the  superior  deposits,  I  began  to 
classify  these  rocks.  After  four  years  of  consecutive  labour,  I  as- 
signed to  them  (1835)  the  name  Silurian,  deriving  it  from  the  portion 
of  England  and  Wales,  in  which  the  successive  formations  are 
clearly  displayed,  and  wherein  an  ancient  British  people,  the  Silures, 
under  their  king  Caradoc  (Caractacus),  had  opposed  a  long  and 

*  See  those  classical  works,  the  first  Geological  Map  of  Mr.  Greenough,  and  the 
Geology  of  England  and  Wales,  by  the  Kev.  W.  D.  Conybeare. 


Ch\p.  I.]  SILUKIAN  RESEARCHES.  7 

valorous  resistance  to  the  Eomans.  Having  firsts  in  the  year  1833, 
separated  these  deposits*  into  four  formations,  and  shown  that 
each  is  characterized  by  peculiar  organic  remains,  I  next  di- 
vided them  (1834,  1835)  into  a  lower  and  upper  group,  both  of 
which  I  hoped  would  be  found  applicable  to  wide  regions  of  the 
earth.  After  eight  years  of  labour  in  the  field  and  closet,  the  proofs 
of  the  truth  of  those  views  were  more  fully  published  in  the  work 
entitled  the  '  Silurian  System '  (1839). 

During  my  early  researches,  it  was  shown  that  the  lowest  of  these 
(1833)  fossil-bearing  strata  reposed,  in  the  west  of  Shropshire,  on  a 
very  thick  accumulation  of  still  older  sediment,  as  exposed  in  the 
ridge  of  the  Stiper  Stones,  and  the  Longmynd  mountain ;  and  the 
strata  of  the  latter  not  offering  a  vestige  of  former  life,  they  were 
consequently  termed  unfossiliferous  greywacke. 

At  that  time  it  was  also  supposed,  that  the  contiguous  slaty  region 
of  North  Wales,  then  under  the  examination  of  Professor  Sedgwick, 
consisted  of  rocks,  in  part  fossiliferous,  and  of  an  enormous  thick- 
ness, which  rose  up,  according  to  my  friend  and  fellow  labourer, 
from  beneath  my  Silurian  types.  Hence,  another  term,  or  that  of 
Cambrian,  was  afterwards,  or  in  the  year  1836,  applied  to  masses 
supposed  to  be  inferior,  before  their  true  relations  to  the  Silurian 
strata  of  Shropshire  and  Montgomeryshire  had  been  ascertained. 
This  assumed  inferiority  of  position  in  the  slaty  rocks  of  North 
Wales  being  considered  a  fixed  point,  it  was  naturally  thought, 
that  such  lower  formations,  the  fossils  of  which  were  then  unde- 
scribed,  would  be  found  to  contain  a  set  of  organic  remains, 

*  For  the  first  tabular  view  of  these  four  formations,  the  bottom  one  resting  on 
the  unfossiliferous  greywacke  of  the  Longmynd,  see  Proceedings  Geol.  Soc.  Lond. 
vol.  ii.  p.  11.,  Jan.  1834.  The  characteristic  fossil  species  were  even  then  enume- 
rated, and  hence  the  classification  which  is  now  sustained  is  essentially  twenty  years 
old.  It  had  even  been  previously  stated  by  me,  that  the  lowest  known  fossil- 
bearing  formation,  or  the  '  black  trilohite  schists  and  flags  of  Llandeilo^  probably  ex- 
ceeded in  thickness  any  of  the  superior  groups' — Proc.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  i.  p.  476.  1833. 

B  4 


8  SILURIA.  [Chap.  I. 

differing  as  a  whole  from  those  of  my  classified  and  published 
Silurian  system.  With  other  geologists,  therefore,  I  waited  for 
the  production  of  the  fossils  which  might  typify  such  supposed 
older  sediments;  for  in  obtaining  all  the  knowledge  I  had  then 
acquired,  by  receding  from  upper  strata  whose  contents  were  known, 
to  lower  and  previously  unknown  rocks,  I  had  invariably  found  that 
the  latter  were  characterized  by  many  distinct  and  new  organisms. 
This  fact,  which  had  been  first  established  in  the  tertiary  and 
secondary  deposits,  was  thus  proved  to  be  universally  applicable  by 
the  occurrence  of  similar  distinctions  in  the  Carboniferous,  Old  E-ed, 
and  Silurian  rocks. 

It  was,  however,  in  vain  that  we  looked  to  the  production  of  a 
peculiar  type  of  life  from  the  '  Cambrian '  rocks.  Silurian  fossils 
were  alone  found  in  them ;  and  the  reason  has  since  become  mani- 
fest. The  labours  of  many  competent  observers  In  the  last  fifteen 
years  have  proved  that  these  rocks  are  not  inferior  in  position, 
as  they  were  supposed  to  be,  to  the  lowest  stratified  rocks  of  my 
Silurian  region  of  Shropshire  and  the  adjacent  parts  of  Montgo- 
meryshire, but  are  merely  extensions  of  the  same  strata  ;  and  hence 
the  looked-for  geological  and  zoological  distinctions  could  never 
have  been  realized.  In  the  following  chapters  it  will  be  shown 
how  Sir  H.  De  la  Beche,  Professors  Ramsay  and  E.  Forbes,  with 
Mr.  Salter,  and  other  geologists  and  palceontologists,  have  demon- 
strated, that  the  fossil-bearing  rocks  of  North  Wales  are  both  in 
their  order  and  contents  the  absolute  equivalents  of  the  chief 
mass  of  the  strata  which  had  been  described  and  named  by  me 
^  Lower  Silurian '  in  Shropshire  and  Montgomeryshire.  These 
Government  geologists  have  used  my  nomenclature  in  all  their 
works  relating  to  North  Wales,  and  have,  in  short,  determined  the 
question  physically  as  well  as  zoologically.* 

But  although  in  1839,  when  my  first  work  was  completed,  I  held, 

*  See  also  Phillips,  on  the  Malvern  and  Abberley  Hills. — Memoirs,  Geol.  Surv. 
Vol.  ii.  Pt.  1.  1848. 


Chap.  I.]  DESIGN  OF  THE  WOKK.  9 

in  common  with  Professor  Sedgwick,  the  erroneous  idea  of  the 
infra- Silurian  position  of  the  rocks  of  North  Wales,  I  soon  saw 
reason  to  abandon  that  view,  and  to  adopt  (in  the  year  1841) 
the  opinion  which  I  have  subsequently  maintained.  Thirteen  years 
have  elapsed  since  I  was  persuaded  that  the  view  I  then  took 
must  be  adhered  to ;  first,  because  it  had  been  ascertained,  that  in 
Scandinavia,  Russia,  Bohemia,  and  other  countries,  the  oldest  traces 
of  former  life  were  the  same  as  the  lower  Silurian  types  of  the 
British  Isles ;  —  and  next,  because  many  of  the  fossils  figured  in 
my  work  as  Lower  Silurian  had  been  detected  in  the  slates  of 
Snowdon,  which  were  then  considered  to  lie  near  the  bottom  of 
the  so-called  '  Cambrian  rocks.' 

The  leading  object,  therefore,  of  the  present  work  is,  I  repeat, 
to  bring  out  the  '  Silurian  System,'  not  as  a  mere  abridgment  of  its 
original  form  ;  but  such  as  it  finally  became  in  the  year  1849,  when 
it  was  honoured  with  the  highest  distinction  which  the  Koyal  Society 
bestows*,  and  what  it  has  proved  to  be,  with  the  geographical  and 
other  additions  made  to  it  by  the  government  surveyors  at  home, 
and  by  numerous  geologists  in  other  countries. 

In  extending  my  own  researches  to  various  distant  lands,  I  found 
that  as  the  true  base  of  all  rocks  containing  fossil  remains  was  clear 
in  Scandinavia,  Russia,  and  Bohemia,  and  as  the  same  fact  was 
announced  from  North  America,  it  was  no  longer  difficult  to  describe 
the  whole  organic  series  from  a  beginning,  and  thus  to  record  the 
succession  of  animals  from  their  earliest  known  developments. 
In  a  word,  as  chroniclers  of  lost  races,  my  associates  and  myself 
were  enabled  to  register  in  our  '  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,"' 
the  types  of  former  creatures  from  their  apparent  dawn.  To  the 
first  chapters  of  that  work,  the  reader  is  referred  as  fully  ex- 
planatory of  views  which   are  here  reiterated,  f     Then  it  was, 

*  The  Copley  Medal. 

t  The  reader  who  desires  to  consult  the  documents  which  explain  how  my 
induction  was  arrived  at,  is  referred  to  a  memoir  entitled,  "  On  the  meaning  at- 


10 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  I. 


that  positive  proofs,  derived  from  a  wide  field  of  observation, 
enabled  us  to  commence  geological  history,  with  an  account  of 
the  entombment  of  the  earliest  animals  recognizable  in  the  crust 
of  the  globe ;  and  also  to  indicate  the  successive  conditions  which 
prevailed  upon  the  surface,  in  a  long  series  of  ages,  and  during  the 
many  changes  of  outline  which  preceded  the  present  state  of  the 
planet.  Then  it  was,  that  looking  to  the  whole  history  of  former 
life,  as  exhibited  in  the  strata,  it  was  demonstrated  from  pheno- 
mena in  one  great  empire  alone  (as  had  to  a  great  extent  been 
shown  in  Britain),  that  during  the  formation  of  the  sediments 
which  compose  the  crust  of  the  earth,  the  animal  kingdom  had 
been  at  least  three  times  entirely  renovated;  the  secondary  and 
tertiary  periods  having  each  been  as  clearly  characterized  by  a 
distinct  fauna  as  the  primeval  series.  In  the  work  on  Russia  the 
sequence  was  thus  followed  out  truly,  from  the  most  ancient  fossil- 
bearing  strata  to  the  most  recent  stages  in  the  geological  series. 

tached  to  the  term  Silurian  during  the  last  ten  years,"  which  will  indicate  to  him 
all  my  successive  publications  on  this  subject,  including  a  geological  map  of 
England  and  Wales,  published  by  the  Society  for  the  Diffusion  of  Useful  Know- 
ledge, in  1843.  (Journal  of  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  viii.  p.  173.  See  also  the 
memoir  entitled,  "  On  the  meaning  attached  to  the  term  'Cambrian  System,'  and 
on  the  evidence  since  obtained  of  its  being  geologically  synonymous  with  the  pre- 
viously established  term  '  Lower  Silurian.'  "  —  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  iii. 
p.  165.)  At  the  same  time  that  I  must  protest  against  the  recent  proposal  to  absorb 
my  Lower  Silurian  into  his  Cambrian  Rocks,  let  me  record  my  high  estima- 
tion of  the  original  memoirs  of  Professor  Sedgwick,  especially  those  on  J^orth 
Wales,  Cumberland,  and  the  adjacent  counties,  which  stand  upon  their  own  in- 
trinsic merits.  The  publication  on  the  palteozoic  fossils  of  the  Cambridge 
Museum,  which  he  is  bringing  out  in  conjunction  with  Professor  M'Coy,  will  be, 
I  doubt  not,  a  lasting  monument  in  the  history  of  geological  science.  If  that 
work  had  been  published  eighteen  years  ago,  or  in  1836,  my  friend,  seeing  that 
his  Bala  and  my  Llandeilo  rocks  were  identical,  might  have  proposed  (although  my 
fossils  were  first  named  and  classified)  that  the  Lower  Silurian  should  be  merged 
in  the  Cambrian.  But,  now  that  the  terms  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  have  been 
adopted  in  every  country,  the  question  is  settled.  My  deep  regret  on  the  oc- 
casion of  this  difference  of  opinion  has  been  expressed  in  the  Preface ;  for  in  general 
views,  as  in  private  friendship,  we  are  cordially  united. 


Chap.  I.]  DESIGN  OF  THE  WORK.  11 

In  this  volume  attention  is  chiefly  restricted  to  what  has  proved 
to  be  the  protozoic,  or  first  era  of  life.  The  plan,  therefore,  pur- 
sued will  be,  so  far,  similar  to  that  which  was  adopted  in  the  earlier 
chapters  of  the  work  on  Russia  ;  and  these  first  leaves  of  geological 
history  will  be  written  from  the  clear  traces  of  a  beginning, —  a 
plan  which,  for  want  of  knowledge,  was  impracticable  in  Britain 
when  the  '  Silurian  System  '  was  published. 

After  a  short  sketch  of  the  earliest  and  unfossiliferous  sedi- 
ments, full  descriptions  will  be  given  of  the  Silurian  rocks 
(Lower  and  Upper),  followed  by  very  brief  accounts  of  the  three 
overlying  groups  of  palseozoic  life,  the  Devonian,  Carboniferous, 
and  Permian. 

The  Devonian  rocks  were  in  previous  years  known  only  as  the  Old 
Bed  Sandstone,  a  name  which  has,  indeed,  become  classical  through 
the  writings  of  Hugh  Miller.  These  were  termed  Devonian,  because 
the  strata  of  that  age  in  Devonshire,  though  very  unlike  the  Old 
Red  Sandstone  of  Scotland,  Hereford,  and  the  South  Welsh  counties, 
contain  a  much  more  copious  and  rich  fossil  fauna,  and  were  de- 
monstrated to  occupy  the  same  intermediate  position  between  the 
previously  described  Silurian  and  Carboniferous  rocks.  At  that 
time,  however,  none  of  the  fossil  fishes  of  the  Scottish  or  English 
Old  Red  had  been  found  in  the  sandstones,  slates,  schists,  or  lime- 
stones of  Devonshire,  or  the  Rhine,  and  objections  might  have  been 
raised  to  the  opinion  formed  of  the  age  of  the  deposits.  But  the 
discovery  made  in  Russia*,  and  afterwards  extended  to  Belgium  and 
the  Rhenish  provinces,  of  Scottish  ichthyolites  being  associated  with 
numerous  mollusca  of  the  Devonshire  rocks,  firmly  established  the 
truth  of  the  comparison. 

The  Carboniferous  rocks,  so  elaborately  and  usefully  developed 
in  the  British  Isles,  have  been  already  well  investigated  by 
many  writers,  particularly  by  Professor  Phillips,  and  have  been  found 

*  See  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  64. 


12  SILURIA.  [Chap.  I. 

to  extend,  like  the  Silurian  and  Devonian,  over  immense  regions 
in  all  quarters  of  the  globe. 

The  great  primeval  or  palceozoic  series  is  now  known  to  ter- 
minate upwards,  in  Europe,  with  certain  deposits,  for  which,  in  the 
year  1841,  I  suggested  the  name  of  Peruiian.  In  the  early  days  of 
geological  science  in  England,  this  group  was  classed  with  the  New 
Red  Sandstone,  of  which  it  was  supposed  to  form  the  base.  But  ex- 
tended researches  have  shown  from  the  character  of  its  imbedded 
remains,  that  it  is  linked  to  the  carboniferous  deposit  on  which 
it  rests,  and  is  entirely  distinct  from  the  Trias,  or  Xew  E,ed  Sand- 
stone, which,  overlying  it,  forms  the  base  of  all  the  secondary  rocks. 
The  chief  calcareous  member  of  this  Permian  group  was  termed  in 
England  the  Magnesian  Limestone,  in  Germany  the  'Zechstein;' 
but  as  magnesian  limestones  are  of  all  ages,  and  as  the  German 
^  Zechstein'  is  but  a  part  of  a  group,  the  other  members  of  which  are 
known  as  *Kupfer  Scliiefer '  (copper  slate),  'Rothe  todte  liegende' 
(the  Lower  New  Red  of  English  geologists),  &c.,  it  was  manifest 
that  a  single  name  for  the  whole  was  much  needed.  After 
showing  how  these  variously  named  strata  constituted  one  natural 
group,  I  therefore  proposed  to  my  fellow-labourers,  de  Yerneuil  and 
A.  de  Keyserling,  that  the  vast  Russian  territory  of  Perm  should 
furnish  the  required  name.  The  term  Permian*  has,  indeed,  been 
adopted  by  several  German  authorities,  and  also  by  the  Govern- 
ment Geological  Surveyors  of  Britain. 

In  the  opening  chapter  on  the  geology  of  Russia,  we  gave  a  gene- 
ral view  of  this  palaeozoic  classification,  as  applied  to  Germany, 
France,  Belgium,  and  North  America;  in  all  of  which  coun- 
tries, as  well  as  in  Russia,  it  was  shown,  that  a  similar  ascending 
order  prevailed,  from  a  base  line  of  recognizable  Silurian  life,  up 
through  Devonian  and  Carboniferous  deposits.  In  the  nine  years 
which  have  elapsed  since  the  issue  of  that  work,  considerable  addi- 
*  '  Pencen'  of  D'Omalius  d'Halloy.    (See  Chap.  12.) 


Chap.  I.]  DESIGN  OF    THE  WOKK.  13 

tions  have  been  made  to  our  knowledge,  and  all  of  them  sustain 
the  truth  of  our  generalization.  We  then  scarcely  knew  of  the 
existence  of  true  Silurian  deposits  in  Germany ;  nearly  all  the  grey- 
wacke  of  the  Rhenish  provinces  and  the  Hartz  having  been  assigned 
to  the  Devonian  series.  But  since  the  opening  out  of  the  rich 
Silurian  basin  of  Bohemia,  which,  in  the  hands  of  M.  Barrande, 
has  become  the  palseozoic  centre  of  the  continent,  Thuringia  and 
Saxony  have  been  also  found  to  contain  Silurian  rocks. 

In  Spain,  several  mountain  chains  have  been  shown  by  M.  de 
Vemeuil  to  consist  of  Silurian,  followed  by  Devonian  and  Car- 
boniferous rocks  ;  whilst,  in  Portugal,  Mr.  Sharpe  has  described  the 
first  and  last  of  these  groups.  Even  Sardinia  has  exhibited,  under 
the  scrutiny  of  General  A.  della  Marmora,  her  Silurian  and  super- 
jacent coal  deposits.  Again,  as  Devonian  and  Carboniferous  strata 
overlie  older  rocks  in  North  Africa,  and  Devonian  fossils  occur  to- 
wards Central  Africa*  and  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  there  are 
already  fair  grounds  for  believing,  that  a  similar  order  pervades  the 
axial  lines  or  ancient  mountains  of  that  vast  continent. 

In  north-western  Asia,  the  chief  features  of  which  are  described 
by  Humboldt  and  Rose,  my  colleagues  and  myself  have  explained, 
how  the  Silurian  rocks  of  the  Ural  chain  are  succeeded  by  younger 
palaeozoic  deposits,  and  Pierre  de  Tchihatcheff  has  indicated  a  great 
extension  of  similar  formations  over  large  tracts  of  Southern  Siberia 
and  the  Altai  mountains;  whilst  in  north-eastern  Siberia,  Adolf 
Erman  has  traced  such  rocks  even  to  the  Sea  of  Ochotsk. 

In  the  giant  Himalaya  mountains,  and  in  HIndostan,  where  till 
recently  no  systematic  labours  had  been  devoted  to  the  older 
strata,  we  now  know,  that  Silurian  rocks,  covered  by  secondary  or 
mezozoic  deposits,  exist  in  those  the  highest  mountains  of  the  world ; 

*  For  North  Africa,  see  Coquand,  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  Geol.  de  France,  2nde  Serie, 
vol.  iv.  p.  1188.  Some  of  the  fossils  collected  by  the  enterprisino-  traveller 
Overweg  are  also  Devonian.  For  South  Africa,  the  reader  must  consult  a 
Memoir  by  Mr.  Bain,  not  yet  published  in  the  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond. 


14 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  I. 


and  that  the  Upper  Punjaub  contains  a  limestone  charged  with  well- 
known  carboniferous  fossils,  reposing,  as  in  England,,  upon  a  red  sand- 
stone.* There  is,  indeed,  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  mountain 
chains  of  Tartary  and  China  are  composed,  to  a  great  extent,  of 
these  older  rocks  ;  for  whilst  extensive  coal-fields  have  been  long 
worked  in  the  environs  of  the  capital,  Pekin,  Devonian  fossils  of  the 
very  same  species  as  those  of  England  and  the  continent  have 
recently  been  sent  from  Kwangsi,  far  to  the  south  of  Shangai. 
Other  fossils,  identified  by  de  Koninck  as  Devonian  forms,  were 
brought  by  M.  Itier,  from  the  Yuennan  province,  one  hundred  leagues 
north  of  Canton.t 

In  Australia,  where  a  very  short  time  since  reference  could  be 
made  only  to  rocks  of  the  Carboniferous  and  Devonian  age  J,  we  hear 
of  true  Silurian  strata  containing  fossils  like  those  of  the  British 
Isles.    Some  species  seem  undistinguishable.  § 

In  South  America,  the  lofty  Cordilleras  and  plateaux,  whose 
mineral  characters  had  been  so  admirably  described  by  Humboldt, 
are  shown  by  Alcide  d'Orbigny  to  consist  in  great  part  of  such 
ancient  sediments.  StiU  more  clearly  has  North  America  been  found 
to  contain  a  vast  succession  of  these  palaeozoic  rocks,  and  especially 
of  their  lower  members.  Numerous  geologists  of  the  United  States 
have  demonstrated,  that  their  ancient  strata  followed  the  same  order 
on  a  very  grand  and  usually  unbroken  scale  (particularly  in  the 

*  The  Himalayan  data  are  described,  by  Capt.  R.  Stracbey ;  those  of  the  Upper 
Punjaub,  by  Dr.  A.  Fleming.  (Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.,  vol.  vii.  p.  292.,  and 
vol.  ix.  p.  189.) 

f  See  a  description  of  the  Chinese  coal-field  near  Pekin,  by  Kovanko,  Ann.  des 
Mines  de  Russie,  An.  1838,  p.  191.  No  geologist  can  peruse  Mr.  Fortune's 
lively  description  of  the  Bohea  mountains  without  suspecting,  that  a  fine  primeval 
succession  may  there  be  found.  For  the  Chinese  fossils,  see  Davidson,  Q.  Journ. 
Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  ix.  p.  353.;  and  de  Koninck,  Bull.  Acad.  Roy.  Sc.  Belg. 
vol.  xiii.  pt.  2.  p.  415. 

I  See  Strzelecki's  Australia,  Foss.  Fauna,  Morris;  M'Coy,  Ann.  Xat.  Hist.  1847. 

§  Memoir  by  the  Rev.  W.  B.  Clarke,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  viii. ; 
see  also  his  collections,  and  those  at  the  Government  Museum. 


Chap.  I.]  DESIGN  OF  THE  WOKK.  15 

western  region);  doubtless  due  to  their  having  been  exempted  in 
such  tracts  from  the  intrusion  of  igneous  rocks.  Spread  out  in 
enormous  sheets  over  the  southern  districts  of  Upper  Canada,  the 
Lower  Silurian  strata,  invariably  so  called  by  every  American  geo- 
logist %  are  there  based  on  unfossiliferous  slates,  limestones  and  sand- 
stones reposing  on  crystalline  rocks,  which,  extending  far  northwards, 
are  surmounted  by  other  sedimentary  masses  similar  to  strata  of  the 
United  States,  and  where  Silurian  fossils  have  been  detected  in 
limestones  amid  the  polar  ices.  Adjacent  to  the  southern  end  of  this 
continent,  similar  remains  have  been  collected  bv  Darwin  in  the 
Falkland  Islands. 

In  few  of  those  regions,  however,  with  the  exception  of  North 
America  (certainly  not  in  the  British  Isles,  where  the  strata  are  in 
many  parts  much  obscured  by  igneous  outbursts),  is  the  sequence  so 
undisturbed  as  in  Scandinavia  and  European  Russia.  There,  the 
successive  primeval  deposits  extend  over  a  large  portion  of  the  earth 
in  regular  sequence  and  in  an  unaltered  state.  Hence,  though 
to  the  unskilled  eye,  Russia  presents  only  a  monotonous  and  un- 
dulating surface,  chiefly  occupied  by  accumulations  of  mud,  sand, 
and  erratic  blocks,  its  framework,  wherever  it  can  be  detected, 
exhibits  a  clear  ascending  series.  The  older  sedimentary  strata, 
deviating  only  slightly  from  horlzontallty,  are  there  overlaid  by 
widely- diffused  masses  of  those  Permian  rocks  which  constitute  the 
true  termination  of  the  long  palaeozoic  period. 

The  following  pages,  as  before  said,  will  be  chiefly  devoted  to 
the  Silurian  or  first  stages  of  this  primeval  series.  They  will  be 
illustrated  by  woodcuts  representing  the  most  important  organic  re- 
mains, and  certain  typical,  pictorial  scenes,  as  well  as  vertical  sec- 
tions, chiefly  taken  from  my  original  work.  Faithful  transfers  from 
the  original  plates  of  the  'Silurian  System'  will  also  be  given, 

*  See  particularly  the  works  of  James  Hall  and  Dale  Owen,  the  Reports  of 
Logan — the  chief  geologist  of  Canada  —  and  the  new  general  map  of  Marcou. 


16  SILURIA.  [Chap.  I. 

in  a  rearranged  fornix  and  with  the  modern  nomenclature  of  the 
fossils. 

If  all  the  succeeding  primeval  rocks  were  to  obtain  the  same  amount 
of  illustration  as  the  Silurian,  this  work  would  be  expanded  far  beyond 
the  limits  to  which  I  must  restrict  it.  The  younger  palaeozoic,  or 
the  Devonian,  Carboniferous,  and  Permian  deposits,  will  therefore 
receive  only  such  a  description  as  may  be  sufficient  to  give  the  student 
a  general  view,  and  stimulate  him  to  acquire  a  fuller  acquaintance 
with  them  by  consulting  the  various  works  wherein  they  are  circum- 
stantially described.  But  even  the  sketch  of  them  in  this  volume 
will,  it  is  hoped,  suffice  to  show,  that  while  the  contiguous  strata  of 
two  natural  groups  are  intimately  linked  together  by  containing 
some  species  which  are  common  to  both,  the  principal  fossils  of  each 
are  certainly  peculiar. 

Although  few  mineral  changes  of  the  strata  can  be  alluded  to,  an 
endeavour  will  be  made  to  show,  that  gold,  however  it  may  now  be 
spread  over  the  surface,  w^as  originally  accumulated  in  abundance  in 
the  older  rocks  only  (especially  in  those  which  have  been  much 
altered),  and  in  the  associated  eruptive  masses. 

Lastly,  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  as  the  true  sequence  of  the  oldest 
fossiliferous  strata  was  first  detected  in  the  British  Isles,  so  the  geo- 
logical descriptions  in  this  volume  Avill  be  principally  derived  from 
our  insular  examples.  At  the  same  time,  a  general  comparison 
will  be  instituted  with  the  contemporaneous  rocks  of  different 
quarters  of  the  globe. 

The  importance  of  having,  through  patient  surveys,  mastered  the 
obscurities  which  clouded  the  history  of  the  earlier  periods  of  animal 
life  will  thus,  it  is  hoped,  be  rendered  obvious,  in  showing  that  we 
have  now  obtained  as  correct  an  insight  into  the  first  fossil- 
bearing  formations  as  we  had  previously  acquired  of  the  younger 
deposits. 


17 


CHAPTEE  11. 

BASE  OF  THE  SILURIAN  ROCKS,  AND  EARLIEST  ZONE  OF  FORMER 

LIFE. 

OUTLINES,  STRUCTURE,  AND  ORDER  OF  THE  OLDER  ROCKS. — EARLIEST  CRYSTALLINE 
ROCKS.  —  THE  LOWEST  DEPOSITS  IN  WHICH  A  TRUE  SEDIMENTARY  ORIGIN  IS  SEEN 
ARE  USUALLY  VOID  OF  SIGNS  OF  FORMER  LIFE. 

ORDER  OF  SUCCESSION  FROM  SUCH  UNFOSSILIFEROUS  STRATA  UPWARDS  TO  THE 
LOWEST  ZONE  IN  WHICH  FOSSIL  REMAINS  HAVE  BEEN  DETECTED  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

The  most  ancient  rocks  in  which  traces  of  fossil  animals  have  been 
detected  vary  much  in  structure  and  outline  in  the  different  coun- 
tries where  they  have  been  recognized.  Wherever  such  masses  have 
remained  in  a  state  of  comparative  quiescence,  from  the  period  when 
they  were  raised  up  from  beneath  a  primeval  ocean  and  have  since 
been  only  slightly  modified  by  physical  causes,  they  are  necessarily 
unlike  those  rocks  which,  though  formed  at  the  same  period  and  even 
composed  of  the  same  materials,  have  been  penetrated  by  igneous 
matter,  or  subjected  to  alteration  and  dislocation  through  the  action 
of  heat,  pressure,  and  other  agencies. 

In  Russia,  for  example*,  where  some  of  the  oldest  deposits  have 
been  only  partially  hardened  since  they  were  accumulated  at  the 
bottom  of  the  sea,  and  have  been  merely  elevated  into  low  plateaus 
that  have  undergone  no  great  change  or  disruption,  they  have 
scarcely  any  resemblance  to  rocks  of  the  same  age  in  the  British 
Isles.   When,  however,  we  follow  these  soft  primeval  strata  of  Russia 

*  Kussia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  by  Murchison,  De  Verneuil,  and  Von  Key- 
serling,  vol.  i.  p.  26  *. 


18 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  II. 


to  the  Ural  Chain,  in  which  there  are  numerous  rocks  of  eruptive 
character,  we  find  that  the  beds,  which  on  the  west  consist  of  mud 
and  sand,  have  there  been  converted  into  crystalline  schists,  lime- 
stones, and  quartz  rocks.  Startling,  therefore,  as  it  may  seem  to 
young  geologists,  the  hillocks  of  slightly  coherent  mud,  marl,  and 
sand  near  St.  Petersburg  are  truly  of  the  same  age  as  some  of  the  hard 
slaty  mountains  of  North  Wales  ;  a  fact  which  geological  researches 
have  established  by  proving,  that  the  deposits  of  the  two  countries 
contain  a  similar  group  of  organic  remains,  and  occupy  the  same 
relative  place  in  the  series  of  formations  which  compose  the  crust 
of  the  globe.  So  also  in  North  America,  where  strata  of  the  same 
period,  as  seen  in  the  United  States  and  the  British  provinces,  are 
usually  in  the  state  of  ordinary  sandstone,  shale,  and  limestone,  when 
traced  westwards  over  vast  prairies  to  the  sources  of  the  Missouri, 
are  seen  to  have  been  also  converted  into  crystalline  rocks.  This 
phenomenon  occurs  along  those  numerous  ancient  cracks  in  the 
crust  of  the  earth  through  which  the  igneous  materials  were  evolved 
which  specially  mark  the  range  of  the  Kocky  Mountains  and  other 
prolongations  of  the  Andes.* 

This  is  the  change  which  geologists  call  metamorphlsm.  For,  as 
the  strata  have  been  penetrated  in  many  places  by  granites,  por- 
phyries, and  other  rocks  which  were  once  in  a  state  of  fusion,  so 
it  is  inferred  that  their  transmutation  has  resulted  from  the  action  of 
heat,  and  usually  under  the  pressure  of  a  former  ocean.  In  such 
examples  the  age  of  the  original  sediment  is  the  same,  though  the 
mineral  aspect  of  the  rocks  in  tracts  distant  from  each  other  is  so 
very  different. 

*  See  Stansbury's  Exploration  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake  of  Utah.  Philadelphia, 
1852.  The  fossils  collected  by  this  enterprising  engineer  and  geographer  are 
described  by  Professor  James  Hall,  and  prove  the  existence,  if  not  of  Silurian,  at 
all  events  of  Devonian  and  carboniferous  deposits,  extending  to  the  Mormon  ter- 
ritory, where  some  of  the  lower  strata,  probably  Silurian,  are  much  metamorphosed 
and  mineralized. 


Chap.  II.]  OUTLINES  OF  SILURIAN  ROCKS.  19 

In  like  manner  it  will  presently  be  shown,  that  the  comparatively 
low  hills  of  western  Shropshire,  and  the  contiguous  districts  of 
Montgomery,  parts  of  Herefordshire,  and  the  adjacent  tracts  of 
South  Wales,  where  the  Silurian  system  was  originally  established, 
present  to  the  student,  in  an  intelligible  manner,  an  arrangement 
and  succession  of  strata  little  altered,  which  he  will  have  much 
more  trouble  in  deciphering  amidst  the  hard,  rugged,  metamorphic, 
and  crystalline  formations  of  the  same  age  in  North  Wales ;  even  now 
that  obscurities  have  been  removed  by  the  labours  of  the  eminent 
persons  who  have  laboured  in  the  arduous  task  of  bringing  that 
region  into  order.*  He  will  also  see  in  it  the  very  same  phenomenon 
as  in  the  Ural  and  Rocky  mountains,  —  the  conversion  of  the  oldest 
of  such  strata  into  crystalline  schists  (Anglesea). 

In  Russia  the  Silurian  rocks  form  either  wide  level  plains,  or 
low  plateaus,  whilst  in  other  countries  where  they  have  been 
heaved  up  into  mountains,  they  have  a  rounded  outline,  particularly 

*  See  particularly  the  Memoirs  of  Professor  Sedgwick,  descriptive  of  the  North 
Welsh  mountains,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Geol.  Soc.  of  Lond.,  vol.  ii.  p.  679. ; 
vol.  iii.  p.  548. ;  Quarterly  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  i.  p.  5.;  ib.  p.  542. ;  vol.  iii. 
p.  133.;  also  the  Memoirs  of  Mr.  Bowman,  Reports  of  Brit.  Association,  1841  ; 
Trans.  Phil.  Soc.  Manch.,  vol.  i.  p.  194. ;  of  Mr.  Sharpe,  Proceedings,  vol.  iii. 
p.  74. ;  ib.  vol.  iv.  p.  10. ;  Quarterly  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  ii.  p.  283. ; 
Davis  on  Tremadoc,  ib.  vol.  ii.  p.  70.  See  Ramsay  and  Aveline,  Quarterly 
Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  iv.  p.  294.  Independently  of  his  works  on  the  Silurian 
System,  and  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  the  author  of  this  volume  refers 
to  his  memoirs.  Lond.  and  Edin.  Phil.  Mag.  1835,  p.  46. ;  Proceedings  of  the 
Geol.  Soc,  vol.  i.  p.  471.;  ib.  vol.  ii.  pp.  11.  and  119.;  ib.  vol.  iii.  p.  640. ;  ib. 
vol.  iv.  p.  70.;  Quarterly  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  i.  p.  467. ;  ib.  vol.  iii. 
pp.  1.  and  165.  But,  above  all,  the  geologist  must  consult  the  recently  published 
maps  and  sections  of  the  government  surveyors,  which  have  finally  determined 
all  questions  at  issue.  Of  these,  and  particularly  in  reference  to  the  complicated 
tracts  of  Wales,  which  he  has  so  skilfully  worked  out  with  his  associates.  Pro- 
fessor Ramsay  will  soon  publish  a  descriptive  work  in  the  volumes  of  the  Go- 
vernment Survey,  similar  to  that  which  has  been  done  for  the  Malvern  Hills  and 
adjacent  tracts  by  Professor  Phillips. 

c  2 


20 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  II. 


where  they  consist  of  schists,  originally  composed  of  mud,  the  fine 
grains  of  which  have  given  rise  to  equable  atmospheric  attrition. 
When,  on  the  contrary,  the  shale  and  schist  having  been  changed 
into  hard  slates,  the  sandstone  into  quartz  rock,  or  the  earthy 
limestone  into  crystalline  marble,  and  particularly  if  the  beds  are 
highly  inclined,  and  penetrated  by  igneous  rocks,  then  striking  peaks 
or  abrupt  cliffs  and  gorges  are  dominant. 

Thus  it  is,  that  the  Silurian  rocks  of  different  regions  put  on 
many  external  forms.  In  South  Britain  they  are,  necessarily,  most 
varied  in  districts  like  western  Shropshire,  North  Wales,  and  Cum- 
berland, where  igneous  and  intrusive  rocks  have  diversified  the 
outline  by  expanding,  breaking  through,  and  altering  these  sediments. 

Observation  has  now  taught  us  of  what  materials  the  fundamental 
rocks  consist  in  the  different  countries  where  they  occur.  In  Scan- 
dinavia, for  example,  as  in  parts  of  North  America,  the  masses 
beneath  all  those  formations  in  which  there  are  the  slightest  vestiges 
of  Silurian  life,  are  primary  rocks,  including  granitic  gneiss,  mica- 
schist,  as  well  as  metalliferous  schists  and  quartzose  crystalline 
masses.  In  Bohemia,  however,  as  in  Great  Britain,  and  other 
portions  of  North  America  *,  the  lowest  zone  containing  fossil  re- 
mains is  underlaid  by  very  thick  buttresses  of  earlier  sedimentary 
accumulations,  whether  sandstone,  schist,  or  slate,  which,  though 

*  In  North  America  this  formation  may  also  be  termed  azoic;  for  along 
the  western  portion  of  Lake  Superior,  and  in  the  country  extending  southwards 
into  the  State  of  Michigan,  rocks  of  this  class  rise  from  beneath  the  Potsdam 
sandstone,  or  lowest  formation  in  which  Silurian  fossils  are  known.  Citing  the 
American  authors,  Foster  and  Whitney  on  the  azoic  rocks  of  Lake  Superior,  of 
King  on  those  of  the  State  of  Missouri,  of  Logan  on  those  of  the  British  frontier, 
and  of  Engelmann  on  Texas,  and  placing  them  iii  relation  to  the  excellent  works 
of  James  Hall  and  Dale  Owen,  M.  Desor  has  announced  to  the  Geological  So- 
ciety of  France,  that  in  those  regions  there  exists  a  vast  formation  of  strata, 
in  parts  metaraorphic,  of  silicious  sandstones,  chloritic  and  quartzose  schists,  cha- 
racterized by  the  absence  of  organic  remains,  and  a  great  abundance  of  iron  ore. 
Bulletin  de  la  Soc.  Geol.  de  France,  2  Ser.,  tom.  ix.  p.  342. 


CiiAP.  II.]  BOTTOM  ROCKS  UNFOSSILIFEROUS.  21 

often  occasionally  not  more  crystalline  than  the  fossiliferous  beds 
above  them,  have  yet  afforded  no  sign  of  former  beings. 

This  is  the  important  fact  to  which  attention  is  first  directed; 
for  in  such  instances  the  geologist  appeals  to  the  book  of  nature 
where  its  leaves  have  undergone  no  great  alteration.  He  sees  before 
him  an  enormous  pile  or  series  of  early  subaqueous  sediment, 
originally  composed  of  mud,  sand,  or  pebbles,  the  successive  bottoms 
of  a  former  sea,  all  of  which  have  been  derived  from  pre-existing 
rocks ;  and  in  these  lower  beds,  even  where  they  are  little  altered, 
he  can  detect  no  remains  of  former  creatures.  But  lying  upon  them, 
and  therefore  evolved  after  them,  other  strata  succeed,  in  which  some 
few  relics  of  a  primeval  ocean  are  discernible,  and  these  again  are 
every  where  succeeded  by  newer  deposits  in  which  many  fossils  occur. 
In  this  way,  evidences  have  been  fairly  obtained  to  show,  that  the 
sediments  which  underlie  the  strata  containing  the  lowest  fossil  re- 
mains constitute,  in  all  countries  which  have  been  examined,  the 
natural  base  or  bottom  rocks  of  the  deposits  termed  Silurian. 

The  hypothesis  that  all  the  earliest  sediments  have  been  so  altered 
as  to  have  obliterated  the  traces  of  any  relics  of  former  life  which 
may  have  been  entombed  in  them,  is  therefore  opposed  by  examples 
of  enormously  thick  and  varied  deposits  beneath  the  lowest  fossili- 
ferous rocks,  and  in  which,  if  animal  remains  had  ever  existed,  some 
traces  of  them  would  certainly  be  detected. 

A  very  few  words  need  here  be  said  of  those  crystalline  rocks 
which  in  numerous  regions  have  been  the  nuclei  out  of  whose 
materials  the  very  oldest  recognizable  sediments  have  been  composed. 
Passing  over  the  consideration  of  the  most  ancient  granites,  por- 
phyries, and  other  igneous  rocks,  there  are  doubtless  also  stratified 
crystalline  rocks,  which  either  lie  under  or  have  been  raised  from 
beneath  all  those  deposits  in  which  we  can  trace  the  signs  of  me- 
chanical and  subaqueous  action. 

Such  rocks,  formed,  as  I  believe,  at  a  period  when  the  heat  of  the 


22  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IT. 

surface  of  the  earth  was  antagonistic  to  the  existence  of  living  beings, 
unquestionably  often  form  the  axes  or  backbones  of  continents,  upon 
the  sides  of  which  the  oldest  sedimentary  formations  have  been  de- 
posited. But  it  is  unnecessary  here  to  dwell  further  upon  them; 
whilst  in  the  sequel  we  shall  have  to  indicate  the  metamorphism  of 
many  formations  of  younger  date.  For  the  present  work  is,  I  repeat, 
simply  intended  as  a  popular  sketch  of  the  successive  accumulation 
of  those  sedimentary  strata  which  succeeded  to  the  primary  state  of 
the  planet,  and  in  which  the  remains  of  the  earliest  known  animals 
are  entombed ;  the  physical  conditions  which  accompanied  such  de- 
posits being  duly  noted. 

Now,  in  some  regions  where  the  oldest  of  these  deposits  (all  of  them 
once  sea-bottoms)  have  been  exempted  from  such  change  or  meta- 
morphism, or  very  slightly  subjected  to  it,  we  observe  that  the  lowest 
sediments  thus  accumulated  are  void  of  traces  of  life.  Proceeding 
in  our  researches,  we  next  find  that  these,  the  most  ancient  grey- 
wacke  grits  and  schists  of  geologists,  which  have  been  formed  under 
water  at  the  expense  of  previous  rocks,  are  succeeded  regularly,  and 
without  disorder,  by  other  strata  scarcely  at  all  diflPering  from  the 
former  in  composition,  in  which,  at  various  points  of  the  surface  of 
the  globe,  and  at  the  same  level  or  horizon,  we  here  and  there  obtain 
the  first  glimpses  of  the  same  group  of  animal  life.  Once  introduced 
to  these  primordial  creatures,  the  inquirer  into  the  subsequent  opera- 
tions of  nature  meets  thenceforward  with  a  never-failing  storehouse 


General  Order  of  the  Primeval  Rocks. 


y  1  2a  2  3  4  5 

Gneiss,  &c.  y ;  granite  x. 


of  animal  relics  in  all  the  formations  which  afterwards  were  suc- 
cessively accumulated.    The  accompanying  diagram  explains  at  a 


Chap.  II.]  ASCENDING  ORDER  OF  STRATA.  23 

glance  this  generalization,  as  established  by  an  appeal  to  the  struc- 
ture of  several  countries,  the  rocks  of  which  exhibit  the  first  steps  in 
this  long  series. 

In  1,  the  reader  sees  the  older  deposits  formed  out  of  the  pre-exist- 
ing rocks,  consisting  of  gneiss,  &c.  y,  or  granite  x,  whilst  2^  represents 
the  earliest  zone  wherein  any  notable  signs  of  life  occur ;  and  the 
overlying  masses,  2,  3, 4,  5,  stand  for  the  mass  of  the  formations  into 
which  the  earliest  primeval  system  of  fossil  animals  is  divided. 

We  will  presently  consider  this  ascending  order  of  stratum  upon 
stratum,  as  it  is  presented  to  us  in  the  region  where  the  Silurian  clas- 
sification began,  and  in  the  adjacent  country  of  N.  Wales,  to  which 
that  classification  has  since  been  extended  and  applied  by  the 
government  geological  surveyors.  In  the  mean  time,  let  me  repeat, 
that  in  Bohemia,  as  well  as  in  N.  America,  there  are  crystalline 
rocks,  which,  from  their  underlying  position,  are  known  to  be  of 
higher  antiquity  than  the  azoic  greywacke  of  the  previous  section. 
So  also  it  is  believed  that  in  the  north  Highlands  of  the  British 
Isles,  and  many  other  regions,  there  are  equally  ancient  crystalline 
rocks. 

In  no  part  of  Siluria  and  Wales,  however,  are  there  any  rocks  of 
more  remote  age  than  the  oldest  greywacke  in  which  no  fossils  are 
known.  The  pre-existing  masses,  out  of  whose  materials  the  pebble- 
beds,  sandstones,  and  schists  of  the  Longmynd  in  Shropshire,  and  of 
the  Llanberis  and  Harlech  mountains  in  North  Wales  were  formed, 
have  either  subsided  and  disappeared,  or  have  been  covered  over  by  the 
strata  under  consideration.  For,  it  is  now  ascertained  that  the  schists 
of  Anglesea,  which  from  their  crystalline  character  were  once  supposed 
to  be  more  ancient  than  any  other  rocks  of  Wales,  are  simply  an 
altered  part  of  the  same  greywacke  which  constitutes  the  base  of  the 
Silurian  series  of  deposits  in  the  adjacent  counties  of  Carnarvon  and 
Merioneth.  In  other  words,  the  old  slate  and  greywacke  of  An- 
glesea have  been  altered  at  one  spot  into  chlorite  and  mica-schist, 

e  4 


24 


SILUKIA. 


[Chap.  II. 


in  another  into  quartz  rock.  Agreeing  with  Sir  H.  De  la  Beche 
and  the  government  geological  surveyors,  that  this  is  the  best  ex- 
planation of  the  case,  a  small  sketch  is  here  annexed,  to  indicate 
the  amount  of  curvature  which  these  metamorphosed  strata  have 
undergone,  as  seen  at  the  promontory  of  the  South  Stack  Light- 
house, near  Holyhead. 


Contorted  Schists  at  the  South  Stack  Lighthouse,  Anglesea. 

These  contorted,  crystalline  rocks  of  Anglesea,  with  their  intruded 
granites,  are  associated  with  stripes  or  patches,  capriciously  dis- 
tributed as  it  were,  of  different  palafeozoic  rocks,  of  Silurian,  Devo- 
nian, and  Carboniferous  age,  thus  forming  a  sort  of  kaleidoscope, 
which  the  most  experienced  geologist  might  have  difficulty  in  un- 
ravelling; the  outlines  of  which,  formerly  laid  down  in  Green- 
ough's  Map  of  England,  are  now  very  accurately  detailed  in  the 
sheets  of  the  Government  Survey     The  whole  of  the  bands  have  a 


CHA.P.  IL]  LONGMYND  OR  BOTTOM  ROCKS.  25 

direction  or  strike  from  S.  S.  W.  to  N.  N.E.,  as  may  be  seen  in  the 
annexed  map. 

No  sooner,  however,  do  we  pass  the  Menai  Straits,  and  advance 
eastwards  towards  the  west  flank  of  the  mountainous  range  of  Snow- 
don,  than  we  find  huge  buttresses  of  very  ancient  grey  wacke  grit, 
schist,  slate,  and  sandstone,  having  the  same  direction,  from  S.  S.  W.  to 
N.  N.  E.,  in  which,  though  their  sedimentary  character  is  obvious,  and 
that  they  have  not  been  altered  as  in  Anglesea,  no  fossils  have 
been  detected  through  a  thickness  of  many  thousand  feet.  These 
are  the  true  representatives  of  the  Longmynd  or  bottom  rocks  of 
this  work,  and  of  which  the  crystalline  schists  of  Anglesea  are  me- 
tamorphosed members.  In  other  words,  these  unfossiliferous  slaty 
rocks  of  North  Wales,  with  their  sandstones  and  grits,  are  now 
proved  to  be  the  equivalents  of  the  strata  of  the  Longmynd  and 
Haughmond  Hills,  which  were  formerly  described  by  me  as  types 
of  that  greywacke,  which  in  Shropshire  rises  from  beneath  all  the 
formations  containing  fossils  of  the  Silurian  system.  (See  section 
below  the  map.) 

It  is  to  these  lowest  known  sedimentary  rocks,  whether  in  the 
Silurian  region  or  in  North  AVales,  that  the  government  surveyors 
have  restricted  the  term  "  Cambrian ;  "  simply  implying  thereby,  not 
that  fossils  may  not  be  found  in  them,  but  that  hitherto  no  traces  of 
the  Silurian  forms  have  been  detected  in  them.  But  such  an  ap- 
plication of  Cambrian  is  not  used  in  this  work,  because,  when  in- 
troduced by  Professor  Sedgwick,  the  term  was  employed,  both  by 
him  and  myself,  as  applying  to  a  vast  succession  of  fossiliferous  strata, 
containing  undescribed  fossils,  the  whole  of  which  were  supposed  to 
rise  up  from  beneath  the  well-known  Lower  Silurian  rocks.  The 
government  geologists  have  shown  that  this  supposed  order  of  infra- 
position  was  erroneous,  and  that  all  the  fossiliferous  rocks  of  North 
Wales,  which  had  been  called  Cambrian  before  their  included 
fossils  were  described,  are  physically  the  same  strata  as  those  which 


26 


SILURIA. 


[Chap,  II. 


had  been  laid  down  as  Lower  Silurian  on  the  immediate  west  flank 
of  the  fundamental  rocks  of  the  Longmynd.  Naturally,  therefore, 
these  North  Welsh  or  so-called  Cambrian  rocks  have  been  found 
to  be  charged  with  Lower  Silurian  fossils. 

As  the  same  authorities  have  thus  recurred  to  the  original  typical 
tracts  of  Shropshire,  a  few  words  must  here  be  said  to  explain  the 
structure  of  that  northern  portion  of  Siluria,  as  laid  down  in  my  ori- 
ginal map  and  sections,  with  which  the  Cambria  of  Sedgwick  has  been 
so  clearly  placed  in  parallel.  The  reader  who  desires  to  peruse  a  full 
description  of  these  ancient  rocks  of  the  Longmynd,  which  form  the 
mineral  axis  of  Shropshire  and  Montgomeryshire,  and  are  there  seen 
to  rise  out  from  beneath  all  the  fossil-bearing  strata,  may  consult  the 
21st  chapter  of  the  Silurian  System,"  which  is  exclusively  devoted 
to  them  and  their  associated  igneous  (trap)  rocks  as  seen  in  the 
hills  of  Longmynd,  Haughmond,  Ratlinghope,  Linley,  Pontesford, 
Lyth,  &c.  To  that  description  I  have  little  or  nothing  to  add, 
nor  am  I  aware  of  any  correction  required  to  be  made  in  it.  The  rocks 
remain  still  the  unfossiliferous  bottom  beds  they  were  then  described 
to  be.    Though  attaining  only  a  height  of  about  1600  feet  above  the 


The  Longmynd. 


Caer  Caradoc. 


Wenlock  Edge. 


Olee  Hills. 


sea,  they  are  of  mountainous  character,  presenting  a  very  ancient 
aspect,  and  the  woodcut  annexed  gives  some  idea  of  their  forms. 


Chap.  TI.]  LONGMYND  OR  BOTTOM  ROCKS.  27 

In  this  view  the  spectator  is  looking  through  one  of  the  depressions 
of  the  Longmynd,  locally  called  "  gutters,"  to  the  tract  diversified  by 
the  ridge  of  Caer  Caradoc  with  the  Wenlock  Edge  and  Clee  Hills 
in  the  distance. 

In  the  Longmynd,  and  adjacent  hills  between  that  mountain  and 
the  Stiper  Stones,  these  elder  rocks  are  exposed  in  an  enormous 
thickness  of  about  26,000  feet,  of  dark  imperfect  slates  and  grey 
schistose  strata,  with  coarse,  purplish,  ferruginous  grit  or  sandstone, 
and  conglomerate.*  According  to  the  government  surveyors,  who 
have  compared  them,  these  Longmynd  rocks  are  of  much  more  than 
double  the  dimensions  of  strata  of  like  age  and  position  in  North 
"Wales ;  and  hence  they  are  truly  the  bottom  rocks  of  the  whole  region. 

Striking  from  S.S.W.  to  N.N.E.,  these  strata  have  not  afforded 
the  trace  of  a  fossil,  after  long  and  assiduous  researches.  They  are 
vertical  in  the  eastern  or  slaty  portion,  and  in  their  western  parts, 
or  in  the  contiguous  hills  of  Ratlinghope,  &c.,  they  dip  at  a  very 
high  angle  to  the  W.N.W.,  under  the  perfectly  parallel  bands 
of  schist  and  grit  of  the  Stiper  Stones,  which  are  now  classed 
in  the  government  maps  and  sections  as  the  lowest  Silurian  rocks 
of  the  region.  This  succession,  which  is  delineated  on  a  small  scale 
in  the  section  below  the  map,  is  sufficiently  exhibited  in  the  long 

*  The  manner  in  which  certain  cavities  of  these  rocks  are  filled  with  bitumen, 
and  the  veins  of  copper  ores  which  they  contain  near  the  junction  of  the  intrusive 
rocks,  are  facts  worthy  of  attention ;  it  being  remembered,  however,  that  these 
mineral  changes  were  produced  very  long  after  the  consolidation  of  such  ancient 
greywacke  strata.    The  same  copper  veins,  i7,  also  penetrate  the  sandstone  and 


3  V  1 


limestone  with  Pentamerus  oblongus,  3,  which  rest  unconformably  upon  the  older 
slates,  1,  of  the  Longmynd,  as  in  this  diagram,  taken  from  Sil.  Syst.,  pi.  32.  f.  4. 


28  SILURIA.  [Chap.  II. 

diagram  on  the  opposite  page  (1).  Then  follow,  in  parallel  masses, 
about  14,000  feet  thick,  the  schists  of  the  mining  tract  of  Shelve 
and  Corndon,  in  which  Llandeilo  flags,  and  true  Lower  Silurian 
strata,  are  replete  with  characteristic  fossils  (2  of  section). 

In  this  manner,  the  conformable  succession  from  an  unfossiliferous 
base,  high  up  into  the  Llandeilo  flags  inclusive,  is  seen  in  this 
district  of  the  region  originally  illustrated  by  myself.  The  accom- 
panying woodcut  is,  indeed,  merely  a  copy  of  coloured  diagrams 
representing  this  order,  which  were  made  in  the  year  1833,  and 
which,  having  been  exhibited  to  the  Geological  Society  of  London, 
were  afterwards  published,  1839,  in  the  "  Silurian  System."  * 

Now,  the  researches  of  the  last  few  years,  on  the  part  of  the 
government  surveyors,  have  shown  that  the  strata  which  occupy 
the  loftier  mountains  of  North  "Wales,  ranging  from  Snowdon  to 
Bala,  are  of  the  same  age  as  these  under  consideration,  which 
extend  from  the  Shelve  and  Corndon  tract  to  the  Stiper  Stones  and 
there  rest  upon  the  Longmynd.  In  other  words,  the  fossiliferous 
rocks  originally  described  as  Lower  Silurian  types,  whether  in  Shrop- 
shire and  Montgomeryshire,  or  in  South  Wales  near  Llandeilo,  have 
been  so  clearly  unfolded  as  to  prove  that  they  occupy  the  greater 
portion  of  North  Wales. 

The  generalized  coloured  section  at  the  bottom  of  the  geological 
map  annexed,  which  has  been  prepared  for  me  by  Professor  Ramsay, 
who  with  his  associates  Aveline  and  Selwyn  established  this  im- 
portant conclusion,  will  at  once  render  the  subject  intelligible  to 
every  reader ;  and  my  own  original  detailed  section,  as  given  on  the 
next  page,  completes  the  comparison. 

In  the  two  buttresses  of  the  earliest  or  unfossiliferous  greywacke, 
of  the  Longmynd  on  the  east,  and  of  Llanberis  and  Harlech  on  the 
west,  are  represented,  therefore,  the  oldest  sedimentary  rocks  of 
England  and  Wales.  (See  map  and  coloured  section.) 

*  Silurian  System,  pi.  32.  fig.  1.  et  seq. 


Chap.  II.] 


SECTION  FROM  THE  LONGMYNT), 


WESTWARDS. 


30  SILURIA.  [Chap.  II. 

In  fact,  these  masses  constitute,  in  Wales  as  in  Shropshire,  the 
natural  base  of  the  lowest  fossil-bearing  strata,  2%  to  which  in  Britain 
they  are  every  where  conformable,  and  into  which  they  gradually 
pass  upwards. 

These  first  steps  in  the  geological  series,  which  the  reader  is 
about  to  ascend,  may  be  further  illustrated  by  the  accompanying 
pictorial  illustration  from  North  Wales. 


Pass  of  Llanbekis  from  the  Lower  Lake. 

In  this  well  known  scene  the  spectator  is  supposed  to  be  looking  up 
to  the  Pass  of  Llanberis,  from  the  lower  lake  of  that  name,  the  heights 
of  Snowdon  being  in  the  distance  on  the  right  hand.  In  the  foreground, 
and  on  both  sides  of  the  ruined  castle  of  Dolbadarn,  the  faces  of  the 
cliffs  exhibit  flexures  of  the  oldest  strata  here  visible.  These  are  • 
the  purplish  and  grey  slaty  rocks,  1,  of  the  previous  section,  whose 
structure  and  relations  in  North  Wales  were  formerly  so  well  de- 
scribed by  Professor  Sedgwick.  Containing  the  best  roofing  slates  in 


Chap.  II.] 


BOTTOM  ROCKS  IN  IRELAND. 


31 


the  world*,  and  subordinate  courses  of  greywacke  grit,  with  rocks  of 
igneous  origin  intermixed,  they  are  seen  to  fold  over  and  plunge 
to  the  east-south-east,  so  as  to  pass  under  the  great  and  mas- 
sive succession  of  schists  which  constitute  the  distant  heights  of 
the  Snowdon  range.  The  reader  will  observe  that  faint  slanting 
lines  have  been  introduced  into  the  drawing  to  represent  this 
ascending  order,  which  the  geologist  can  observe  for  himself,  as  he 
examines  the  sides  of  the  valley  in  passing  from  the  unfossiliferous 
slaty  rocks  of  Llanberis,  up  to  the  overlying  strata  of  Snowdon 
(2%  2  of  section  below  the  map),  which,  by  their  imbedded  organic 
remains,  are  known  to  be  of  Llandeilo  age.  In  short,  the  rocks  in 
the  foreground  stand  in  the  place  of  the  Longmynd,  whilst  the 
overlying  or  distant  masses  are  the  equivalents  of  the  rocks  of  the 
Stiper  Stones,  Shelve  and  Corndon  of  the  previous  section,  p.  29. 

A  similar  succession  is  visible  at  Barmouth  and  other  places  in 
North  Wales,  as  will  hereafter  be  noticed. 

Whilst,  however,  the  lowest  rocks  of  Shropshire  and  Wales 
are  void  of  fossils,  it  must  here  be  noticed,  that  in  Ireland  and  im- 
mediately opposite  to  Anglesea  and  Carnarvon,  rocks  of  precisely 
the  same  mineral  characters,  and  occupying  the  same  place  in  the 
geological  series,  have  afforded  two  species  of  a  peculiar  zoophyte. 

The  government  surveyors  have  decided  (and  after  two  personal 
inspections  of  the  ground,  I  quite  agree  with  them,)  that  the  purple 
and  greenish  greywacke  of  Bray  Head,  near  Dublin,  to  which  the 

*  The  best  slates  lie  in  the  masses  to  the  left  hand  of  the  foreground,  and  are 
the  property  of  my  friend  Mr.  T.  Assheton  Smith.  Thence  they  range  to  the  quar- 
ries of  Colonel  Douglas  Pennant,  M.P.,  on  the  N.N.E.  A  very  instructive  dia- 
gram, representing  the  curves  of  the  original  strata,  at  Llanberis,  and  the  man- 
ner in  which  they  are  traversed  by  planes  of  slaty  cleavage,  is  given  by  Profes- 
sor Sedgwick,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  iii.  p.  138.  For  a  correct  ac- 
quaintance with  all  the  faults  and  fractures  of  these  rocks,  the  geologist  will,  of 
course,  consult  the  subsequently  published  maps  and  sections  of  the  government 
surveyors. 


32  SILURIA.  [Chap.  II. 

quartz  rock  of  the  great  and  lesser  Sugar  Loaf  is  subordinate,  cor- 
responds exactly  to  the  oldest  buttresses  of  the  opposite  mountains  in 
Wales,  and  which  form  the  foreground  in  the  preceding  sketch.  It  is 
in  this  ancient  Irish  grey  wacke  that  a  very  peculiar  fossil  zoophyte  was 
detected  by  Professor  Oldham,  and  named  after  him  by  Professor  E. 
Forbes.  The  Oldhamia  is  a  polype  of  which  two  species  have  been 
detected,  and  one  of  them  is  here  given. 


Fossils,  1. 


Oldhamia  antiqua,  from  Bray  Head,  Ireland. 

The  reader  may  look  with  reverence  on  this  zoophyte ;  for  not- 
withstanding the  most  assiduous  researches,  it  is  the  only  animal  relic 
yet  known  in  this  very  low  stage  of  unequivocal  sedimentary  matter. 
The  term  azoic  cannot  therefore  be  applied  to  the  Irish  rocks  of  the 
same  age  as  those  which  in  England  and  Wales  have  afforded  no 
such  traces  of  life.  A  zoological  reason  is,  however,  added  to  the  phy- 
sical arguments  above  offered,  for  considering  these  very  ancient  de- 
posits as  simply  the  base  of  the  oldest  known  series  of  former  beings. 

Returning  then  from  Ireland,  to  the  region  of  Siluria  and  Wales, 
in  whose  bottom  rocks  no  fossils  have  been  found,  it  will  be  seen  by 
reference  to  the  map,  that  of  the  strata  containing  Silurian  organic 
remains,  the  lowest  bands,  or  2,  3,  are  most  spread  out  on  the  west 
or  Welsh  side,  the  upper  group,  or  4,  5,  on  the  English  or  original 
Silurian  frontier. 

In  great  part  of  South  Wales,  or  in  nearly  all  the  hilly  region  to 
the  S.  of  Cader  Idris,  as  bounded  by  the  sea  on  the  west.  Lower 


Chap.  II.]     OLDEST  SLATY  ROCKS  OF  NORTH  WALES.  33 

Silurian  rocks  only  prevail.  There  also,  as  in  North  Wales,  they  roll 
over  in  undulations  with  a  general  direction  in  some  parts  from 
N.N.E.  to  S.S.W.,  in  others  from  N.E.  to  S.W.;  the  dip  or  in- 
clination of  the  strata  varying  necessarily  with  each  of  their  great 
folds.  In  the  south-western  parts  of  Montgomery  and  Radnor,  as 
well  as  in  Cardigan,  and  a  large  portion  of  Carmarthen,  they  are 
much  less  associated  with  igneous  rocks  than  in  Merioneth  and 
Carnarvon  on  the  one  side,  or  in  western  Shropshire  or  eastern 
Radnorshire  on  the  other.  In  the  three  last-mentioned  tracts.  Lower 
Silurian  rocks  are  interstratified  with  felspathic  trap;  whilst  pro- 
jections of  rock  of  irregular  forms  have  burst  through  all  the 
sediments  at  a  later  period.  Viewed  in  this  general  sense,  and 
excepting  the  few  oases  consisting  of  the  older  and  unfossiliferous 
base,  all  the  western  region  of  Wales  (excluding  the  old  red  sand- 
stone and  carboniferous  deposits  at  its  northern  and  southern  ex- 
tremities) consists  of  Silurian  rocks.    (See  map.) 

Let  us  now  make  a  rapid  traverse  of  the  whole  region  from  the 
higher  Welsh  mountains  to  Montgomeryshire  and  the  border  English 
counties  of  Salop  and  Hereford,  where,  as  above  stated,  the  Silurian 
types  were  first  described. 

The  lowest  rocks  of  Carnarvonshire,  already  adverted  to,  are 
much  more  slaty  than  those  of  the  same  age  in  the  Longmynd  of 
Shropshire.  Though  it  is  not  compatible  with  the  nature  of  this 
work  to  expatiate  upon  the  structure  in  rocks  called  slaty  cleavage, 
I  may  state  that  it  is  a  crystalline  determination  and  arrangement 
of  the  fine  particles  of  mud  of  which  the  rocks  were  originally 
composed,  into  a  countless  number  of  thin  plates  precisely  parallel 
to  each  other,  and  which  usually  cutting  across  the  original  lines 
of  deposit,  indicate  (when  observable)  the  true  bedding  or  stra- 
tification. 

The  following  woodcut  will  serve  to  explain  the  slaty  cleavage  of 
rocks  as  distinguished  from  the  original  layers  or  laminae  of  deposit. 

D 


34 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  II. 


This  remarkable  physical  feature  of  cleavage,  which  in  former  days 
was  often  mistaken  for  the  true  beds  of  the  rocks,  is  often  persistent 

b  h 


h  h 
Slaty  Cleavage  and  Bedding. 
a.  Strata  or  beds  in  undulation,  b.  Lines  of  cleavage.    (The  dark  tint  represents  the  portions  of 
a  mountain  in  which  the  layers  of  deposit  and  lines  of  cleavage  coincide.)  From  Sil.  Syst.  p.  400. 

through  great  portions  of  a  mountain-chain,  and  those  who  wish  to  be 
better  acquainted  with  it,  must  consult  the  admirable  memoir  of  Sedg- 
wick*, who  first  threw  a  clear  light  upon  the  phenomena,  and  referred 
them  to  some  great  chemical  change  which  heat  and  electricity 
probably  combined  to  produce.  The  strata,  however,  I  remind  the 
reader,  which  are  now  found  in  this  fine  and  crystalline  state,  were 
at  one  period  nothing  more  than  accumulations  of  mud ;  and  there 
are  still  parts  of  the  world,  as  in  Russia,  where,  unaffected  by  any 
changes,  they  have  remained  almost  in  their  primeval,  muddy,  and 
unsolidified  condition  up  to  the  present  day. 

It  is  sufficient  on  this  occasion  to  say,  that  their  crystalline  struc- 
ture, as  seen  in  Wales,  and  as  indicated  by  the  highly  inclined  lines, 
of  the  preceding  diagram,  was  impressed  upon  the  strata  or  undulating 
layers,  «,  very  long  after  their  accumulation  as  submarine  mud,  and 
even  after  they  had  been  subjected  to  curvatures,  as  above  indicated. 
Such  a  cleavage,  prevailing  at  intervals  from  the  lowest  unfossiliferous 
greywacke  or  bottom  rock  through  the  Silurian  system,  is  seen  in 

*  See  particularly  Professor  Sedgwick's  Memoir  on  the  Structure  of  large  Mineral 
Masses,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  N.  S.  vol.  iii.  p.  461. 


Chap.  II.]  LOWEST  FOSSILIPEROUS  ZONE.  35 

parts  of  other  overlying  palaeozoic  formations.  In  all  the  instances  of 
its  occurrence  in  fossiliferous  strata,  the  separation  of  the  original 
lines  of  bedding  from  the  plates  of  cleavage  is  naturally  much  more 
easy  where  fossil  shells  occur  *  along  the  layers  of  deposit,  than  in 
those  oldest,  unfossiliferous,  and  finely  levigated  sediments,  in  which 
the  beds  are  often  only  distinguishable  by  the  different  colours  in 
the  same  slaty  mass. 

In  all  other  diagrams  or  sections  used  in  this  work,  young  geolo- 
gists must  understand,  that  the  divisional  lines  represent  the  layers  or 
laminae  of  true  beds  as  originally  and  successively  formed  by  depo- 
sition under  water.  It  is  by  long  and  patient  labours  in  the  mountains, 
and  by  following  the  curvatures  and  breaks  of  these  lines  of  deposit, 
that  the  whole  symmetry  of  the  rocks  has  been  determined,  in 
spite,  as  it  were,  of  the  obscurities  produced  by  slaty  cleavage 
(which  occurs  more  or  less  in  all  the  North  Welsh  Silurian  rocks), 
and  also  by  the  interpolation  of  igneous  rocks  of  various  characters. 

From  this  allusion  to  an  important  physical  feature,  by  which  many 
ancient  rocks  of  different  epochs  which  were  originally  composed  of 
fine  mud  have  been  more  or  less  affected,  and  particularly  in  Britain, 
we  must  return  to  the  natural  order  of  succession  as  read  off  in  the 
earlier  pages  of  primeval  history. 

Lowest  zone  of  animal  life  in  Great  Britain.  —  Near  the  two  ex- 
tremities of  the  coloured  section  of  the  map,  or  in  Shropshire,  on  the 
one  hand,  and  near  the  Menai  Straits  on  the  other,  the  lowest  zone 
in  which  any  vestiges  of  former  life  are  discoverable  consists  of  the 
schists  and  sandstones,  2%  which  overlie  the  unfossiliferous  strata,  1, 
above  described.  On  the  west  flank  of  the  Longmynd  of  Shrop- 
shire, these  schists,  though  of  some  thickness,  are  only  imperfectly 

*  The  reader  who  would  well  understand  how  fossil  shells  have  been  distorted 
by  the  action  which  produced  the  cleavage,  must  consult  an  able  memoir  of  Mr 
D.  Sharpe,  Quarterly  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  iii.  p.  74.  See  the  example  of  a 
distorted  trilobite  in  this  work,  chap.  8.  p.  201. 


36  SILURIA.  [Chap.  II. 

developed  in  a  valley  of  denudation,  and  in  the  slopes  between  it 
and  the  singular  quartz  rocks  called  the  Stiper  Stones.  There  the 
lowest  beds  have  only  been  found  to  contain  fucoids  and  a  rare 
graptolite,  a  genus  of  zoophyte  which,  as  will  hereafter  be  seen, 
characterizes  the  Silurian  strata  from  their  beginning  to  their  close. 

Although  the  section  at  page  29,  which  passes  from  the  Long- 
mynd  on  the  E.S.E.  to  the  mining  country  of  Shelve  on  the  W.N.W. 
across  the  quartzose  ridge  of  the  Stiper  Stones*,  will  convey  a 
general  idea  of  the  succession,  the  lover  of  nature  f,  as  well  as  the 
geologist,  will  recognize  in  the  Stiper  Stones,  objects  well  worthy  of 
a  visit  and  a  close  examination. 

These  rocks  are  made  up  of  a  number  of  broken  and  serrated 
ledges  jutting  out  from  beneath  the  heath  and  turf  f,  like  rugged 
Cyclopean  ruins,  to  form  the  summits  of  the  hills  which  flank  the 
mining  district  of  Shelve,  at  heights  varying  from  1500  to  1600  feet 
above  the  sea.  They  are  sandstones,  which  in  the  highest  parts  of 
the  ridge  have  been  considerably  altered,  probably  by  the  former 
action  of  the  heat  evolved  during  the  protrusion  of  those  igneous 
rocks  which  abound  in  the  adjacent  hills. 

The  first  of  these  sketches  represents  the  general  range  of  these 
protruding  rocks,  as  seen  on  their  western  faces,  where  they  dip  at  a 

*  It  is  also  worthy  of  remark,  that  in  the  long  transverse  section  below  the  map, 
extending  in  a  right  line  over  90  miles  of  country,  the  lowest  rocks,  near  each  ex- 
tremity, are  accompanied  by  much  mineralization  of  the  strata.  In  both,  copper 
and  lead  veinstones  occur,  and  in  parts  of  Merionethshire  gold  also  occurs  in 
small  quantities.  These  auriferous  conditions  of  the  Lower  SUurian  and  other  pa- 
laeozoic rocks  will  be  explained  in  chap.  16. 

f  The  northern  summit  and  slope  of  one  of  the  elevations  of  the  Stiper  Stones 
(called  Bleak  Hill  in  the  Ordnance  maps),  is  covered  with  a  forest  of  holly  trees  of 
great  size.  These  hard,  old,  indigenous  tenants  of  the  soil,  defying  all  cold  blasts, 
are  appropriate  emblems  of  the  extreme  antiquity  of  the  rocks  of  this  mountain. 
The  views  of  the  Stiper  Stones  on  the  next  page  are  taken  from  the  Silurian  System, 
pp.  268,  282. 

I  See  map  and  sections  of  the  Silurian  System,  and  p.  268.  of  that  work. 


Chap.  II.]  THE  STIPER  STONES.  37 

high  angle  under  the  schists  of  the  Llandeilo  formation,  the  low 
country  of  northern  Shropshire  being  seen  in  the  distance. 


The  Western  Face  of  the  Stiper  Stones. 

In  the  following  sketch,  on  the  contrary,  the  spectator  is  supposed 
to  be  looking  southwards  along  the  eastern  escarpments  of  these 
broken  rocks,  the  hills  of  Linley  being  in  the  distance ;  on  the  left 


The  Eastern  Face  of  the  Stiper  Stones. 
In  this  case  the  strata  dip  to  the  right  hand  of  the  spectator,  whilst  in  the  preceding  sketch 
they  dip  to  the  left.    In  the  upper  view  the  spectator  is  looking  to  the  N.  N.E.  ;  in  the  lower 
to  the  S.  S.  W. 

hand  is  the  valley  which  has  been  excavated  in  the  shale  which  lies 
between  the  Longmynd  and  these  Silurian  sandstones. 

D  3 


38  SILURIA.  [Chap.  II. 

In  following  these  quartzose  rocks  in  their  strike  from  the  cul- 
miating  points  of  the  Stiper  Stones  to  the  Nils  Hill  quarries  near  Pon- 
tesbury,  on  the  N.N.E.,  we  find  the  strata  gradually  assuming  the 
ordinary  character  of  a  sandstone  and  pebbly  grit,  the  beds  of  which 
are  ocasionally  separated  by  shale  occasionally  greenish  and  steatitic. 
On  the  surfaces  of  some  of  these  beds  are  ripple-marks,  so  common  in 
all  arenaceous  deposits  which  have  been  formed  under  water,  and  also 
branching  raised  casts,  strongly  indicative  of  organic  origin.  Some 
of  these  are  certainly  the  forms  of  fucoids  which  were  deposited  on 
an  ancient  sea-shore  or  bottom.  The  rock  so  characterised  is,  indeed, 
very  analogous  to  the  lowest  sedimentary  stratum  in  Sweden,  which 
there  lies  at  the  base  of  the  fossil  series  of  deposits,  and  which,  from 
its  exposing  similar  forms,  was,  in  another  work,  called  the  fucoid 
sandstone."*  In  Shropshire,  small  flakes  of  anthracite  occur,  though 
rarely,  in  the  joints  and  cavities  of  these  silicious  sandstones;  and 
this  substance,  we  may  very  rationally  infer,  might  have  resulted 
from  the  conversion  into  carbon  of  the  original  sea-weeds  whose 
casts  are  still  visible  in  the  sandstone.  This  remarkable  ledge  of  the 
Stiper  Stones,  with  its  underlying  schists,  a  fuller  description  of 
which  must  be  sought  in  the  "  Silurian  System,"  constitutes,  as  it 
were,  a  divisionary  band  between  the  ferruginous,  unfossiliferous 
greywacke  of  the  liongmynd,  1,  with  its  copper  veins  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  lead-bearing,  fossiliferous  Lower  Silurian  schists 
and  sandstones,  2%  2,  of  Shelve  and  Corndon  on  the  other. 

The  strata  that  repose  conformably  on  the  silicious  grits  of  the 
Stiper  Stones  (see  long  section,  p.  29.)  are  flagstones,  which, 
weathering  to  a  rusty  brown  colour,  exhibit  an  internal  texture  and 
colour  resembling  usual  forms  of  greywacke  in  many  countries.  They 
are  well  exposed,  in  a  vast  succession,  in  highly  inclined  ledges,  dip- 
ping about  55°  to  the  W.N. W.,  on  the  north  side  of  the  deep 
transverse  combe  of  Mytton's  Dingle.   Their  surfaces  are  also  marked 

*  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  16. ;  Sil.  Syst.  p.  285. 


Chap.  II.]      W.  SHROPSHIRE  AND  N,  WALES  IDENTIFIED.  39 

by  casts  of  fucoids;  but  I  have  been  unable  to  detect  other  fossils  in 
them,  though  they  pass  up  into  and  form  an  integral  part  of  the 
Llandeilo  formation. 

The  next  overlying  strata,  which  are  spread  out  in  undulations 
over  the  mining  tract  of  Shelve,  are  black  schists,  with  occasional 
bands  of  earthy  sandstone,  in  parts  calcareous  and  light  coloured. 
These  form  the  chief  mass  of  the  Llandeilo  formation,  with  its 
numerous  graptolites,  trilobites,  moUusks,  and  other  fossils,  and  will 
be  treated  of  hereafter.    (See  section,  p.  29.) 

Miniature  as  it  is  by  comparison  with  North  Wales,  this  tract  of 
the  Stiper  Stones  and  Shelve,  which,  with  a  description  of  its  fossils, 
was  formerly  described  and  mapped  as  Lower  Silurian,  and  which 
extends  from  Shropshire  into  Montgomeryshire,  is,  I  repeat,  now 
determined  to  be  the  geological  prototype  of  the  grander  undulations 
of  the  same  rocks,  which  spread  out  over  so  large  a  portion  of  the 
principality  of  Wales. 

But  whilst  the  strata  in  the  escarpment  of  the  Stiper  Stones  have 
afforded  little  more  than  casts  of  fucoids,  and  traces  of  graptolites*, 
certain  districts  in  North  Wales  contain  remains  which  mark  more 
definitely  the  lowest  known, shelly  band  in  the  British  Isles. 

On  the  lower  flanks  both  of  Snowdon  and  Cader  Idris,  where 
they  dip  away  from  the  above-mentioned  subjacent  greywacke  grits 
and  slates  (the  No.  1  of  the  section),  these  strata  consist  of  schists, 
with  glossy  surfaces  of  lightish  and  dark  grey  and  black  colours. 

Occasionally  they  are  much  laden  with  crystallised  iron  pyrites, 
and  interstratified  with  felspathic  ash-beds  or  volcanic  grit,  sometimes 
calcareous,  which  proceeded  from  submarine  volcanoes.  In  this 
region,  such  eruptions,  of  which  more  notice  will  be  taken  in  the 
sequel,  have  considerably  expanded  the  dimensions  of  the  whole 
series  of  beds,  whilst  here  and  there  irregular  and  projecting  bosses 

*  The  Cruziana  of  the  Welsh  Lingula  beds,  p.  42,  has  also  just  been  detected 
at  the  Stiper  Stones  by  Mr.  Salter. 

D  4 


40  SILURIA.  [Chap.  II. 

of  eruptive  igneous  rock,  that  have  since  broken  through  the  strata, 
have  greatly  diversified  the  surface  of  the  country.  Still,  there  are 
many  spots  near  Harlech,  Tremadoc,  Llanberis,  &c.,  where  the  most 
perfectly  conformable  and  equable  passage  from  lower  unfossiliferous 
schist  and  grit  to  the  beds  under  consideration  are  seen.  This,  for 
example,  is  the  succession  at  Barmouth. 


a  6  6 

b.  Lingula  Schists  with  imperfect  slaty  cleavage. 

a.  Grits  and  Schists,  or  Longmynd  and  bottom  rocks. 


The  fossil  remains  of  this  primeval  zone  of  life  in  N.  Wales 
consist  notably  of  the  flat  bivalve  shell,  the  Lingula,  of  which  ex- 
amples are  here  and  there  to  be  seen,  as  on  the  flanks  of  Cader 
Idris  and  near  Tremadoc. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  covering  of  this  animal,  as  repre- 
sented f.  1.  of  the  following  woodcut,  is  very  horny,  and  only  slightly 
calcareous ;  showing  that  its  inhabitant  was  suited  to  the  conditions 
of  a  sea  whose  bottom  was  composed  of  mud  and  sand,  and  which 
contained  little  or  no  lime  wherewith  to  supply  the  fabric  of  a 
thicker  shell.  It  is,  indeed,  a  remarkable  fact,  that  in  the  vast 
thicknesses  of  the  inferior  or  unfossiliferous  greywacke  before  ad- 
verted to,  there  is  scarcely  any  lime,  and  not  a  trace  of  a  shell ; 
whilst  in  these  the  lowest  strata  in  which  calcareous  matter  is  visible, 
it  has  only  occurred  in  such  small  quantities  as  to  afford  a  very  thin 
testaceous  covering  to  the  few  animals  of  this  early  zone  of  life.  We 
shall  presently  see  that  when  the  Silurian  fauna  became  abundant,  as 
in  the  next  overlying  strata,  it  was  accompanied  by  a  corresponding 
development  of  lime  which  served  as  the  pabulum  for  the  construction 
of  the  shells  of  the  imbedded  mollusks. 

In  ascending  through  the  different  stages  of  the  Silurian  system,  it 
will  also  be  seen,  that  different  species  of  the  genus  Lingula  occurred 


Chap.  II.]  LINGULA  FLAGS  OF  N.  WALES.  41 

most  frequently  at  those  intervals  in  which  there  was  a  return  to 
similar  sedimentary  conditions,  L  e,  whenever  the  original,  muddy 
sea-bottom  was  only  slightly  impregnated  with  lime. 

Eeverting  to  the  original  typical  district  of  Shropshire,  it  must  be 
remarked,  that  the  beds  immediately  underlying  the  sandstones  and 
quartz  rocks  of  the  Stiper  Stones,  and  which  stand  in  the  place  of 
the  Lingula  flags  of  Wales,  are  similar  in  composition  to  many  strata 
which  pervade  the  whole  Silurian  system.  They  are  dark  grey,  fine- 
grained schists,  occasionally  containing  a  little  mica,  which  either 
exfoliate  in  rude  concretions,  or  split  up  into  shivery  and  irregular 
fragments;  the  whole  mass  rapidly  decomposing  by  atmospheric 
action,  and  returning  into  its  original  state  of  mud.  It  is  this  pre- 
valent character  of  large  portions  of  the  Silurian  rocks,  particularly 
where  they  have  not  been  intruded  upon  by  igneous  matter,  or 
subjected  to  a  slaty  cleavage,  which  led  me  to  apply  the  term 
"  mudstones  "  so  generally  to  them.  And  it  is  therefore  specially  to  be 
remembered,  that  at  the  foot  of  the  escarpment  of  the  Stiper  Stones, 
or  at  the  base  of  every  thing  which  contains  Silurian  fossils,  this 
class  of  rock  prevails. 

In  the  mean  time  it  is  to.  be  noted,  that  a  form  of  Lingula  nearly 
identical  with  that  of  North  Wales,  is  also  characteristic  of  the  lowest 
Silurian  rock  of  North  America  (the  Potsdam  sandstone).  The 
genus  has  indeed  lived  on  from  the  Silurian  or  primeval  days  to 
the  present  time,  though  its  former  associates,  the  graptolites  and 
trilobites,  vanished  long  ago  from  the  world.  The  latter,  or  the 
earliest  crustaceans,  abound  infinitely  more  in  the  Silurian  than  in 
the  next  overlying  system  of  rocks,  and  of  them  the  earliest  which 
the  labours  of  geologists  have  brought  to  light  in  Britain  are  the 
little  Olenus  and  Paradoxides*,  one  species  of  the  first-mentioned 

*  One  species  of  Paradoxides,  p.  43.  Foss.  4.  (locality  unknown)  has  been  found 
in  North  Wales,  and,  although  very  imperfect,  Mr.  Salter  believes  it  identical  with 
P.  Forchhammeri,  of  the  alum  slates  of  Andrarum  in  Scania. 


42  SILURIA.  [CnAP.  11. 

genus,  O.  micrurus,  Foss.  2.  f.  2.,  having  been  found  associated  with 
the  Lingula  in  this  primordial  zone  as  it  appears  in  Wales. 


Fossils,  2. 


1.  Lingula  Davisii,  M'Coy. 

2.  Olenus  micrurus,  Salter. 


Lingula  Flags,  North  Wales. 


In  addition  to  the  Lingula  and  Olenus,  the  government  surveyors 
have  lately  detected  a  new  crustacean  of  the  Phyllopod  tribe  near 
Dolgelly,  —  Hymenocaris  vermicauda,  Salter.  In  beds  of  the  same 
age  near  Bangor,  there  have  been  also  found  two  kinds  of  fucoid,  one 
of  which  is  the  Chondrites  acutangulus,  M'Coy,  and  a  new  species 
of  the  curious  genus  Cruziana  (Bilobites,  D'Orbigny).  The  above- 
mentioned  fucoid.  Chondrites,  is  the  same  species  as  Professor 
Sedgwick  found  in  the  Skiddaw  slate  of  Cumberland,  where  it  is 
associated  with  the  Palaeochorda,  M'Coy,  another  genus  of  fucoids, 
and  with  the  Graptolites  latus.    A  figure  is  here  given  of  the 


Fossils,  3. 


Hymenocaris  vermicauda, 
Salter. 


Lingula  Flags,  Dolgell}-. 


Hymenocaris  vermicauda,  from  specimens  in  the  collection  of  the 
Geological  Survey.  It  occurs  plentifully  at  Dolgelly  and  Tremadoc, 
in  North  Wales,  associated  with  Lingula  Davisii,  and  is  therefore  a 
true  primordial  fossil. 


Ohap.  II.]       LOWEST  SILURIAN  FOSSILS  IN  WALES,  ETC. 


43 


Fossils,  4. 


Paradoxides  Forchhammeri, 
Angelin.  ? 


Black  Schists  of  North  Wales. 


The  small  Olenus  is  found  in  the  lowest  known  fossil  strata  of 
another  British  tract.  In  the  black  schists  on  the  western  flanks  of 
the  Malvern  Hills,  strata  which  I  had  termed  Lower  Silurian,  Pro- 
fessor Phillips  detected  three  species  of  this  genus,  viz.  O.  humilis, 
W.  5.  f.  1. ;  O.  bisulcatus,  f.  2.;  0.  scarabaeoides  (O.  spinulosus. 
Ph.),  f.  3.    To  these  my  friend  Mr.  Hugh  Strickland  has  recently 


Olenus  humilis,  Ph. 

2.  0.  bisulcatus,  Ph.  hd^^^~^)=i     l^^^^*     Trilobites  from  the  black  schists 

3.  O.  scarabaeoides,  Wahl.  ?  >=^;^^  2  »^^"^         of  the  Malverns. 

4.  Agnostus  pisiformis,  Brongn. 


made  the  interesting  addition  of  the  Agnostus  pisiformis,  Brongn., 
Foss.  5.  f.  4.,  a  fossil  only  known  in  the  oldest  Silurian  schists  or  alum 
slates  of  Sweden,  of  which  hereafter.  Associated  with  the  Grap- 
tolite,  the  Olenus  is  also  found  in  the  same  fossiliferous  stratum 
of  Scandinavia,  which  rests  on  a  sandstone  in  which  no  other 
remains  have  been  detected  except  fucoids,  and  is  made  up  of  the 
detritus  of  the  subjacent  crystalline  rocks.  Again,  the  Olenus 
occurs  in  Bohemia  in  the  same  or  lowest  horizon  of  life,  and  under 


44 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  IL 


similar  conditions ;  and  also  associated,  as  in  Sweden,  with  Agnostus, 
Paradoxides,  and  other  trilobites,  several  of  which  have  not  yet  been 
discovered  traces  in  our  island.*    (See  chap.  13.) 

Let  it  not,  however,  be  supposed,  that  fossil  shelly  remains  occur 
in  any  notable  quantity  in  this  the  lowest  stratum  in  which  they 
are  known  in  Wales  or  England.  On  the  contrary,  the  collections 
in  the  instructive  public  Museum  of  the  Geological  Survey  teach  us 
how  very  rare  are  the  species  which  the  labours  of  a  series  of  years 
have  been  able  to  detect ;  and  the  student  who  may  explore  the 
North  Welsh  mountains,  will  duly  appreciate  the  industry  that  has 
been  required  to  gather  together  even  these  few  primordial  relics. 
The  Lingulae  were  first  discovered  by  Mr.  Davis  in  the  year  1846, 
and  termed  by  him  Silurian  fossils,  f  In  Bohemia,  Sweden,  and 
America,  as  will  hereafter  be  noticed,  trilobites  are,  however,  more 
plentiful  in  this  zone. 

In  the  following  chapter  the  reader  will  be  introduced  to  strata 
containing  the  chief  mass  of  the  Lower  Silurian  animals,  some  of 
which  are  similar  in  kind  to  the  few  crustaceans,  moUusks,  and 
graptolites  already  alluded  to,  but  with  very  numerous  additions  of 
genera  and  species,  in  these,  as  well  as  in  other  classes;  represent- 
ing, in  fact>  nearly  every  known  family  of  submarine  beings  except 
fishes. 

*  See  the  admirable  work  of  M.  Barrande,  "  Le  Bassin  Silurien  de  Bolieme" — 
a  monument  of  the  talent  and  perseverance  of  the  French  author,  in  a  foreign 
land,  and  one  of  the  most  remarkable  monographs  of  our  age.  The  first  part  only 
has  appeared,  in  which  the  numerous  trilobites  are  completely  described. 

■j-  See  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  ii.  p.  70.  The  rocks  of  that  tract 
had,  however,  been  described  at  a  much  earlier  period  by  Professor  Sedgwick,  who, 
though  he  did  not  detect  these  fossils,  has  shown  in  a  subsequent  memoir  the  exact 
relations  of  these  Tremadoc  slates  to  the  subjacent  strata  of  Trawsfynydd  and  the 
overlying  slates  and  igneous  rocks  of  Festiniog  and  Moel-Wyn.  Quart.  Journ. 
Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  iii.  p.  143. 


45 


CHAPTEE  III. 

LOWER  SILURIAN  ROCKS  —  continued, 

THE    LLANBEILO    FORMATION,    ITS    SLATES,    SCHISTS,    SANDSTONES,   LIMESTONES,  AND 
INTERPOLATED  IGNEOUS  ROCKS.     (2^  AND  2  OF  MAP  AND  COLOURED  SECTIONS.) 

Throughout  the  northern  part  of  the  Silurian  region,  and  the 
tracts  of  North  Wales  already  mentioned,  the  rocks  to  be  described 
in  this  chapter  have  the  same  direction  as  the  older  schists  and  grey- 
wacke  on  which  they  rest.  The  direction  of  the  Longmynd  from 
S.  S.  W.  to  N.  N.E.  has,  in  fact,  been  impressed  on  the  whole  of  the 
Llandeilo  formation,  the  beds  of  which  are  perfectly  conformable  to  and 
graduate  downwards  into  those  of  the  older  rocks.  (See  map  and  sect, 
p.  29). 

In  the  Silurian  region,  and  in  North  Wales,  as  exhibited  in  the 
general  section  below  the  map,  29,  the  Lingula  zone,  described  in 
the  last  chapter,  is  surmounted  by  thick  masses  of  schist,  2,  which, 
with  much  interpolated  igneous  matter,  pass  up  into  and  constitute 
the  lower  part  of  the  Llandeilo  formation.  These  relations  of  super- 
position will  be  more  clearly  understood  by  referring  to  the  sections 
across  the  northern  parts  of  the  Silurian  region,  as  formerly  described 
by  myself.* 

There,  whether  near  Shelve  in  Shropshire,  or  at  Llandrindod, 
Llandegley,  and  Builth  in  Radnor,  these  strata  are  often  interlaced 
with  conformable  sheets  of  contemporaneous  igneous  matter,  which 
I  termed  volcanic  grits.f   They  are  also  broken  up  by  the  intrusion 

*  See  Silurian  System,  pp.  268.  and  324.  As  early  as  the  year  1833, 1  described 
the  Llandeilo  formation,  then  termed  black  trilobite  flagstones,  as  being  of  more 
copious  development  than  the  overlying  deposits.  Proc.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  i. 
p.  476. 

t  The  "  volcanic  ash  "  of  Sir  Henry  de  la  Beche  and  the  government  surveyors. 


46  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

of  great  bands  of  greenstone,  porphyry,  and  other  eruptive  rocks. 
In  North  Wales,  the  same  deposits  are  not  only  to  a  greater  extent 
similarly  aifected  by  igneous  matter,  but  are  also,  as  before  said,  much 
more  slaty. 

The  mineral  feature,  however,  by  which  the  upper  mass  of  the  for- 
mation, whether  slaty  or  not,  is  most  distinguished  from  the  strata 
which  preceded  it,  is  in  the  occasional  presence  of  lime,  particularly 
towards  its  central  portion,  where  some  of  the  schists,  flagstones,  and 
shale  become  calcareous,  and  in  parts  pass  into  limestone,  as  at 
Llandeilo  in  Carmarthenshire,  Llampeter  Felfrey  in  Pembrokeshire, 
and  Bala  in  Merionethshire. 

In  the  lower  or  schistose  parts,  where  very  little  calcareous  matter 
is  visible,  and  nearly  every  bed  is  argillaceous,  the  fossils  called 
graptolites  most  prevail.  This  genus  of  zoophyte  is  supposed 
by  many  naturalists  to  have  been  nearly  allied  to  the  living  Vir- 
gularia,  a  creature  known  only  in  deep  seas.  Others  rather  con- 
sider these  extinct  forms  to  belong  to  corallines  or  Sertularia.  Be 
this  as  it  may,  the  geologist  has  observed  that  they  are,  for  the  most 
part,  found  in  beds  of  muddy  origin,  and  exclusively  in  the  Silurian 
or  earliest  known  system  of  fossil  animal  life.    The  whole  group  of 

Fossils,  6. 
Lower  SiLURiAi>r  Graptolites. 


1.  Rastrites  peregrinus,  Barr. 

2.  Graptolites  Sedgwicki,  Portl, 

3.  G.  priodon,  Bronn.  (G.  Lu- 
densis,  Sil.  Syst. 

4.  Diplograpsus  pristis,  Hising. 

5.  D,  nodosus,  Harkness. 

6.  D.  folixxm,  Hising. 
T.  D.  ramosus,  HalL 

8.  Didymograpsus  sextans,  Hall. 

9.  D.  Murchisonse  SiL  Syst. 


these  little  serrated  creatures  has  been  called  Graptolithina,  and  has 
been  divided  into  about  four  genera,  as  represented  in  this  woodcut. 


Chap.  III.]  CHIEF  POSITION  OP  GRAPTOLITES.  47 

One  of  these,  the  Diplograpsus,  M^Coy,  f.  4,  5,  6.,  is  distinguished 
by  having  double  sides  like  a  leaf.  A  second,  Graptolites  of  Lin- 
naeus, f.  2, 3.,  has  teeth  or  serrae  on  one  side  only.  A  third,  Kastrites, 
Barrande,  f.  1.,  has  teeth  placed  like  the  last,  but  not  so  crowded 
together.  There  are  other  branched  forms,  f.  8,  9.,  for  which  the 
name  of  Didymograpsus  has  been  proposed,  and  one  of  which,  the 
D.  Murchisonge,  f  9.,  is  the  most  characteristic  fossil  of  the  black 
shales  of  the  Llandeilo  flags  of  Wales :  it  has  also  been  found  on  the 
continent.    Some  of  these  forms  are  figured  on  our  PI.  12.  f.  1. 

The  Diplograpsus,  or  doubly  serrated  forms,  are  chiefly  character- 
istic of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks ;  D.  pristis,  f.  8.,  and  D.  foliaceus, 
PI.  12,  f.  2.,  being  the  ordinary  forms,  whilst  the  one-sided  species 
extend  from  the  Lower  to  the  Upper  Silurian. 

In  no  palaeozoic  rock  younger  than  the  Silurian  is  the  true  graptolite 
known,  and  hence,  as  types,  they  are  most  important  to  the  practical 
geologist,  who,  in  exploring  many  tracts  of  this  age  in  Cumberland, 
the  southern  counties  of  Scotland,  Ireland,  Central  Germany*,  &c., 
meets  with  scarcely  any  other  fossils.  In  Sweden,  indeed,  grap- 
tolites and  fucoids  so  abound,  as  to  have  given  a  highly  bituminous 
character  to  the  lower  strata,  which,  being  also  largely  impregnated 
with  iron  pyrites,  has  aflbrded  so  much  alum  as  to  have  procured 
for  the  strata  the  name  of  Alum  slates.  The  graptolite  also  occurs 
copiously,  in  the  Silurian  region  of  Britain,  and  in  Sweden,  Norway, 
and  Bohemia,  in  the  shales  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks. 

Whilst,  how^ever,  the  mere  presence  of  a  true  graptolite  will  at 
once  decide  that  the  rock  in  which  it  occurs  is  Silurian,  it  is  only 
by  finding  the  genera  of  these  animals  which  display  a  double  set 

*  Dr.  Beck,  of  Copenhagen,  assisted  me  in  describing  the  few  species  of  grapto- 
lite published  in  the  Silurian  System.  M.  Barrande  has  published  a  most  elaborate 
and  valuable  treatise  on  the  Graptolites  of  his  Silurian  Basin  of  Bohemia.  Dr. 
Geinitz  has  systematised  all  the  known  forms  of  graptolites  in  a  work,  illustrated 
by  clear  and  beautiful  drawings,  entiled,  "  Die  Versteinerungen  der  Grauwacken 
Formation  in  Sachsen."   Leipsic,  1852. 


48 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  III. 


of  serratures  In  the  same  species,  that,  in  the  absence  of  signs  of  the 
order  of  superposition,  the  field  observer  may  presume  he  is  examining 
the  lower  division  of  the  system. 

Deferring  for  a  moment  the  consideration  of  the  pseudo-volcanic  or 
igneous  rocks,  which  in  some  districts  characterize  the  schists  last  spoken 
of,  let  us  first  take  a  glance  at  the  great  mass  of  the  Lower  Silurian 
rocks,  as  distinguished  by  very  many  organic  forms,  most  of  which  wilJ 
be  treated  of  hereafter.  (See  chap.  8.  and  plates  1.  to  11.)  This  great 
group  was  long  ago  described  in  the  Silurian  region,  as  made  up  of 
Llandeilo  schists  and  flags  beneath,  and  of  Caradoc  sandstone  above  ; 
the  names  having  been  taken  from  the  localities  where  each  formation 
was,  as  it  was  thought,  most  characteristically  developed.  But, 
even  in  1835,  I  specially  cautioned  geologists  not  to  attach  im- 
portance to  the  character  implied  by  the  names  of  flagstone  or  sand- 
stone, for  I  well  knew  that  such  mineral  features  were  partial  and 
evanescent  even  in  my  own  region,  and  must  necessarily  prove 
much  more  so  in  distant  countries.  The  survey  of  Siluria  alone  had 
taught  me,  that  the  schistose  and  slaty  beds  of  one  tract  became 
sandy  in  their  extension,  or  vice  versa,  and  that  the  same  courses 
which  are  so  calcareous  in  some  districts  as  to  constitute  limestone, 
were  mere  schists  and  flagstones  in  another.  Hence  I  held  to  the 
rule,  that  in  studying  the  primeval,  as  well  as  medieval  or  secondary 
and  tertiary  formations,  the  zoological  contents  of  rocks,  when  coupled 
with  their  order  of  superposition,  were  the  only  safe  criteria  of  their  age. 

In  proceeding  from  the  primordial  zone  described  in  the  last 
chapter,  to  younger  formations,  we  find  that,  in  the  British  Isles  at 
least,  calcareous  matter,  doubtless  formerly  supplied  from  subterranean 
sources,  increases  upwards,  and  with  it  the  number  of  fossil  animals.* 

*  The  observation  in  the  text  is  only  intended  to  apply  to  the  number  of 
animal  remains  found  in  the  lowest  formation  in  which  there  is  any  notable  quan- 
tity of  lime,  by  comparison  with  the  subjacent  strata  where  it  is  not  perceptible. 
The  fact,  however,  of  the  increase  of  limestone  as  the  formations  become  newer,  is 
generally  true.    Thus,  no  course  of  the  limestone  near  Bala  exceeds  twenty  or 


Chap.  III.] 


LLANDEILO  LIMESTONE. 


49 


At  and  near  Llandeilo,  the  formation  under  review  chiefly  consists 
of  calcareous  flags,  having  a  great  thickness  of  schists  below  them, 
and  sandy  and  gritty  strata  above  them;  but  in  following  the  deposit 
into  Pembrokeshire,  the  calcareous  portion  is  enriched,  and  becomes 
in  some  places,  as  at  Llampeter  Felfrey  and  Llandewi  Felfrey,  a 
copious  mass  of  dark  subcrystalline  limestone  with  white  veins. 
These  rocks,  which  are  there,  as  elsewhere,  underlaid  and  overlaid  by 
a  great  thickness  of  black  schist,  are  thus  represented  in  a  section 
of  the  government  surveyors,  little  differing  from  one  I  formerly 
published. 

Section  at  Llandewi  Felfkey,  Pembrokeshire. 
S.S.E.  'N.N.W. 

d        c     b'^  62  b  62 

b.  Llandeilo  schists  and  limestones,  h'^.  e.  Overlying  Silurian  rocks,  d.  Old  Eed  Sandstone. 
The  contiguity  of  the  Llandeilo  formation  to  the  Old  Red  Sandstone,  and  the  tenuity  of  all 
the  interjacent  Silurian  strata,  will  be  explained  hereafter. 

Again,  the  very  same  formation  as  developed  in  Radnorshire 
(Builth  to  the  Gelli  Hills  near  Llandrindod),  is  chiefly  schistose  and 
flaggy,  with  comparatively  little  lime  disseminated,  and  such  also  is 
its  composition  in.  the  districts  of  Corndon  and  Shelve  in  Shropshire. 
The  distribution  of  the  limestone  is  equally  irregular  and  uncertain 
in  those  tracts  of  North  Wales  which  Professor  Sedgwick  so  long 
explored.  The  limestone,  for  example,  is  visible  near  Bala,  though, 
from  its  impure  character,  it  is  now  no  longer  worked  for  use. 
But  on  its  strike  to  the  N.  N.  E.  or  to  the  S.  S.  W.,  it  soon  dwindles  to 
so  insignificant  a  course,  that  its  position  can  only  be  detected  by  the 

thirty  feet  in  thickness,  and  even  the  same  strata  in  Carmarthen  and  Pembroke 
are  not  more  than  double  those  dimensions.  The  Woolhope,  or  lowest  Wenlock 
limestone  (see  chapter  6.),  has,  probably,  about  a  maximum  thickness  of  twenty-five 
feet.  The  chief  Wenlock  limestone  is,  in  some  places,  more  than  a  hundred  feet 
thick,  and  the  limestones  of  South  Devon  are,  perhaps,  twice  that  magnitude ; 
whilst  the  carboniferous  or  mountain  limestone  is  vastly  thicker  than  any  of  the 
older  calcareous  rocks  of  Britain. 

E 


50  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

occasional  presence  of  some  of  its  fossils.  A  reference  to  the  map 
at  once  indicates  how  this  limestone  wedges  out  and  disappears  a 
few  miles  to  the  south  of  Bala,  thus  leaving  all  the  region  between 
North  Wales  and  Carmarthenshire  void  of  any  such  rock. 

But  besides  this  Llandeilo  limestone,  other  shreds  of  calcareous 
matter  are  discernible  at  intervals  in  the  ascending  order.  One  of  these, 
or  the  Hirnant  limestone  of  Merioneth,  a  still  thinner  and  more 
partial  course  described  by  Professor  Sedgwick,  is,  probably,  on  the 
parallel  with  certain  calcareous  bands  described  by  me  as  occurring 
near  Meifod  in  Montgomeryshire,  and  mapped  as  Llandeilo  rocks  by 
the  government  geologists.  To  the  north-west  of  Meifod  these  sand- 
stones and  schists,  with  partial  limestones,  seemed  to  me  to  repose  on 
flagstones^with  the  Asaphus  tyrannus,  as  exhibited  on  the  banks  of 
the  river  Twrch,  and  described  in  my  old  sections.  (See  Sil.  Syst., 
p.  307.  and  pi.  32.  f.  9.) 

From  their  mineral  character,  I  formerly  connected  the  Meifod 
rocks  with  the  next  overlying  formation.  Their  separation  from  the 
Caradoc  depends  upon  the  researches  of  Professor  Sedgwick  and  those 
of  the  government  surveyors.  In  some  parts  of  Wales,  and  in  the 
Longmynd  and  Shelve  districts,  these  rocks  are  unconformable  to 
the  Caradoc  sandstone.  But  the  researches  of  the  surveyors  have 
also  shown,  that  this  physical  phenomenon  of  unconformity  be- 
tween these  two  divisions  of  Lower  Silurian  strata  intimately  con- 
nected by  their  organic  remains  is  local,  and  that  there  are  tracts 
in  North  Wales,  and  even  in  the  vicinity  of  Bala  itself,  where  the 
Llandeilo  formation  is  conformably  surmounted  by  the  Caradoc  sand- 
stone, as  represented  in  the  coloured  section  appended  to  the  map. 
See  also  the  diagrams  in  chapter  4. 

In  truth.  Sir  H.  De  la  Beche  and  his  associates  have  proceeded 
on  the  axiom,  that  local  unconformity  of  stratification  does  not  con- 
stitute a  ground  for  the  establishment  of  a  line  of  geological  dis- 
tinction and  classification.     They  have  even  ascertained  that  in 


Chap.  III.]  LOWER  SILURIAN  SANDSTONES.  51 

South  Wales,  one  portion  of  the  carboniferous  series  is  as  uncon- 
formable to  another  and  older  part  of  the  same  coal-field,  as  the 
example  which  has  been  alluded  to  between  the  Llandeilo  and  the 
Caradoc  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  certain  districts  in  North 
Wales  and  Shropshire. 

In  France,  as  in  Bohemia  (see  chapters  13  and  14.)  and  elsewhere 
in  foreign  countries,  there  is  always  a  perfect  conformity  between  the 
lowest  Silurian  strata,  and  those  which  stand  in  the  place  of  our 
Caradoc  sandstone.  The  only  great  break  which  is  there  known 
occurs  between  the  base  of  everything  fossiliferous,  and  those  great 
azoic  masses  of  greywacke  which  represent  the  bottom  rock,  of  the 
preceding  chapters.  In  Britain,  on  the  contrary,  as  already  demon- 
strated, that  fundamental  rock  is  the  regular  and  conformable  base  of 
all  the  Silurian  strata.  It  is,  indeed,  manifest  that  the  break  or 
overlap  in  Wales,  and  along  the  south  end  of  the  Longmynd  and 
Corndon  tracts  of  Shropshire,  is  a  local  phenomenon. 

I  adhere,  then,  to  my  old  divisions,  under  a  belief,  confirmed  by 
subsequent  extensive  survey,  that  in  many  regions  of  the  earth 
the  geologist  will  find  it  impossible  to  classify  by  the  means  of  such 
smaller  divisions,  and  that  he  must  simply  view  the  whole  as  "  Lower 
Silurian  Rocks."  Thus,  however  certain  distinctions  may  be  clear 
and  good  in  typical  tracts  of  Siluria  and  Wales,  there  are  many 
parts  even  of  the  British  Isles,  and  numberless  foreign  localities, 
where  separation  into  the  formations  of  Llandeilo  and  Caradoc  is 
absolutely  impracticable,  either  by  mineral  and  zoological  distinctions, 
or  by  dislocations. 

In  my  original  work  it  was  stated  that  the  so  called  Llandeilo  flags 
and  schists  were  often  underlaid,  or  their  place  taken,  by  sandstones 
of  considerable  thickness.  Such,  for  example,  are  the  sandstones 
of  the  Stiper  Stones,  which  as  before  stated  (p.  29.),  and  as  represented 
in  the  original  sections,  lie  beneath  the  great  mass  of  the  strata  now 
under  consideration,  and  were  from  the  first  called    Lower  Silurian." 

E  2 


52  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  fact  now  generally  admitted  was  always 
insisted  on,  that,  however  the  mineral  character  might  vary,  very 
many  of  these  strata  were  characterized  by  similar  fossils,  par- 
ticularly by  some  of  the  commonest  Lower  Silurian  types.  In 
short,  two  groups  or  divisions  only  were  dwelt  upon,  for  the  general 
scale  of  comparison,  and  these  were  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian. 
(See  Sil.  Syst,  passim.) 

In  tracts  where  it  is  unassociated  with  trap  or  igneous  rocks,  the 
Llandeilo  formation  above  the  Lingula  schists  consists  thus  in 
ascending  order,  first,  of  the  dark  schists  with  graptolites ;  next,  of 
hard  dark-coloured  flags,  sometimes  slightly  micaceous,  often  cal- 
careous, with  white  veins  of  crystallized  carbonate  of  lime,  and  which, 
here  and  there  forming  limestones,  are  specially  distinguished  by 
containing  the  large  trilobites,  Asaphus  tyrannus,  Ogygia  Buchii, 
with  several  species  of  Trinuclei,  as  well  as  numerous  shells,  many 
of  which  are  represented  in  the  plates  1  to  10.  The  upper 
member  is  composed  of  strata  of  shale,  schist,  and  sandstones, 
occasionally  even  conglomerates,  in  other  tracts  containing  thin 
courses  of  calcareous  or  shelly  sandstone.  In  the  neighbourhood 
of  Llandeilo,  in  Carmarthenshire,  where,  from  the  abundance  of 
the  above-mentioned  fossils,  the  name  was  applied,  the  forma- 
tion, consisting  of  schists,  limestones,  and  sandstones,  has  been 
estimated  by  the  government  surveyors  to  have  a  thickness  of  about 
4000  feet.  In  North  Wales,  where  the  rocks  are  much  expanded  by 
the  intervention  of  igneous  materials,  the  dimensions  are  vastly 
greater,  and  even  to  the  west  of  the  Longmynd  and  Stiper  Stones 
this  formation  has  a  thickncGS  of  several  thousand  feet. 

Igneous  Bocks  associated  with  the  Lower  Silurian. — In  order  to 
make  the  reader  acquainted  with  the  general  aspect  and  nature  of  the 
British  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  it  is  essential  to  explain  how  in  certain 
districts  volcanic  action  affected  the  bottom  of  the  sea  during  the 
deposition  of  the  strata,  and  how  they  were  dislocated  by  subsequent 


Chap.  III.]  CONTEMPORANEOUS  IGNEOUS  ROCKS.  5S 

eruptions.  In  the  vicinity  of  some  igneous  rocks,  these  schists  and 
calcareous  flagstones  have  been  filled  with  mineral  veins,  and  have 
undergone  various  changes.  Besides  ores  of  lead  and  copper,  it  will 
also  be  shown,  in  a  separate  chapter,  that  rocks  of  this  age  were  ren- 
dered partially  auriferous  in  Wales,  and  largely  so  in  other  countries. 
(See  chap.  16.) 

One  of  the  tracts  in  the  original  Silurian  region,  where  the  Llan- 
deilo  formation  is  most  metalliferous  {lead  veins),  is  that  lofty  ond 
rugged  district  of  Shropshire,  which  lies  around  the  village  of  Shelve 
and  the  Corndon  mountain,  and  which  extends  from  the  west  of 
the  Stiper  Stones  into  Montgomeryshire.    (See  Map.) 

The  student  of  natural  phenomena  is  specially  invited  to  examine 
this  tract,  because,  together  with  the  adjacent  Longmynd  and  the 
Stiper  Stones,  it  exhibits  nearly  the  whole  series  of  strata  of  North 
Wales  in  lower  hills,  and  is  therefore  more  easily  accessible  and  com- 
prehensible than  the  subcrystalline,  contorted,  and  steep  flanks  of 
Snowdon  and  Cader  Idris,  which  exhibit  similar  phenomena  on  a 
grand  scale. 

In  reference  to  North  Wales,  I  will  merely  say,  that  some  of  the 
finest  examples  of  the  stratified  and  contemporaneous  beds  of  fel- 
spathic  ash  or  volcanic  grit  are  exhibited  in  the  environs  of  Fes- 
tiniog.  There,  the  interval  between  the  green  and  grey  schists,  of 
the  age  of  the  Lingula  flags  of  Tremadoc,  and  certain  black  roofing 
slates  of  the  Llandeilo  formation,  is  occupied  by  syenite,  satiny 
schists,  and  volcanic  grits,  the  last  being  in  parts  coarse  con- 
glomerates. Again,  to  the  west  of  Tan-y-bwlch,  the  latter  in  the 
form  of  ash-beds,  which  there  are  very  finely  levigated,  differ 
chiefly  from  talc  schist  in  being  less  quartzose,  associating  and  al- 
ternating with  hard  greywacke  grit,  which  is  penetrated  by  large 
branching  veins  of  white  quartz. 

Occasionally,  this  felspathic  ash,  which  is  separated  into  thick  beds 
by  slightly  inclined  layers  of  deposit,  is  traversed  by  numerous  highly 

*E  3 


54  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

inclined  lamlnse  of  slaty  cleavage,  from  which  the  associated  coarse 
grits  are  exempt. 

The  repeated  alternations  of  these  pseudo-volcanic  rocks  with  the 
schists  and  grey  wacke  of  North  Wales  can  alone  be  well  understood  by 
reference  to  the  maps  and  sections  prepared  by  Kamsay  and  Selwyn. 
In  the  small  map  attached  to  this  work,  and  which,  as  before  ex- 
plained, is  simply  a  reduction  of  that  of  the  government  surveyors, 
numberless  features  are  necessarily  omitted. 

An  adequate  acquaintance  with  such  features  can  only  be  at- 
tained by  traversing  those  mountains  with  the  originals  of  these 
remarkable  illustrations  in  hand.  There,  in  the  space  of  a  few  square 
miles,  the  geologist  meets  with  numerous  grand  alternations  of  in- 
terstratified  volcanic  ashes  and  felspathic  conglomerates,  sometimes 
sandy  and  calcareous,  which  have  been  pierced  by  eruptive  igneous 
rocks,  whether  syenite,  felspar  rock,  or  greenstone,  here  and  there 
porphyritic.  It  is  sometimes  most  difficult  to  separate  the  contem- 
poraneous igneous  rocks  from  the  subsequently  intruded  masses 
(porphyries  of  Sedgwick) ;  as,  for  example,  at  Cader  Idris,  where  the 
succession  is  represented  in  a  diagram,  also  taken  from  the  sections  of 
the  Survey,  which  is  given  towards  the  conclusion  of  this  chapter. 

Then,  again,  let  the  student  take  any  one  of  the  closely  worked 
quarter- sheet  maps  of  this  Survey  (particularly  those  of  Snowdon 
and  Cader  Idris),  and,  marking  the  faults  or  fractures  as  delineated 
by  the  great  number  of  white  lines,  he  may  form  some  idea  of  the 
consummate  skill  and  labour  by  which  such  results  have  been 
obtained.  * 

But  to  return  to  similar  Silurian  rocks  which  are  seen  in  the 
tracts  of  Shelve,  Llandrindod,  and  Builth,  where  they  were  first 
classified  and  placed  in  distinct  relation  to  other  deposits,  and  with 
which  some  of  the  copious  masses  of  North  Wales  have  been 

*  A  fine  example  of  this  succession  to  the  north  of  Festiniog  was  recently 
pointed  out  to  M.  de  Verneuil  and  myself  by  Professor.  Ramsay. 


Chap.  III.  j  STRATIFIED  FELSPAR  ROCKS.  55 

identified  by  the  government  surveyors.  Those  districts  were  long  ago 
shown  by  me  to  contain  two  classes  of  submarine  igneous  rocks  ;  the 
one  bedded  and  regularly  interlaced  with  the  strata,  and  therefore 
formed  contemporaneously  with  them;  the  other  not  bedded,  and 
which  had  broken  through  the  others.  Each  of  these  is  similarily 
divided  into  several  varieties,  for  an  acquaintance  with  which  the 
reader  must  consult  the  original  descriptions.  * 

Of  the  bedded  pseudo-volcanic  rocks  in  Shropshire  and  Mont- 
gomeryshire, some  of  the  finest  examples  are  to  be  seen  in  the  pic- 
turesque defile  of  Marrington  Dingle.  There,  the  lowest  strata, 
exposed  at  a  high  inclination  in  numerous  quarries,  are  felspar  rocks 
of  a  concretionary  structure,  which  are  surmounted  by  coarse  mottled 
volcanic  grits,  consisting  of  a  base  of  lightish  and  greenish  grey 
granular  felspar,  mixed  with  sand  and  chlorite,  and  containing  an- 
gular fragments  of  schists  and  porphyritic  greenstones,  the  whole 
arranged  in  beds  from  two  to  four  feet  thick,  and  dipping  at  an 
angle  of  45°,  as  expressed  in  this  vignette. 


Whittery  Quarries  in  Harrington  Dingle. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  270.) 

In  other  parts  of  this  district  there  are  both  felspathic  agglome- 
rates and  ash-beds,  or  volcanic  grits  and  slaty  porphyries,  with 
crystals  of  felspar.  Some  of  these  alternate  in  thick  masses  with 
the  schist  containing  trilobites,  others  in  courses  of  a  few  inches  thick 

*  See  Sil.  Syst.,  pp.  269.  324.  and  passim. 

E  4 


56  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

only,  and  occasionally  including  fragments  of  the  Ogygia  (Asaphus) 
Buchii.  Other  organixj  remains  are  found  in  beds  which  are  almost 
exclusively  composed  of  igneous  materials ;  thus  showing  that  sub- 
marine volcanic  action  was  rife  in  the  sea-bottom  in  which  these 
Lower  Silurian  strata  were  accumulated.  The  annexed  woodcuts 
will  convey  some  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  the  volcanic  breccia  or 
ash,  h,  which  alternates  with  the  beds  of  schist,  a,  envelopes  other 
fragments  of  schist  and  slate,  c. 


(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  271.) 


Another  diagram,  taken  from  the  coloured  sections  on  the  margin 
of  my  old  map  of  the  Silurian  region,  explains  the  manner  in  which, 
by  the  action  of  submarine  volcanoes,  such  igneous  dejections  are 
supposed  to  have  been  accumulated,  as  represented  by  the  light- 
coloured  layers  which  alternate  with  the  ordinary  sediments,  and 
further,  how  a  volcanic  cone,  similar  to  that  of  Graham  Island  in 
the  Mediterranean,  as  represented  by  the  dotted  line,  may  have  dis- 
appeared and  mixed  its  scoriae  and  ashes  with  the  ordinary  submarine 
mud  or  sand. 


Ideal  Representation  of  the  manner  in  which  submarine  Volcanic  Dejections 

WERE  formed  in  THE  LoWER  SiLURIAN  PeRIOD. 

(From  bottom  of  Map,  Sil.  Syst.) 


Chap.  III.]     VOLCANIC  GRITS  AND  LLANDEILO  FLAGS.  57 

Some  large  masses  of  eruptive  trap,  which  have  penetrated  the 
sedimentary  and  associated  volcanic  deposits  at  a  subsequent  period, 
are  seen  in  the  Corndon  Hills  as  expressed  in  this  view,  the  undu- 
lating grounds  around  them  being  composed  of  strata  of  the  Llan- 
deilo  formation. 


Lower  Silurian  and  bedded  Trap,  traversed  by  eruptive  Eocks,  the  Corndon 
Mountain  in  the  distance. 

(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  271.) 


Equally  instructive  examples  of  the  alternations  of  bedded  igneous 
rocks  with  Lower  Silurian  strata,  and  of  posterior  eruptions,  are  seen 
in  the  hills  of  Gelli,  Gilwern,  and  Carneddau,  near  Llandegley,  Llan- 
drindod,  and  Builth  in  Radnorshire.  Felspar  porphyries  are  there 
regularly  stratified,  one  example  of  which,  as  taken  from  the  illus- 
trations of  my  former  researches,  is  here  exhibited. 


Alternations  of  Llandeilo  Flags  and  Schists  with  Volcanic  Grits. 
(From  Sil.  Syst,  p.  325.) 


a 


a.  Coarse  slaty  felspar  rock,  sliglitly  porphyritic  and  amygdaloidal,  containing  elongated  con- 
cretions of  green  earth.  This  rock  is  regularly  stratified  in  beds  of  three  to  four  feet  thick, 
and  forms  the  mass  of  the  hill,  rising  into  the  higher  ground,   h.  Finely  laminated  greenish- 


58 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  III. 


grey  sandy  flagstone,  apparently  hardened  near  the  top.  c.  Fine-grained  granular  felspar 
and  courses  of  clay-stone,  some  of  which  are  used  as  oven-stone,  d.  Altered  flags,  having 
a  conchoidal  fracture,  in  parts  almost  Lydian-stone,  with  crystals  of  iron  pyrites,  e.  Grey 
felspar  rock,  the  laminae  of  deposit  marked  by  feruginous  streaks,  probably  due  to  the  de- 
composition of  some  other  mineral.  /.  Black  shivery  shale,  containing  a  few  concretions  of 
argillaceous  limestone,  with  veins  of  calcareous  spar.  One  of  these,  which  fell  under  my  notice, 
was  a  septarium,  two  or  three  feet  in  diameter,  containing  many  impressions  of  Graptolites. 
This  band  of  black  shale  was  excavated  to  a  considerable  distance  in  search  of  coal!  on  the 
strike  of  the  beds,  by  the  same  individuals  who  have  sought  for  lead  ore.  g.  Hard  thick- 
bedded  porphyritic  felspar,  h.  Flagstone,  with  Ogygia  Buchii,  indurated  in  contact  with 
the  trap ;  much  iron  pyrites,  i.  Grey  porphyritic  clay-stone,  j.  Black  schist,  with  some 
hard  stone  bands,  in  parts  pyritous.  k.  Slaty  porphyritic  felspar.  I.  Black  shale,  with  stone 
bands  and  concretions  of  argillaceous  limestone,  m.  Thin  band  of  decomposed  granular 
felspar,  weathering  to  a  rusty  colour,  and  looking  like  a  coarse  oolite,  n.  Black  pyritous 
schists,  much  contorted  near  the  mouth  of  the  gallery. 

Thus,  in  a  thickness  of  only  350  feet  across  the  beds,  this  detailed 
section  exhibits  bands  of  felspathic  and  porphyritic  rocks,  occasionally 
both  crystalline  and  amygdaloidal,  with  clay-stones,  granular  felspar, 
and  green  earth ;  which  materials  alternate,  six  or  seven  times,  with 
finely  laminated  flagstones  and  black  schists,  one  of  which  contains 
graptolites,  and  another  the  Ogygia  Buchii.  (PI.  3.  f.  1.)  In  truth, 
this  little  section  exhibits  an  epitome  of  the  structure  of  vast  tracts 
in  North  Wales. 

Examples  of  such  contemporaneous  rocks,  as  well  as  those  of 
posterior  intrusion,  are  well  seen  in  Salop,  Montgomery,  and  Rad- 
nor. In  and  around  the  Corndon  mountain  of  Montgomeryshire, 
(see  view,  p.  57.),  in  the  volcanized  and  mining  tracts  of  Shelve,  the 
eruptive  and  intrusive  rocks  are  chiefly  coarse-grained  hornblendic 
greenstones  and  felspar  rocks  passing  into  basalt.  In  many  of  these 
cases,  the  shale  or  schist  in  contact  with  the  eruptive  rock  has  been 
cemented  into  a  complete  porcellanite,  with  surfaces  as  smooth  as  the 
finest  lithographic  stone.  These  altered  shales  are,  in  fact,  the 
brand-erde, "  or  burnt  earth,  of  the  Germans.* 

*  In  England  the  most  curious  actual  proofs  of  this  conversion  occur  in  the 
South  Staffordshire  coal-field,  particularly  near  the  town  of  Dudley,  where  the 
spontaneous  and  long-continued  combustion  of  subterranean  coal  in  abandoned 
mines  has  produced  in  the  shale  and  sandstones  of  the  coal  measures  a  variety 
of  burnt  earths,  which  are  of  divers  colours  ;  some  of  them  resembling  the  riband 
jasper  of  mineralogists. 


Chap.  III.]  THE  BREIDDEN  HILLS.  59 

The  Breidden  Hills,  including  the  picturesque  Moel-y-Golfa,  on 
the  right  bank  of  the  Severn,  near  Welsh  Pool,  also  exhibit  similar 
illustrations,  both  of  contemporaneously  bedded  trap  and  of  posterior 
or  intrusive  rocks,  which  have  broken  out  along  the  same  line  at  dif- 
ferent periods,  for  a  better  acquaintance  with  which  I  must  refer  to 
former  detailed  descriptions.* 

The  annexed  drawing,  taken  from  the  terrace  of  Powis  Castle, 
shows  these  hills  in  the  distance.  They  mark  a  line  of  eruption  that 
separates  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  on  the  left  hand  or  west,  from  the 
Upper  Silurian  of  the  Long  Mountain  on  the  right  hand  or  east. 


View  of  the  Breidden  Hills  near  Welshpool,  from  Powis  Castle. 
(From  a  Drawing  by  Lady  Murchison,  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  302.) 


Now,  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  along  this  line  of  eruption  some 
volcanic  dejections  were  thrown  down  on  the  sea-bottom  during  the 
formation  of  the  Lower  Silurian  strata ;  that  other  eruptions  and  dis- 
locations afterwards  took  place  along  it,  heaving  those  strata  into 
highly  inclined  positions,  like  those  on  which  Powis  Castle  stands ; 

*  Silurian  System,  p.  287.  et  seq. 


60  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

that  on  the  edges  of  these  beds  carboniferous  deposits  were  after- 
wards accumulated ;  and  that  again,  after  all  these  and  other  form- 
ations, including  the  new  red  sandstone,  were  completed,  still  more 
recent  eruptions  occurred  along  this  same  line  of  fissure.* 

The  shortest  method  of  explaining  to  the  reader  the  structure  of 
the  Breidden  Hills  is  to  exhibit  this  small  diagram,  taken  from  a 
section  just  published  by  the  Geological  Survey,  and  which  represents 
a  mass  of  porphyritic  and  amygdaloidal  greenstone,  which  in  its 
protrusion  has  carried  up  included  portions  of  slaty  beds,  and  has 
thrown  off  pebble  beds  and  Upper  Silurian  rocks  to  the  S.  E.,  and 
Lower  Silurian  to  the  N.  W. 

Section  across  the  Breiddex  Hills. 
N.W.  S.E. 

Rodney's 
PUlar. 


b  *  b        *  b  b*  b  d 

b.  Lower  Silurian  slaty  rocks,    b  *.  Contemporaneous  trap  breccia,    d.  Wenlock  shale 
or  base  of  Upper  Silurian.    *.  Eruptive  rocks. 


One  of  the  igneous  rocks  most  easily  examined  on  this  line  of 
habitual  outburst  in  ancient  periods,  is  the  largely  excavated  prismatic 
mass  at  Welsh  Pool,  which  seems  to  cut  as  a  dike  through  the 
Lower  Silurian  strata,  which  in  contact  with  the  igneous  matter  are 
much  altered.  At  a  little  distance,  however,  these  beds  contain  organic 
remains,  some  of  which,  particularly  the  Trinucleus  concentricus, 
were  originally  figured  in  the  "  Silurian  System."  (See  pi.  4.  f.  2—5.) 

This  prismatic  rock,  unquestionably  of  igneous  origin,  is  largely 
quarried  as  a  building  stone,  like  that  of  the  Whittery  quarries.  It 
is  remarkable  in  having  its  light-green  felspar  matrix  speckled  with 
minute  nuts  and  kernels  of  calcareous  spar,  which,  together  with  the 
finely  aggregated  state  of  the  felspar,  renders  the  stone  sectile  and 
valuable. 

*  For  the  proofs  of  this,  see  Sil.  Syst.,  pp.  299.  et  seq. 


Chap.  III.]      LOWER  SILURIAN  AND  ERUPTIVE  ROCKS.  61 

Eruptive  masses  of  greenstone  and  hypersthene  rocks,  described  as 
cutting  through  Silurian  strata,  occur  near  Old  Radnor*;  but  as 
these  are  associated  with  strata  of  posterior  date  to  those  we  are  now 
considering,  they  will  be  mentioned  in  the  sixth  chapter. 

The  Carneddau  Hills,  between  Llandrindod  and  Builth,  are, 
however,  truly  amorphous  and  eruptive  masses  of  igneous  rock, 
which  have  broken  through  and  highly  altered  the  Llandeilo  flags 
and  associated  sandstones.  Beautiful  examples  of  this  are  seen  on 
the  banks  of  the  Wye,  west  of  Builth.  (See  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  332.  et  seq.) 

On  this  occasion  one  diagram  only  is  selected,  as  taken  from  one  of 
the  coloured  plates  in  my  large  work,  to  show,  at  one  view,  first. 


Section  across  the  Gelli  Hills. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  pi.  33.  f.  5.) 


b*.  Lower  Silurian  with  interpolated  contemporaneous  trap.       *.  Eruptive  Rocks. 


how  the  strata  of  the  Llandeilo  formation  alternate  with  bedded 
igneous  rocks,  b  and  next,  how  they  have  been  altered  in  contact 
with  eruptive  masses,  *.  It  is  in  these  black  and  hardened  schists 
of  contact  that  films  of  anthracite  have  been  found,  which  have 
led  credulous  farmers  to  search  for  coal.f 

Another  frequent  result,  in  this  district,  of  the  contact  of  the 
eruptive  rock  with  the  schists,  is  the  production  of  much  sulphuret  of 
iron,  the  decomposition  of  which  gives  rise  to  the  various  mineral 

*  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  318. 

I  A  full  exposure  of  this  folly  was  giveii  in  the  Silurian  System,  p.  328.,  with 
this  diagram,  representing  an  actual  search  after  coal !  at  a  spot  called  Tin-y-Coed, 
thus  — 


b,  Lower  Silurian  schists  traversed  hy  a  gallery,  c,  until  the  eruptive  trap  rock,  *,  was 
reached,  where  the  enterprise  was  necessarily  stopped. 


62 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  III. 


sources  of  Llandegley,  Landrindod,  Builth,  Llanwrtyd,  &C.5  which 
gush  out  around  this  volcauized  tract. 

Lower  Silurian  of  Pembroke  and  Carmarthen. — Although  some 
allusions  have  been  made,  in  the  preceding  pages,  to  parts  of  South 
Wales,  and  to  the  general  agreement  of  its  structure  with  that  of 
North  Wales,  it  is  necessary  to  explain,  particularly  to  all  those 
who  may  have  considted  the  "  Silurian  System,"  the  general  views 
which  I  have  long  ago  adopted,  and  which,  though  well  known 
to  English  geologists  during  the  last  ten  years,  may  still  be  little 
understood  by  foreigners  and  the  public  into  whose  hands  the  original 
work  may  have  fallen. 

Whilst  North  Wales  and  the  northern  parts  of  Siluria  have  been 
described  as  consisting  of  troughs,  or  undulating  masses  of  Lower 
Silurian  rocks,  resting  to  the  west  upon  the  unfossiliferous  grey  wacke 
of  Carnarvon,  and  to  the  east  on  similar  rocks  of  the  Longmynd, 
the  same  sedimentary  base  or  bottom  rock  is  again  visible  in  South 
Wales,  but  at  one  spot  only.  This  is  at  St.  David's,  in  Pembroke- 
shire, where  the  oldest  greywacke,  like  the  rocks  of  the  Longmynd, 
Llanberis,  and  Haerlech,  is  an  intractable,  hard,  fine-grained,  purple 
and  grey  sandstone,  with  slaty  schists,  in  which  no  organic  remains 
have  been  found. 

In  North  Pembrokeshire,  these  bottom  rocks  are  followed  by 
Lower  Silurian  strata,  but  with  much  irregularity,  owing  to  the 
association  of  vast  masses  of  igneous  rocks,  which  are  interpolated  in 
a  broken  series  of  quartzose  and  felspathic  conglomerates,  grits,  sand- 
stones, and  slates.  Among  the  older  igneous  rocks  of  contempo- 
raneous origin,  are  thick-bedded  coarse  conglomerates,  and  among 
those  of  intrusive  and  posterior  date,  are  large-grained  greenstones 
and  compact  felspar  rocks,  for  a  better  acquaintance  with  which  the 
reader  must  consult  other  writings  as  well  as  my  own.* 

*  See  Kidd.  Trans.  Geol.  Soc,  old  series,  vol.  ii.  p.  791. ;  De  la  Beche,  Trans. 
Geol.  Soc,  new  series,  vol.  ii.  p.  1. ;  and  Silurian  System,  p.  401. 


Chap.  III.] 


PEMBROKE  LOWER  SILURIAN. 


63 


With  the  exception  then  of  the  old  greywacke  of  St.  David's, 
all  these  rocks  of  sedimentary  origin  in  North  Pembroke,  which 
were  formerly  termed  Cambrian,  have  been  found  by  the  govern- 
ment surveyors  to  be,  as  in  North  Wales,  mere  undulations  or  ex- 
pansions of  what  had  been  described  as  Lower  Silurian  strata  in 
South  Pembroke  and  Carmarthen.  Many  years  have  indeed  elapsed 
since  I  publicly  announced  my  belief  in  this  result  of  the  valuable 
labours  of  those  geolooiists.* 

Wherever,  therefore  (with  the  above  exception),  the  reader  of  the 
original  "  Silurian  System  "  meets  with  descriptions  of  schistose,  slaty, 
or  quartzose  rocks  of  South  Wales,  which  were  called  Cambrian,  he 
must  now  consider  that  they  merely  refer  to  mineralogical  variations 
of  undulating  strata  of  the  Lower  Silurian  age.  Of  these,  there  are 
in  Pembrokeshire,  some  sandstones  and  schists,  which  are  on  the  pa- 
rallel of  the  Lingula  beds  of  North  Wales,  though  the  few  fossils  of 
that  age  have  not  yet  been  found  in  them  any  more  than  in  Shrop- 
shire. And  in  truth,  when  the  geologist  examines  North  Pembroke 
(where  alone  in  South  Wales  the  bottom  rocks  are  exposed),  he  will 
not  be  surprised  that  even  the  sedulous  fossil  collectors  of  the  geo- 
logical survey  should  have  failed  in  procuring  from  such  materials 
many  traces  of  primordial  life  ;  so  much  are  the  strata  buried  amidst 
masses  of  igneous  rocks,  both  contemporaneous  and  eruptive,  and  so 

*  In  the  "Silurian  System"  it  was  indeed  stated,  as  an  apology  (Notes,  pp.399, 
and  402.),  that  I  had  given  little  attention  to  North  Pembroke,  to  which  I  only  made 
one  rapid  excursion.  Owing  to  its  highly  mineralized  aspect,  the  vast  profusion 
of  associated  igneous  matter,  and  their  highly  crystalline  nature,  all  these  rocks 
were,  at  that  day,  considered  to  belong  to  a  system  inferior  to  the  Silurian.  That 
erroneous  view  was  publicly  renounced  by  me,  many  years  ago,  in  two  addresses  to 
the  Geological  Society  of  London.  I  also  endeavoured  to  give  a  wider  currency  to 
my  views,  by  publishing,  1843,  a  general  map  of  England  and  Wales,  at  the  re- 
quest of  the  Society  for  the  Diffusion  of  Useful  Knowledge.  I  have,  since  then, 
twice  visited  North  Wales,  and  had  all  my  views  confirmed,  by  inspecting  the 
ground  with  Professor  Ramsay  and  Mr.  Selwyn,  in  the  company,  on  the  one  oc- 
casion, of  Professor  Nicol,  on  the  other,  of  M.  de  Verneuil. 


64  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

slaty  and  crystalline  is  their  structure,  accompanied,  further,  by 
an  absence  of  all  calcareous  matter.* 

The  lowest  beds  of  that  region  in  which  fossils  are  visible  are  the 
black  schists  with  graptolites,  formerly  described  by  me  either  as  the 
base  of  the  Silurian  system,  or  as  forming  a  downward  passage  into 
what  was  then  termed  Cambrian,  under  the  erroneous  supposition 
of  the  inferiority  of  position  of  another  great  mass  or  system  with 
which  the  schists  were  connected. 

The  graptolite  schists  are  well  exposed  at  Abereiddy  Bay,  where 
the  surfaces  of  slaty  cleavage,  as  formerly  pointed  out,  coincide  in 
one  part  absolutely  with  the  laminas  along  which  the  graptolites, 
chiefly  the  G.  Murchisoni  (see  pi.  12.  f.  1.),  have  been  deposited 
as  exhibited  in  this  woodcut. 


Lower  Silurian  Rocks  in  Abereiddy  Bay. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  400.) 


Coincidence  of  Slaty  Cleavage  and  Bedding. 


In  the  Pembrokeshire  section,  the  next  strata  in  ascending  order, 
or  the  calcareous  flags  of  Llandeilo,  as  defined  by  their  trilobites 
and  other  fossils,  are  rarely  to  be  detected  amidst  the  great  intrusions 
of  igneous  matter,  and  the  enormous  breaks,  faults,  and  denudations, 
by  which  the  whole  system  has  been  obscured  in  this  region.  Some 
depressions  being  filled  with  overlying  old  red  sandstone  and  car- 
boniferous limestone  (of  which  hereafter),  and  others  with  highly 
dislocated  troughs  of  broken  stone  coal,  or  culm,  the  Llandeilo  flags 
are  only  visible  in  one  locality,  along  the  whole  of  the  rugged  coast 

*  See  the  tracts  between  the  Precelly  slates  and  Strumble  Head,  west  of 
Fishguard. 


Chap.  III.]  LLANDEILO  KOCKS  OF  PEMBROKE.  65 

clilFs  of  this  southern  extremity  of  Wales,  and  just  in  the  place  wh'fere 
I  first  described  them. 

This  is  at  Musclewick  Haven  in  St.  Bride's  Bay,  where  black 
schists,  in  parts  sandy,  are  traversed  by  dingy  veins  of  black  cal- 
careous spar,  and  contain  the  usual  trilobites  (Asaphi  and  Trinuclei).* 
The  beds  there  dip  at  about  35°  to  the  S.  S.E.,  which  inclination 
would  convey  them  under  the  great  mass  of  the  fossil-bearing 
Silurian  rocks,  as  exhibited  in  Marloes  Bay.  There  is,  however,  no 
visible  connection,  as  the  intervening  promontory  is  much  overlaid 
by  intrusive  igneous  rock.  This  insulated  mass  of  Llandeilo  schists 
is,  indeed,  flanked  by  enormous  faults  or  dislocations,  by  which,  on 
their  north  side,  these  Lower  Silurian  strata  are  thus  brought 
abruptly  into  contact  with  the  old  red  sandstone,  f 


Llandeilo  Schists  in  Musclewick  Bay. 
(From  Sil.  Syst,  pi.  35.  f.  11.) 


0  6  6 

o.  Old  Red  Sandstone.      b.  Llandeilo  Schists.        *  Eruptive  Rocks. 


In  tracing  an  ascending  order  in  South  Pembroke,  the  inferior 
strata  are  seen  to  occupy  the  isles  of  Skomer,  where,  associated 
with  huge  bands  of  trap  rock,  they  plunge  rapidly  to  the  S.E.,  as 
represented  in  the  next  drawing  taken  from  Wooltack  Park  and  the 
mainland,  and  then  dip  under  all  the  strata  of  Marloes  Bay. 

In  pursuing  the  ascending  order  into  Marloes  Bay  on  the  south-east, 
we  first  meet  with  other  bands  of  slaty  grey  wacke,  which  also  alternate 
w^ith  igneous  rocks,  that  seem  to  have  cut  out  the  schists  Avith  the  fos- 
sils of  the  Llandeilo  flags.  For,  we  next  pass  over  the  inclined  edges 

*  Silurian  System,  p.  394. 

f  Sir  Henry  de  La  Beche  estimates  this  fault  between  the  Llandeilo  flags  and 
the  old  red  sandstone,  as  an  upcast  of  upwards  of  2000  feet. 

F 


66 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  III. 


View  of  Skomer  Isles,  seen  from  the  Mainland. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  389.) 


of  a  great  thickness  of  quartzose  sandstones,  in  which,  though  also 
associated  with  much  eruptive  trap,  remains  of  encrinites  and  other 
fossils  have  been  found ;  the  whole  dipping,  like  the  inferior  strata 
of  Skomer,  to  the  S.E.  Then  follow  schists  having  a  slaty- 
cleavage.  All  these  are  overlaid  in  the  cliffs  (at  Marloes  Mire, 
Kain  Kock,  and  Gateholm),  as  expressed  in  this  little  view,  by 


Hook  Point. 


Silurian  Rocks  of  Marloes  Bay,  Pembroke,  dipping  under  the  Old  Red 
Sandstone  of  Hook  Point. 

(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  392.) 

other  sandy  schists  and  sandstones  of  considerable  dimensions.  From 
their  position  and  mineral  character,  and  not  having  found  many 
fossils,  a  large  portion  of  the  lower  beds  was  classed  by  me  with  the 
Caradoc  sandstone  ;  but  in  most  of  these  the  government  surveyors 


Chap.  III.]  SILURIAN  ROCKS  —  MARLOES  BAY.  67 

have  since  collected  fossils  which  rather  refer  them  to  the  bottom  of 
the  Wenlock,  and  consequently  to  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks. 

Such  are  the  rocks  represented  in  the  foreground  of  the  last 
vignette,  and  which  continue  conformably,  layer  over  layer,  to 
the  dark-shaded  headlands  in  the  middle  of  the  bay,  where  they 
plunge,  as  expressed,  at  a  high  angle,  under  other  strata  repre- 
senting the  mass  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  or  Wenlock  and 
Ludlow  formations,  which  in  their  turn  are  surmounted  by  the  old 
red  sandstone  of  Hook  Point.  Reverting  hereafter  to  the  great 
discrepancy  in  lithological  conditions  which  is  here  apparent  in 
these  Upper  Silurian  rocks  when  compared  with  the  typical  strata 
of  the  same  age  in  Salop  and  Hereford,  attention  is  specially 
called  to  this  section,  the  only  one  in  the  British  Isles,  where  a 
great  succession  of  Silurian  rocks  is  seen  in  clear  relations  to  the 
old  red  sandstone  on  the  sea-coast.  We  thus  learn  how  difficult  it 
is,  even  in  these  fully  exposed  coast  cliffs,  to  distinguish  the  upper 
portion  of  the  Lower  Silurian  from  the  lower  part  of  the  superior 
group  by  the  structure  of  the  rocks,  and  we  are,  therefore,  com- 
pelled to  revert  to  their  fossil  contents. 

Here  is  a  vast  thickness  of  sandstone  and  sandy  schists,  which, 
dipping  under  strata  of  shale  and  calcareous  beds  with  many  fossils 
of  the  Wenlock  limestone,  has  its  surface  marked  by  numerous  brown 
impressions  of  the  stems  of  encrinites  (a  character  very  common  in 
the  true  Caradoc  sandstone).  These  beds  are  also  affected  by  a  slaty 
cleavage,  giving  to  them  a  very  antique  impress, 

In  truth,  they  are  lithologically  and  stratigraphically  the  Caradoc 
of  the  Lower  Silurian,  to  be  described  in  the  next  chapter ;  whilst  the 
palaeontologist  must  range  them  with  the  base  of  the  Upper  Silurian 
on  account  of  a  prevalence  of  certain  forms.  And  thus  it  ever  must 
be  in  strata  so  intimately  connected  as  the  lower  and  upper  members 
of  this  natural  system,  wherever  such  clear  divisionary  features  are 
wanting  as  those  to  which  attention  will  be  called  in  the  sequel.  In 

F  2 


68  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

fact,  the  same  slaty  impress,  which  affects  all  the  lower  strata  in 
Marloes  Bay,  is  continued  upwards  through  shales  and  schists  which 
represent  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks ;  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Silurian 
system,  up  to  its  beds  of  passage  into  the  old  red  sandstone,  being 
here  exhibited  in  the  space  of  less  than  three  miles. 

The  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  Pembroke,  composed  in  some  parts 
of  sandstones,  in  others  of  schists  and  flagstones,  are  much  more 
calcareous  as  they  trend  eastward  and  north-eastward  into  Car- 
marthenshire. Rolling  out  in  undulations  from  the  complicated,  dis- 
turbed, and  slaty  masses  of  North  Pembroke,  these  strata  become 
much  more  simple  on  a  zone  ranging  from  Haverfordwest  by  Sholes- 
hook  and  the  north  of  Narbeth  to  Llandewi  Felfrey  and  Llampeter 
Felfrey,  where  the  calcareous  matter*  so  increases,  that  it  forms,  as 
before  said,  by  far  the  finest  masses  of  Llandeilo  limestone  in  all 
Wales,  as  in  this  woodcut,  which  is  here  reproduced  from  p.  49. 

Section  at  Llandewi  Felfrey,  Pembrokeshire. 
S.S.E.  ■  N.N.W. 


d.  Old  red  sandstone.         c.  Thin  zone  of  Upper  Silurian  rocks. 
b.  Llandeilo  limestone,  with  underlying  and  overlying  schists. 

There  the  beds,  as  originally  described,  are  charged  with  the  pre- 
vailing fossils  of  the  Llandeilo  formation,  including  Ogygia  Buchii, 
pi.  3.  f.  L  ;  Asaphus  tyrannus,  pi.  1. ;  Leptasna  sericea,  pi.  6. 
f.  13.;  Orthis  elegantula,  pi.  6.  f.  5.;  with  the  coral  Halysites 
catenulatus,  and  also  the  Echinosphaerites  aurantium  and  E.  Bal- 
ticus,  of  the  lower  limestones  of  Sweden  and  Russia.  (See  chap.  5.) 

When  the  limestone  thins  out,  its  position  in  the  strata  of  schist 
and  flag  is  often  marked  by  bands  of  concretions  only,  and  in  other 
places  by  flagstones  more  or  less  calcareous.    The  latter  type,  or  that 


*  Silurian  System,  p.  397. 


Chap.  III.J  LLANDEILO  FLAGS.  69 

of  calcareous  flagstones,  prevails  around  the  town  of  Llandeilo. 
There,  and  in  other  parts  of  Carmarthenshire,  the  Lower  Silurian 
rocks  are,  on  the  whole,  much  less  interfered  with  or  expanded  by- 
igneous  rocks  than  in  Pembrokeshire  or  North  Wales.  Hence, 
though  they  do  contain  some  small  subordinate  bands  of  greenstone 
and  felspar  rocks,  analogous  to  their  larger  types  elsewhere,  and  are 
thrown  into  undulations,  their  relations  are  more  clearly  exposed 
in  a  small  compass,  thus : — 


View  from  Dynevor  Park,  Llandeilo,  looking  to  the  Hills  above  Golden  Grove. 

(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  347.) 

Here,  all  the  Silurian  rocks,  from  the  Llandeilo  flags  up  to 
the  Ludlow  rocks,  are  exhibited  in  the  vale  of  the  Towy  or  on 
the  banks  of  that  river ;  the  old  red  sandstone  forming  the  distant 
hills. 

In  reference  to  my  original  opinions,  I  beg  the  reader  to  compare 
the  coloured  sections  in  the  Silurian  System,"  pi.  34.,  with  those 
since  published  by  the  Government  Survey,  to  see  how  they  both 
represent  the  same  succession  of  conformable  strata  of  Lower  and 
Upper  Silurian  rocks  in  the  environs  of  Llandeilo. 

Among  the  lowest  visible  strata  of  these  tracts,  are  schists  with  an 


70  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

imperfect  slaty  cleavage,  which  contain  irregular  elliptic  masses  of 
silicious  grit*,  made  up  of  pebbles  of  quartz  and  fragments  of  older 
greywacke  slate ;  the  former  being  seen  in  some  places  to  have 
indented  the  latter  as  if  they  had  been  subjected  to  an  enormous 
pressure. 

It  is  in  the  lower  schistose  beds  of  these  rocks,  that  the  remains  of 
annelids  or  red-blooded  sea-worms,  now  so  generally  found  in  the  Silu- 
rian rocks  of  various  countries,  were  first  discovered ;  and  which  were 
described  for  me  by  Mr.  Macleay.f  Occasionally,  as  between  Llandeilo 
and  Llandovery,  the  upper  members  of  these  slaty  schists  are  also 
marked  by  other  silicious  grits,  which,  from  their  perfect  conformity 
to  the  masses  of  Upper  Silurian  rocks  above  them,  and  to  the  cal- 
careous flags  and  schists  of  Llandeilo  beneath,  I  naturally  considered 
to  be  thin  and  partial  representatives  of  the  intermediate  Caradoc 
sandstone.  These  beds  are  now  classed  by  the  surveyors  with  the 
Llandeilo  formation. 

In  its  prolongation  from  Carmarthenshire  and  Cardiganshire,  into 
Brecknockshire,  this  slaty  greywacke  group  is  again  distinguished  by 
included  quartzose  greywacke  sandstones,  which  in  Radnorshire  swell 
out  into  important  and  continuous  mountain  masses. 

Not  unfrequent  to  the  east  of  Aberystwith,  these  sandstones 
become  of  considerable  thickness  near  Rhayader  on  the  Wye, 
where  they  contain  subordinate  conglomerates,  some  of  the  finest 
examples  of  which  are  seen  in  the  deep  gorge  of  the  river  Elain, 
a  tributary  of  the  Wye  (Craig-y-voel). 

Similar  rocks,  whether  silicious  grits,  pebbly  conglomerates  or 
hard  iijtractable  sandstones,  range  to  the  north-west,  and  occupy  the 
ridges  of  Gwastaden,  Rhiw  Gwraidd,  Dolfan,  Devanner,and  the  Maen 

*  See  Silurian  System,  vol.  i.  p.  359,  360.  A  similar  phenomenon  has  been 
observed  in  other  countries,  as  if  the  pebbles  of  quartz  had  indented  each  other 
by  pressure  and  friction. 

t  See  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  699. 


Chap.  III.]  LOWER  SILURIAN  SANDSTONES.  71 

rocks  in  Eadnor,  and  Bryn  Din  and  Moel-ben-twrch  in  Montgomery. 
Owing  to  great  dislocations  on  their  eastern  frontier,  they  are  occa- 
sionally placed  in  unconformable  relations  to  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks 
of  that  region.* 

To  the  west,  however,  they  roll  over  in  great  undulations,  on  cer- 
tain parallels,  as  laid  down  on  the  maps  and  horizontal  sections  of 
the  government  surveyors  (some  of  the  arenaceous  masses  being 
not  less  than  1000  feet  thick),  and  with  a  strike  which  in  South 
Wales  is  usually  N.E.  and  S.  W.,  the  dips  being  both  to  the  S.E. 
and  N.  W.,  but  more  frequently  in  the  latter  direction.  In  my 
former  examination,  I  only  detected  casts  of  encrinites  in  these  sand- 
stones, but  the  government  surveyors  have  found  a  sufficient  number 
of  forms  to  enable  them  to  refer  these  rocks  to  that  portion  of  the 
Lower  Silurian  (Llandeilo  division),  with  which  they  are  physically 
united.  In  my  opinion,  they  may  be  simply  considered  the  central 
sandstones  of  the  great  schistose  Lower  Silurian  group,  whose  bottom 
rocks  are  seen  in  the  Longmynd  and  at  Harlech  and  Llanberis,  and 
whose  highest  term  is  the  Caradoc  sandstone,  to  be  described  in  the 
next  chapter. 

In  districts  where  they  have  been  affected  by  the  intrusion  of 
igneous  rocks,  the  slaty  masses  of  this  age  in  South  Wales  are  much 
mineralized,  just  as  in  Shropshire  and  North  Wales.  They  contain 
the  lead  ores  of  Nant-y-Moen,  and  the  old  Eoman  gold  mines  of 
Gogofau,  the  one  to  the  north  the  other  to  the  west  of  Llandovery ; 
both  of  which  mines  occur  in  quartzose  bands  subordinate  to  graptolite 
schists.  The  mineral  sources  (Llanwrtyd,  Builth,  &c.)  also  rise  from 
points  of  junction  between  the  intrusive  and  sedimentary  rocks. 

In  some  districts,  where  these  South  Welsh  strata  were  formerly 
described  by  me  as  charged  with  characteristic  Lower  Silurian  fossils, 

*  See  Sil.  Syst.,  p,  316.,  where  these  hard  and  slaty  sandstones  are  described  as 
being  cut  oflf  from  the  Upper  Silurian  by  great  faults.  See  also  original  map  of 
the  Silurian  region  and  sections,  p.  90.,  in  the  next  chapter. 

p  4 


72  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

they  have  the  antique  and  slaty  impress  of  the  oldest  rocks.  Thus,  in 
the  wild  and  barren  tract  of  "  Noeth  Grrug,"  north  of  Llandovery,  the 


NoETH  Grug.    (From  the  Government  Survey.) 


f  e  d  c  b  b 


b.  Lower  Silurian  schists,  flags,  and  slates.  c.  Lower  Silurian  grits  and  sandstone,  classed 
by  the  surveyors  with  the  schists  above  and  below  them.  d.  Schists.  e.  Upper  Silurian 
shale  and  schist,  capped  b}'  tilestone.  /.  Old  red  sandstone.  (Compare  with  Section 
Sil.  Syst.  p.  352.,  and  pi.  34.  f.  3.) 

strata  are  seen  undulating,  as  represented  by  the  curved  lines,  h,  and 
are  also  traversed  by  cleavage  planes  (the  highly  inclined  white  lines). 
Consisting  of  coarse  grits,  sandstones,  and  schists,  these  strata  are 
in  parts  replete  with  Lower  Silurian  fossils,  among  which  are  the 
Leptaena  sericea,  pi.  6.  f.  14.;  Pentamerus  undatus,  pi.  8.  f.  5.*;  P. 
oblongus,  pi.  8.  f.  3. ;  Atrypa  crassa,  pi.  5.  f.  6. ;  Or  this  Actoniae, 
pi.  6.  f.  11.;  O.  flabellulum,  pi.  6.  f.  12.;  and  the  Lituites  cornu-arietis, 
pi.  ll.f.  2. 

Though  most  of  these  species  are  found  in  the  slates  of  Snowdon, 
the  equivalent  strata  in  which  they  are  here  imbedded  are  little 
more  than  two  miles  distant  from  the  frontier  of  the  Old  Red  Sand- 
stone ;  all  the  intervening  Silurian  rocks,  which  elsewhere  occupy 
vast  tracts,  being  compressed  in  this  district  into  the  small  horizontal 
space  exhibited  in  the  woodcut,  as  reduced  from  a  section  of  the 
government  surveyors.  It  is  gratifying  to  me  to  observe  that  this 
diagram  is  quite  in  accordance  with  my  old,  published,  coloured 
section  across  the  same  tract.  (See  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  352.  and  pi.  34.  f.  3.) 

And  here,  in  reference  to  the  question  whether  there  be  or  be 
not  in  this  section,  or  in  other  similar  traverses  in  Carmarthen- 


*  This  fossil  is  termed  Atrypa  undata  in  the  Silurian  System,  nearly  all  the 
so  called  Atrypae  of  which  work  are  now  found  to  belong  to  the  genus  Pentamerus. 


Chap.  IIT.]  SECTIONS  NEAR  LLANDEILO.  73 

shire  and  Pembrokeshire,  any  small  representative  of  the  Caradoc 
sandstone,  as  I  thought,  I  must  specially  call  attention  to  the  fact, 
that  the  correctness  of  my  original  sections  is  confirmed  by  the 
detailed  works  of  the  geologists  employed  to  survey  the  tract.  For, 

Section  Neak  Llangadock.   From  the  Lower  Silurian  to  the  Old  Red  Sandstone. 
(The  Spectator  is  looking  to  the  south-west.) 


S.E. 


TrichrUg. 


Cairngoch- 


Tanyrallt. 


N.W. 


b.  Undulations  of  Llandeilo  schists,  flags,  and  limestone  with  interstratified  trap  *.     c.  Sand- 
stones, &c.      d,  e.  Upper  Silurian.      /.  Old  red  sandstone. 

all  these  lower  strata,  in  parts  coarse  sandstones,  which  overlie  the 
black  and  grey  slaty  schists  and  flags  of  Llandeilo,  are  now  admitted 
by  those  who  followed  me  to  be  conformable  to  the  Upper  Silurian 
strata  or  Wenlock  and  Ludlow  formations,  as  exhibited  in  these 
woodcuts,  taken  from  the  published  section  of  the  surveyors.* 

Section  Near  Llandeilo.   From  the  Lower  Silurian  to  the  edge  of  the  great 
South- Welsh  Coal-iield. 

(In  this  diagram  the  spectator  is  supposed  to  be  placed  a  little  south  of  Llandeilo,  looking 
north-east,  or  up  the  Vale  of  the  Towy.  Hence  the  points  of  the  compass  are  reversed  in 
reference  to  the  foregoing  diagram.) 


N.W. 


S.E. 


h.  Llandeilo  flags  and  limestone.      c.  Sandstone,  &c.      d,  e.  Upper  Silurian  rocks.    /.  Old 
red  sandstone.      g.  Carboniferous  limestone.      h.  Millstone  grit. 


Such  facts  indicate  the  propriety  of  adhering  to  two  groups  only 
for  all  general  purposes  of  comparison.    In  truth,  the  only  Silurian 


*  I  beg  geologists  to  compare  the  several  coloured  sections  of  the  Silurian 
System,  pi.  34.,  which  represent  the  succession  from  the  Llandeilo  flags  to  the  old 
red  sandstone  in  Carmarthenshire,  with  the  horizontal  sections  of  the  surveyors 
from  which  the  above  diagrams  are  faithful  reductions. 


74  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

formation  which  is  fully  developed  in  Carmarthenshire  is  the  lower 
one  of  Llandeilo  with  its  associated  schists  and  slates;  all  that 
overlie  it  being  feebly  displayed.  Thus,  though  the  Upper  Silurian 
rocks  here  may  be  spoken  of  as  a  group,  they  can  scarcely  be 
identified  with  the  copious  formations  of  Wenlock  and  Ludlow, 
as  seen  in  Shropshire  and  Herefordshire.  Even  the  chief  Lower 
Silurian  formation,  or  that  of  Llandeilo  on  which  we  have  been 
dilating,  is  at  this  spot  compressed  into  the  horizontal  space  of  a 
mile,  whilst  in  North  Wales  it  extends,  as  has  been  shown,  through 
undulations  and  expansions,  over  a  whole  region.  We  also  see  how 
in  this  same  tract,  and  in  the  longitudinal  space  of  a  few  miles, 
the  very  strata  which  are  so  calcareous  at  Llandeilo,  have  become 
slaty  sandstones  and  schists  at  Noeth  Griig,  north  of  Llandovery ; 
a  character  indeed  which  they  put  on  before  they  reach  that  town, 
even  at  Mandinam  and  Goleugoed.*  With  this  absence  of  lime  the 
prevalent  trilobites  of  the  Llandeilo  flags  disappear ;  the  whole  of 
the  lower  division  assuming  so  different  a  lithological  aspect,  that 
except  by  rigid  observation  of  other  imbedded  fossils  the  subforma- 
tions  cannot  be  distinguished. 

In  most  parts,  indeed,  of  South  Wales,  the  only  broad  and  clear 
distinctions  are  those  of  lower  and  upper  groups.  I  dwell,  there- 
fore, upon  the  fact,  that  in  their  range  through  this  part  of  South 
Wales,  the  Silurian  rocks,  both  lower  and  upper,  with  the  partial 
exceptions  mentioned,  are  entirely  deprived  of  any  subdividing 
bands  of  limestone.  Hence  it  is,  that  in  Carmarthen,  Brecknock, 
and  Radnor  in  the  interior,  or  at  Marloes  Bay  on  the  coast,  the  lines 

*  This  is  the  only  locality  in  Britain  where  the  rare  species  Lituites  (Nautilus), 
pi.  3.  f.  3.,  has  been  found,  as  well  as  the  unique  Diploceras  (Orthoceras)  bisi- 
phonatum.  (See  chap.  5.)  I  cannot  allude  to  these  forms  without  expressing  my 
deep  obligation  to  my  deceased  kind  friend  Mr.  W.  Williams  of  Llandovery,  and 
his  son,  now  the  Rev.  Stewart  Williams,  for  their  aid  in  collecting  many  of  my 
best  fossils,  as  acknowledged,  Sil.  Syst.  p.  351. 


Chap.  III.]         LOWER  SILURIAN  SLATES  OF  BRECON.  75 

of  demarcation  between  the  formations  can  with  great  difficulty  be 
drawn.  In  truth,  they  are  often  so  slaty  and  crystalline,  that  the 
highly  inclined  cleavage  of  the  slates,  as  represented  in  the  foreground 
of  the  following  sketch,  is  the  only  feature  visible  to  the  unpractised 
eye ;  the  real  strata  undulating  or  dipping  at  a  much  less  angle,  as 
represented  in  the  sloping  bank  on  the  left  of  the  foreground  of  this 
drawing. 

Llanwrtyd  Wells. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  336.) 


Lower  Silurian  slaty  rocks. 
View  in  a  combe  below  the  Baths  of  Llanwrtyd.    (From  a  drawing  by  Mrs.  Traherne.) 

When  viewed,  however,  on  the  grand  scale,  there  is  no  dis- 
trict more  explanatory  of  the  general  succession  than  this  very  tract 
between  Llandovery  and  Builth,  of  which  the  above  vignette  repre- 
sents a  part.  There,  if  the  spectator  stands  on  the  slaty  Lower 
Silurian  rocks  of  the  mountain  of  Esgair  Davydd,  above  the  baths 
of  Llanwrtyd,  he  overlooks  a  wide  area  to  the  south-east,  and  has 
beneath  his  feet,  and  for  a  certain  distance  before  him,  a  mass  of 
the  lower  slaty  rocks  now  under  consideration;  whilst  in  the  dull 
round  hills  of  the  middle  ground,  are  spread  out  the  Upper  Silurian  of 
the  Mynidd  Epynt  and  Mynidd  Bwlch-y-Groes.  In  the  background. 


76  SILURIA.  [Chap.  III. 

the  Old  Eed  Sandstone  is  seen  rising  to  the  Black  Mountain  of 
Hereford,  and  thence  into  the  Fans  of  Brecon  and  Carmarthen,  the 
highest  mountains  in  South  Wales. 

The  sketch  of  this  grand  geological  scene  being  a  proper  introduc- 
tion to  the  description  of  the  Old  Eed  or  Devonian  rocks,  is  therefore 
given  in  the  tenth  chapter,  which  treats  of  them ;  for  in  no  one 
district  of  Wales  and  England  are  the  Silurian  and  Devonian  rocks 
so  well  brought  together  in  a  bird's-eye  view :  nor  is  the  super- 
position of  their  groups  anywhere,  as  far  as  I  know,  more  apparent 
in  the  interior  of  the  country  and  on  so  grand  a  scale.  (See  also 
large  coloured  view,  Sil.  Syst.  p.  346.) 

In  the  mean  time,  this  long  chapter  may  be  concluded  by  reminding 
the  reader,  that  the  low  western  headlands  of  Pembrokeshire  are  of 
the  same  age  as  the  loftier  and  grander  mountains  of  North  Wales ; 
both  of  them  having  been  identified  with  the  rocks  of  the  original 
Lower  Silurian  districts  of  Shropshire,  Herefordshire,  Montgomery- 
shire, Radnorshire,  Brecknockshire,  and  Carmarthenshire.  In  many 
tracts,  the  copious  evolutions  of  volcanic  ashes  and  dejections  have 
swollen  out  the  earliest  formed  Silurian  strata,  and  the  finer  muddy 
sediments  of  a  primeval  sea  have  since  been  changed  into  a  crys- 
talline and  slaty  condition.  But  no  sooner  do  we  pass  from  such 
hard  and  rugged  centres  (including  the  sandstones  and  conglo- 
merates of  the  South  Welsh  slates),  than  we  find  that  many  of  the 
intervening  and  central  tracts  in  South  Montgomery,  Radnor,  Car- 
digan, &c.,  consist  of  an  undulating  series  of  schists  and  shale,  in 
which  bands  of  sandstone  are  rare,  and  wherein  limestones  have  alto- 
gether disappeared ;  a  country,  in  fact,  almost  entirely  deficient  in 
anything  like  a  stony  framework. 

No  more  striking  example  of  this  change  from  hard  and  bold 
rocks,  to  those  of  much  less  coherent  nature  and  tamer  outline,  can  be 
given,  than  by  traversing  from  the  low  fossil  rocks  of  Cader  Idris 
and  its  magnificent  bosses  and  depressions,  to  the  soft  hills  and 
schistose  tracts  on  the  banks  of  the  Dyfi,  as  in  this  diagram. 


Chap.  III.]        LOWER  SILURIAN  AND  IGNEOUS  ROCKS.  77 
Cader  Idris. 


N.W.  S.B. 


a  *  *         J      *  Q 

a.  Summit  of  the  Lingula  schists  with  porphyry,  *.  Grand  masses  of  porphyry  and  other 
trap  rocks,  with  courses  of  hard  slaty  Lower  Silurian  schists.  c.  Lower  Silurian,  as- 
suming its  ordinary  characters  of  shale  when  removed  from  the  igneous  rocks. 


In  so  doing,  the  field  observer  will  see  that  the  strata  which, 
on  the  flanks  of  the  mountain,  are  crystalline  and  slaty,  are  succeeded 
by  other  masses,  which  in  proportion  as  they  recede  from  the  igneous 
rocks  partake  more  and  more  of  the  character  of  "  mudstone"  —  a 
character  which  prevails,  as  before  said,  in  this  region,  from  the  base 
of  the  system  with  Silurian  fossils,  to  the  very  youngest  of  its  rocks. 

To  form  some  idea  of  the  great  development  of  volcanic  or  igneous 
materials  in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  North  Wales,  the  reader 
will  understand,  that  the  porphyries  and  trap  rocks  represented  in  the 
above  diagram,  belong  exclusively  to  a  set  of  phenomena  which 
commenced  about  the  close  of  the  deposition  of  the  Lingula  schists. 
Thick  as  these  lower  igneous  accumulations  are,  they  were  followed 
by  others  of  scarcely  less  dimensions,  which  swell  out  the  overlying 
series  of  the  Snowdon  slates*,  as  explained  in  the  little  coloured 
section  beneath  the  map. 

The  next  chapter  will  be  dedicated  to  the  consideration  of  a  forma- 
tion, in  which,  through  some  typical  British  tracts,  sandstone  so 
abounds,  as  to  have  induced  me  to  term  it  the  Caradoc  sandstone — 
a  rock  which  forms,  in  many  places,  the  upper  member  of  the  natural 
group  which  has  been  under  consideration. 

*  The  large  horizontal  section  across  Snowdon  by  the  government  surveyors 
has  just  appeared,  and  shows  in  detail  how  the  Lingula  flags  and  certain  igneous 
rocks  rise  up  to  the  N.W.  and  S.E.  from  beneath  the  elevated  trough  of  Snowdon. 
Professor  Ramsay,  who,  with  his  associate,  Mr.  Selwyn,  accomplished  this  arduous 
task,  has  just  explained  the  results  to  the  Geological  Society.  April  10.  1853. 


78 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  IV. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
LOWER  SILURIAN  ROCKS  —  continued, 

THE  CARADOC  FORMATION. 

CAEADOC  SANDSTONE  AS  DEVELOPED  IN  NOKTH  WAJ.ES  AND  RADNOESHIRE.       TYPES  OF 

THE  FORMATION  IN  SHROPSHIRE,  HEREFORDSHIRE,  ETC. 
THE  CARADOC  STRICTLY  UNITED  WITH  THE  LOWER  DEPOSITS    BY  ITS  STRUCTURE  AND 

FOSSIL  CONTENTS. 

The  superior  member  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  or  middle  Silurian 
of  the  government  surveyors,  is  of  varied  composition  in  the  differ- 
ent tracts  in  which  it  occurs.  In  the  interior  of  North  Wales 
(Merioneth  and  Montgomery,  and  thence  extending  into  West 
Radnor,  &c.)  certain  sandy  masses,  overlying  the  rocks  described 
in  the  last  chapter,  have  been  identified  with  the  Caradoc  sandstone 
of  the  original  Silurian  region,  and  laid  down  as  such  in  the  co- 
loured sheets  of  the  Government  Survey.  In  these  tracts,  like  the 
older  sandstones  and  conglomerates  of  the  Llandeilo  division,  the  Ca- 
radoc is  usually  a  hard,  intractable,  silicious  rock,  with  many  courses 
of  shale  or  schist,  but  with  few  or  no  traces  of  calcareous  matter,  and 
seldom  containing  well  preserved  fossils.  In  fact,  it  frequently 
bears  a  close  resemblance  to  the  very  oldest  greywacke  grits  and 
sandstones  in  the  sedimentary  series,  or  the  bottom  rocks  of  the 
Longmynd,  Harlech,  Llanberis,  and  St.  David's ;  a  lithological  fact 
which  shows  how  all  these  rocks,  from  their  base  to  the  Caradoc 
inclusive,  are  included  in  one  natural  group. 

In  portions  of  Wales  and  Shropshire  this  formation,  as  before 
stated,  is  either  transgressive,  or  unconformable  to  the  inferior  schists 


Chap.  IV.]       CARADOC  SANDSTONE  OF  NORTH  WALES.  79 

and  slates.*  In  many  other  parts,  on  the  contrary,  as  in  the  wild 
tracts  east  of  Bala,  it  reposes  conformably  for  many  miles  in  lofty 
escarpments  on  the  upper  Llandeilo  rocks,  composed  of  slaty  schists 
with  feeble  courses  of  limestone.f  A  reference  to  the  general 
section  across  North  Wales,  prepared  for  this  work  by  Professor 
Kamsay  (see  bottom  of  map)  completely  establishes  this  position.  In 
following  that  line  of  section  to  the  S.E.  from  the  environs  of  Bala, 
we  see  how  the  Llandeilo  formation,  rolling  over  in  domes  or  anticlinal 
masses,  supports  basins  of  Caradoc  sandstone  and  its  overlying  for- 
mation of  Wenlock  shale.  In  this  way  even  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks 
are  brought  by  conformable  folds  into  the  proximity  of  the  Llandeilo 
formation,  as  in  South  Wales.  In  the  environs  of  Bala  itself,  indeed, 
the  Caradoc  formation  of  sandstone  and  shale  occupies  a  trough 
flanked  and  underlaid  conformably  on  the  south-east,  as  well  as  on 
the  north-west,  by  the  upper  division  of  the  Llandeilo  formation, 
as  in  this  section,  which  has  been  reduced  from  one  of  the  plates 
of  the  Government  Survey  prepared  by  Mr.  Jukes. 

Llandeilo  Schists  supporting  Caradoc  Sandstone. 

,„     Cwm  Cwyn.  Sir  Watkin's  Mynydd  Mynyllod.  Vale  of         C  p 

N.W  Monument.  Edeimion.        *  ' 

h  c  c  c  b 


b,  Llandeilo  formation,  with  its  thin  courses  of  Bala  limestone  on  the  N.W.  e.  Caradoc 
sandstone,  seen  at  Sir  Watkin's  Monument  to  be  lying  in  perfect  conformity  on  the  Upper 
Llandeilo  schist,  which,  rising  out  from  beneath  the  sandstone  in  the  Vale  of  Edeirnion,  thence 
ascends  to  the  S.  E.  to  form  the  north-western  flanks  of  the  Berwyn  Kange.  The  powerful 
faults  which  atfect  the  tract  are  represented  by  the  dark  traversing  lines. 

Now,  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  surveyors,  that  in  pursuing  this  section 
to  the  S.  E.  of  the  Berwyns,  and  in  traversing  the  vales  watered  by  the 

*  See  the  memoir  of  Professor  Ramsay  and  Mr.  Aveline,  in  which  this  feature 
is  pointed  at  (Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  iv.  p.  294.)  The  map  annexed 
to  this  work  shows  the  fact,  in  the  wrapping  round  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone  upon 
the  edges  of  the  Llandeilo  flags  of  the  Shelve  and  Corndon  districts,  Shropshire. 

t  I  examined  this  tract  in  1851,  in  company  with  Professor  Nicol. 


80  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IV. 

Tannat  and  Fyrnwy  rivers,  the  same  series  of  Llandeilo  or  Bala  beds 
as  is  represented  in  the  h  of  the  above  section  is  repeated  in  obscure 
undulations  until  the  Breidden  Hills  are  reached  (see  p.  60.),  where 
the  Caradoc  sandstone  seems  to  be  omitted,  and  the  lower  series  is  at 
once  surmounted  by  the  Wenlock  shale.  In  that  locality  of  powerful 
eruption  the  suppression  of  the  Caradoc  may,  indeed,  be  due  to  dis- 
memberments, of  which  hereafter.  But  there  are  tracts  where  the 
sandstones  of  the  lower  group,  which  are  so  expanded  in  parts  of 
Wales  (see  p.  70.),  naturally  thin  out  and  disappear ;  and  hence  I 
adhere  ta  my  original  opinion,  that  the  presence  or  absence  of  such 
sandy  rocks  is  a  local  feature  in  a  group  for  which,  in  many  cases, 
there  is  no  safe  term  except  *^  Lower  Silurian." 

The  Caradoc  formation  is  also  seen,  in  the  western  and  mountainous 
parts  of  Radnorshire,  to  fold  over  in  undulations  similar  to  those  near 
Bala,  resting  conformably  on  the  Llandeilo  schists,  and  overlaid  in 
equal  conformity  by  the  Wenlock  shale.  The  next  diagram  repre- 
sents a  portion  of  the  flexures  which  these  rocks  exhibit,  as  taken 
from  a  part  of  the  large  and  detailed  horizontal  sections  of  the 
Geological  Survey,  relating  to  the  country  along  the  boundary 
between  the  counties  of  Radnor  and  Montgomery,  in  a  section 
drawn  from  Cader  Idris  across  the  Severn  and  its  tributaries  to  the 
river  Ithon,  and  the  sandstone  ridges  to  the  west  of  Radnor  Forest. 
On  this  line  the  same  conformability  is  seen  in  numerous  localities, 
of  which  this  is  one  example. 


Pegwn's  Fawr,  Borders  of  Radnor  and  Montgomery. 
N.W.  c  S.E. 


Junction  Beds  of  the  Llandeilo  and  Caradoc  Formations.    (From  a  Section  by  Mr.  Aveline.) 

b,  Llandeilo  formation  of  grey,  blue,  and  purple  slates  and  shale.      c.  Caradoc  sandstone, 
composed  of  hard  grey  grits,  with  grey  and  blue  schists,  &c. 


Chap.  IV.]  CAER  CARADOC  —  SHROPSHIRE.  81 

These  facts,  as  well  as  those  which  are  generalized  in  the  section 
below  the  map,  being  the  record  made  by  independent  and  competent 
observers  since  the  time  of  my  personal  researches,  demonstrate  that 
the  break  or  dislocation  between  the  Caradoc  and  Llandeilo  forma- 
tions (which  together  constitute  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  the 
original  classification)  is  purely  a  local  phenomenon.  And  even  in 
the  tracts  where  these  two  formations  have  been  physically  disunited, 
we  shall  soon  see  that  they  are  mutually  so  characterized  by  the  same 
organic  remains  that  they  cannot  be  separated  in  any  geological 
arrangement. 

In  the  typical  Silurian  tract  of  Shropshire,  around  the  eruptive  trap- 
pean  rocks  of  Caer  Caradoc,  from  whence  the  formation  was  named,  it 
is  indeed  cut  off  from  those  inferior  deposits,  with  which  it  is  else- 
where so  intimately  associated,  by  a  great  mass  of  igneous  rocks,  and 
by  a  very  powerful  displacement  or  fault,  which  brings  it  against  the 
Longmynd  or  bottom  rocks.  The  annexed  view  of  the  bold  ridge 
of  the  Caradoc  hills  is  taken  from  the  slope  at  the  escarpment  of  the 
Longmynd,  a  little  to  the  south  of  Church  Stretton. 


The  Lawley.      Caer  Caradoc.  Hope  Bowdler.  Broccard's  Castle.  Ragleath. 


The  Cakadoc  Range. 

(Sketched  by  Mrs.  S.  Acton,  from  the  eastern  slopes  of  the  Longmynd,  overlooking  the  vale  of 
Stretton,  along  which  ran  the  old  Roman  road.) 

G 


82  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IV. 

The  Caradoc  formation  is  unconformable,  at  least  in  its  uppermost 
or  calcareous  member,  to  the  Llandeilo  flags  and  schists  of  the 
Corndon  and  Shelve  district,  around  the  ends  of  which  it  wraps  in 
the  manner  laid  down  by  the  government  surveyors.  (See  Map.) 
On  the  other  hand,  however,  or  towards  the  east,  the  formation  ex- 
pands and  gradually  passes  up  into  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks  of 
Wenlock  and  Ludlow. 

In  the  lithographic  view,  p.  26.,  taken  from  the  eastern  slopes 
of  the  Longmynd,  the  spectator  overlooks  this  range  of  eruptive  hills 
of  Caer  Caradoc,  &c.,  which,  flanked  on  the  east  by  sandstones,  are 
followed  by  distant  ridges  of  overlying  Upper  Silurian  rocks  and  old 
red  sandstone,  as  in  this  section.    Here  it  is  of  much  more  complex 

Relations  of  Caradoc  Sandstone  to  the  Upper  Silurian  Rocks  in  Shropshire. 


N.w.  sj;. 

Caer  Caradoc.  Wenlock  Edge. 


*  Eruptive  rocks,    c*.  Caradoc  sandstone  altered  by  eruptive  rocks,    c.  Caradoc  sandstone,  &c. 
d.  Wenlock  rocks.       e.  Ludlow  rocks.      /.  Old  red  sandstone. 


mineral  structure  than  in  North  Wales  and  the  mountains  of  Ead- 
norshire.  For  the  Caradoc  of  Shropshire  contains  good  freestone, 
flagstone,  grit,  and  conglomerate,  with  courses  of  limestone  and  shelly 
sandstone,  and  with  this  composite  stony  character  the  formation  is 
much  more  highly  fossiliferous  than  in  any  district  of  Wales  with 
which  I  am  acquainted. 

The  observer  who  has  little  time  to  spare  may  study  the  leading 
features  of  the  deposit,  in  ascending  order,  by  following  the  banks  of  the 
river  Onny  from  the  south-east  flank  of  the  Longmynd  to  Cheney 
Longville  and  the  Craven  Arms ;  but  he  who  would  endeavour  to 
recognize  all  its  variable,  lithological  features,  must  examine  the 
masses  as  they  spread  out  on  their  strike  to  the  north-east,  and  expand 
in  their  course  from  the  environs  of  Acton  Scott,  by  Soudley,  Church 


Chap.  IV.]         CARADOC  SANDSTONES  OP  SHROPSHIRE.  83 

Preen,  ChatwalL  and  Acton  Burnell,  to  the  tract  on  the  Severn, 
between  the  Wrekin  and  Coalbrook  Dale.  In  so  doing,  he  will 
see  how  the  upper  portion,  chiefly  calcareous,  dips  everywhere  con- 
formably under  the  Wenlock  shale,  or  base  of  the  Upper  Silurian. 
Along  this  line  he  will  also  see  how  the  lower  beds  have  in  many 
places  been  fused  and  changed  into  quartz  rock,  and  their  schistose 
parts  converted  into  dark  brittle  clay-stones,  wherever  they  are  in 
contact  with  the  igneous  rocks  of  Caer  Caradoc,  the  Lawley,  &c.* 

As  seen  in  the  gorge  of  the  river  Onny,  or  in  the  various  quarries 
of  Soudley,  Frodesley,  Kenley,  &c.,  the  unaltered  Caradoc  sandstones 
are  of  considerable  thickness.  The  lowest  masses  of  the  formation 
which  are  visible,  consist  of  grits  and  fine-grained  sandstones  of  brown- 
ish, yellowish,  red,  purple,  and  even  white  colours,  sometimes  striped 
dull  red  and  yellowish  brown,  sometimes  green,  and  in  other  instances 
they  are  variegated  with  spots  and  concretions.  They  thus  resemble 
portions  of  the  old  red  sandstone,  carboniferous  rocks,  and  even  the 
newer  red  sandstones.  Some  of  the  beds  are  as  easily  worked  into 
building  stones,  troughs,  and  tombstones  as  the  freestones  of  those 
younger  formations ;  and,  when  remote  from  eruptive  rocks,  are, 
therefore,  very  dissimilar  to  the  strata  of  precisely  the  same  age  which 
have  been  just  mentioned  as  composing  the  hard  rocks  of  Wales. 

The  typical  Caradoc  sandstones  of  Shropshire  are,  indeed,  remark- 
able in  being  the  oldest  strata  of  the  British  Isles  which  present  such  a 
comparatively  modern  aspect;  it  having  been  formerly  the  sterile  privi- 
lege of  the  old  "  grey  wacke  "  of  this  age  to  be  considered  useless  except 
for  the  construction  of  rude  buildings  and  stone  walls.  Such  truly 
is  the  character  of  the  same  sandstones  in  North  Wales,  which  have 
been  adverted  to  in  the  opening  pages  of  this  chapter.  And  yet, 
notwithstanding  this  modern  aspect,  these  rocks,  as  will  presently 

*  For  a  detailed  account  of  the  mineral  structure  of  this  eruptive  range,  and  of 
the  Wrekin,  in  which  felspathic  rocks  abound,  but  in  parts  of  which  syenite  and 
greenstone  also  occur,  see  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  225. 

G  2 


84  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IV. 

be  shown,  are  charged  with  some  of  the  oldest  fossil  types  of  the 
formation  which  lies  far  beneath  them. 

The  remains  of  fossils  occur  at  intervals  throughout  the  deposit  in 
Shropshire,  and  often  so  abound  as  to  render  some  of  the  courses 
shelly  limestones,  which  have  occasionally  been  burnt  for  use ;  such 
local  shelly  developments  being  known  to  the  workmen  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood as  "  Jacob's  Stones."  Where  the  calcareous  matter  is  more 
diffused  in  small  particles  through  the  mass,  the  rock  becomes  a  hard 
calciferous  grit,  usually  of  a  whitish  drab  colour,  and  breaking  under 
the  hammer  with  a  conchoidal  fracture,  and  a  "  chatoyant"  lustre. 

On  the  banks  of  the  Onny,  between  Horderly  and  Wistanstow, 
the  calcareous  matter  so  augments  as  to  form  a  band  of  limestone, 
which  is,  however,  chiefly  a  pebbly  quartzose  conglomerate  in  a  cement 
of  lime.  Another  course  of  limestone  is  found  at  the  eastern  flank 
or  upper  end  of  the  formation.  In  their  north-eastern  prolongation 
to  Church  Preen  and  Chatwall,  the  pebbly  and  conglomerate  beds 
are  not  calcareous. 

The  recent  cuttings  of  the  Ludlow  and  Shrewsbury  railroad  have 
laid  open  several  hillocks  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone,  between  Church 
Stretton  and  the  Marsh-Brook  station,  the  rocks  of  which  consist  of 
thick  and  thin  bedded,  dull,  purple  and  red  earthy  sandstones,  in 
parts  finely  micaceous,  with  usual  partings  of  green  earth,  some 
courses  of  the  shelly  beds  or  Jacob's  Stones,"  and  brown  calciferous 
grits.  In  the  cutting  nearest  to  Church  Stretton,  the  rock  is  very 
earthy  and  incoherent,  and  in  it  I  found  Diplograpsus  pristis, 
Foss.  7.  f.  14.,  a  common  Lower  Silurian  species  which  occurs  in  the 
Llandeilo  schists  of  South  Wales  and  the  Snow  don  group  of  North 
Wales.  This  variety  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone  is  very  concretionary, 
exfoliates  on  weathering  into  balls,  and  is  full  of  irregular  joints, 
whose  surfaces  are  coated  with  a  film  of  the  dark  indigo- coloured 
oxide  of  iron  which  is  so  common  in  the  Ludlow  rocks.  Mineralogi- 
cally,  indeed,  the  formation  has  already  begun  to  assume  the  structure 


Chap.  IV.]  CARADOC  FORMATION,  SHROPSHIRE.  85 

of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  to  the  base  of  which  its  upper  band  is 
everywhere  conformable  in  this  tract. 

Besides  the  prevalent  building-stones  of  Soudley  and  other  places, 
where  thick-bedded  sandstones  are  separated  by  courses  of  shale, 
often  of  a  dull  greenish  colour,  surmounted  by  flags,  there-  is  an 
inferior  mass  of  shale  often  laden  with  fossils.  Another  variety  of 
the  Caradoc  sandstone,  which  assimilates  the  formation  to  the  in- 
ferior one  of  Llandeilo,  consists  of  stratified  bands,  along  the  outer 
flanks  of  the  Caradoc  and  Wrekin  hills,  which  resemble  the  volcanic 
grits  described  in  the  last  chapter.  These  sandstones  are  allied  to 
greenstones  of  igneous  origin,  in  being  made  up  of  green  earth  and 
felspar,  with  only  a  few  fine  scales  of  mica.  Like  certain  strata  of 
the  inferior  formation,  they  seem  to  indicate  either  a  contemporaneous 
volcanic  disturbance  in  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  or,  that  they  have  been 
derived  from  pre-existing  igneous  rocks.  My  belief,  however,  is, 
that  some  of  these  beds  were  really  the  result  of  submarine  volcanic 
dejections,  thrown  down  in  the  sea-bottom  whilst  the  Caradoc  sand- 
stones were  accumulating,  and  were  the  precursors  of  those  sub- 
sequent copious  outbursts  of  the  felspar  and  other  trap  rocks  of  the 
Caradoc  and  Wrekin. 

The  superior  masses  of  the  Caradoc  formation  in  Shropshire, 
which  are  well  displayed  at  Cheney  Longville,  and  on  the  banks  of 
the  Onny  where  that  river  flow^s  across  the  strata,  are  chiefly  made 
up  of  fine-grained,  sandy,  thin  flagstones,  of  gosling  green  and  dingy 
olive  colours,  amidst  which  some  beds  of  shale  occur,  with  courses 
of  grey-coloured  shelly  limestone.*  Others  of  these  calciferous  sands 
and  earthy  greenish  flagstones  begin  to  assume  a  lithological  aspect, 
frequent  in  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  and  particularly  in  the  Ludlow 
formation,  to  which  other  varieties  of  the  rock  above  alluded  to  (to 
the  south  of  Church  Stretton)  have  also  an  affinity  ;  they  are  earthy ; 
with  great  spheroidal  concretions,  and  with  a  general  tendency  to 

*  The  Asaphus  Powisii  was  first  found  here.    Pi.  2.  f.  2. 
*G  3 


86  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IV. 

exfoliate  and  decompose  to  mud.  Thus,  in  composition,  some  of  the 
varieties  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone  connect  it  with  the  volcanic  grit 
or  ash  of  the  Llandeilo  formation,  and  others  with  the  ordinary 
aqueous  deposits  of  Upper  Silurian  age. 

The  highest  calcareous  band  of  the  Caradoc  formation  is  visible  on 
the  Onny,  and  is  traceable,  to  the  N.  E.,  by  Acton  Scott  and  the 
Hollies  to  Cressage  and  Buildwas.*  In  this  range  the  portion  of  the 
rock  which  is  calcareous,  with  beds  of  sandy  shale  and  pipe-clay, 
dipping  under  the  Wenlock  shale,  passes  conformably  upwards  into 
that  lowest  member  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  as  formerly  so 
defined.    (Sil.  Syst.,  p.  217.) 

The  fossils  which  most  frequently  occur  in  the  heart  of  the 
Caradoc  formation  are  as  follow  : 


Caradoc  Fossils,  7. 


1.  Calymene  Blumenbacliii.    2.  Homalonotus  bisulcatus,  Salter,   3.  Phacops  truncato-caudatus, 
Portl.  4.  Tentaculites  annulatus.    5.  Lingula  crumena,  Phill.    6.  Orthis  testudinaria,  Dalm, 


*  In  a  minute  re-examination  of  this  district,  made  by  the  Government  Sm-veyors  Avhilst 
these  pages  are  passing  through  the  press,  I  learn  that  they  have  detected,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Onny,  a  small  amount  of  unconformity  between  the  uppermost  of  the  limestones  containing  the 
Pentamerus  oblongus  and  the  fossils  figured  on  the  opposite  page,  and  the  subjacent  beds  of 
flagstone  shale  and  impure  limestone  in  which  occur  the  fossils  given  on  this  page.  That  this 
transgression  is  local  is  manifest  from  the  fact,  that  in  other  tracts  the  Caradoc  Sandstone  and 
Wenlock  Shale  are  represented  by  the  surveyors  to  undulate  in  perfect  parallelism.  Believing 
that  the  limestone  with  Pentamerus  oblongus  is  truly  the  bed  of  transition  from  the  lower  to 
the  upper  group,  it  is  still  my  conviction  that  it  must,  from  its  fossils,  be  classed  with  the 
former.  For,  although  the  Orthis  alternata,  Foss.  8.  f.  6,  (Avhich  is  a  fossil  of  the  beds  sub- 
jacent), has  been  introduced,  by  mistake,  into  that  woodcut,  I  must  always  consider  that  a  band 
into  which  Trinucleus  concentricus  and  Pentamerus  oblongus  range  upwards  from  the  Llan- 
deilo formation  is  truly  Lower  Silurian.  I  willingly  admit  that  several  of  the  other  species  of 
fossils  in  this  bed.  are  common  to  the  Wenlock  and  lower  deposits ;  a  fact  which  strengthens 
my  view  of  the  unity  of  the  Silurian  system  of  life.— R.  I.  M.,  28th  May,  1853. 


Chap.  IV.] 


TYPICAL  CArVADOC  FOSSILS. 


87 


7.  O.  vespertilio.  8.  Strophomena  tenuistriata.  9.  S.  grandis.  10.  Bellerophon  bilobatus. 
11.  B.  ornatus,  Conrad.  12.  Orthonota  nasuta,  Conrad.  13.  Nebulipora  lens,  M'Coy. 
14.  Diplograpsus  pristis,  His.  15.  Graptolites  priodon. 
In  addition  to  the  above,  the  following  characteristic  fossils  are  figured  in  plates  4  to  10.,  or  in 
the  woodcuts  of  the  next  chapter :  ~  Orthis  elegantula.  0.  flabellulum.  O.^Actoniae.  O. 
calligramma  (virgata,  Sil.  Syst.).  Strophomena  expansa.  S.  spiriferoides,  M'Coy.  Lep- 
taena  sericea,  Modiolopsis  orbicularis  (Avicula,  Sil.  Syst.).  M.  modiolaris,  Conrad.  M. 
obliqua.  Bellerophon  acutus.  Phacops  conophthalmus,  Eichw.  (Asaphus  Powisii,  head  of, 
Sil.  Syst.). 

The  species  with  no  author's  name  attached  are  published  in  the  "  Silurian  System." 

After  this  mention  of  the  chief  fossils  of  this  formation,  the  atten- 
tion of  the  reader  is  again  called  to  the  fact  that,  notwithstanding  the 
differences  between  the  lithological  character  of  these  strata  of  Cara- 
doc  sandstone  and  those  of  the  Llandeilo  formation,  all  the  above- 
mentioned  species  of  fossils  prevail  in  both  deposits ;  thus  absolutely 
uniting  them  in  one  natural  group. 

Even  in  the  very  uppermost  stratum  of  the  Caradoc  formation, 
which  here  graduates  into  the  Wenlock  shale  and  true  Upper  Silurian 
Rocks,  there  are  several  species,  such  as  the  Petraia  elongata,  Foss.  8. 
f.  11.;  Leptaena  sericea,  pi.  6.  f.  13.;  Orthis  calligramma,  Foss.  14. 
f.  3.;  Trinucleus  concentricus  (T.  Caractaci,  Sil.  Syst.),  pi.  4.  f.  2 
— 5. ;  Pentamerus  undatus,  pi.  8.  f.  5. ;  Tentaculites  annulatus,  Foss.  7. 
f.  4.,  &c.,  which  are  known  to  occur  on  the  flanks  of  Snowdon,  or  in 
beds  of  the  Llandeilo  age  in  North  and  South  Wales. 


Upper  Caradoc  Fossils,  8. 


1.  Pentamerus  lens.  2.  P.  oblongus.  3.  P.  liratus,  Sow.  4.  Atrypa  hemisphaerica.  5.  A. 
reticularis.  6.  Orthis  alternata.  7.  Strophomena  compressa.  8.  Holopella  cancellata. 
9.  Bellerophon  trilobatus.    10.  Encrinurus  punctatus.    11.  Petraia  elongata,  Pliill. 

G  4 


88  S1L¥RIA.  TChap.  IV. 

The  above  woodcut,  Foss.  8.,  exhibits  the  chief  characteristic 
fossils  of  this  upper  band,  some  of  them,  as  above  stated,  being  com- 
mon in  the  inferior  strata ;  whilst  others,  such  as  the  Atrypa  hemi- 
sphaerica,  f.  4. ;  A.  reticularis,  f.  5. ;  Pentamerus  liratus,  f.  3. ;  P. 
lens,  f.  1. ;  and  Holopella  cancellata,  f.  8.,  are  more  characteristic  of 
this  horizon.  On  the  other  hand,  Encrinurus  punctatus,  f.  10., 
and  Bellerophon  trilobatus,  f.  9.,  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the 
Upper  Silurian  group,  of  which  hereafter. 

It  is  therefore  manifest  that,  to  whatever  extent  dislocations  may- 
have  acted  in  producing  to  the  west  of  the  Longmynd  in  Shropshire, 
or  in  some  parts  of  Wales,  a  break  between  the  Llandeilo  and  the 
Caradoc  formations,  as  before  explained,  or  may  have  excluded  the 
mass  of  the  Caradoc,  as  is  seen  along  the  south  end  of  the  Longmynd, 
the  operations  were  purely  local,  and  had  no  influence  whatever  in 
destroying  the  races  of  animals  that  inhabited  the  seas  of  that  long 
period.  Those  marine  creatures  lived  on ;  some  of  them  (judging 
from  their  remains)  becoming  more  abundant  when  the  upper  Cara- 
doc beds  were  accumulated,  than  when  the  much  older  mud  and  sand 
which  afterwards  formed  the  slates  of  Snowdon  were  deposited. 
With  such  clear  and  strong  zoological  proofs,  and  the  evidences  of 
conformable  transition  and  succession  in  some  portions  of  this  region, 
which  have  been  already  given,  the  government  surveyors,  who  ob- 
served the  transgressions  alluded  to,  have  decided  that  my  general 
classification  was  correct. 

In  defining  the  course  of  the  Lower  Silurian  Rocks  along  their 
eastern  or  superior  frontier,  from  Shropshire  through  those  counties 
of  South  Wales  which  were  included  in  the  region  of  my  former  ex- 
amination, or  from  the  eastern  parts  of  Radnor,  Brecon,  Carmar- 
then, to  the  south  of  Pembroke,  I  announced  that  the  Caradoc 
formation  there  became  unusually  thin,  and  was  with  diflficulty 
separable  from  the  Llandeilo  flags. 


\ 

Chap.  IV.]  UPPER  CARADOC,  EAST  RADNOR.  89 

Strictly,  however,  considered  us  the  Caradoc  of  Shropshire,  the 
formation  is  seen  to  protrude  along  a  line  of  fault  as  an  isolated  patch* 
among  the  Wenlock  shale  of  Brampton  Bryan  Park,  and  is  again 
visible  further  to  the  S.  W.  at  two  points  in  Radnorshire,  the  one  in 
a  dome  to  the  south  of  the  town  of  Presteign,  the  other  on  the 
western  slopes  of  the  hill  of  Old  Radnor.  (See  Map.)  In  these 
examples  it  is  a  quartzose,  pebbly  conglomerate,  passing  into  a  hard 
greywacke  grit  (Gorton),  in  which  casts  of  the  Pentamerus  oblongus 
and  other  characteristic  fossils  occur,  such  as  Atrypa  hemisphserica, 
and  very  abundantly  Petraia  elongata  and  P.  bina.  Along  this  line 
it  is  also  obviously  the  uppermost  bed  of  the  formation  as  brought 
up  in  domes  and  arches  by  a  line  of  igneous  eruption,  which  in 
evolving  the  adjacent  crystalline  hypersthene  and  felspathic  rocks  of 
Stanner,  Hanter,  and  Ousel,  has  so  altered  the  contiguous  sand- 
stones, schists,  and  grits  (just  as  around  the  Wrekin,  and  the  Caer 
Caradoc)  that  in  Old  Radnor  Hill  and  Yat  Hill  it  is  difficult  to 
determine  which  parts  of  it  are  metamorphosed  rocks  resulting  from 
the  effect  of  volcanic  eruption,  and  which  have  really  been  in  a 
molten  state.  The  diagrams  illustrating  this  phenomenon,  including 
the  metamorphosis  of  the  limestone  of  Nash  Scar,  will  be  given  in 
the  next  chapter,  which  treats  of  the  Wenlock  formation. 

In  that  district  of  Radnorshire,  the  uppermost  Caradoc  is  a  silicious 
grit  and  conglomerate,  and  is  at  once  conformably  surmounted  by 
shale  and  limestone,  which,  from  their  fossils,  are  grouped  with  the 
Wenlock  formation  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  as  will  be  hereafter 
explained  (pp.  102.  et  seq.). 

At  Corton,  near  Presteign,  where  the  order  is  clear,  the  old  exca- 
vations or  quarries  exhibit  the  strata  thus ;  —  the  lower  beds  of  the 
Wenlock  formation  dipping  away  from  the  side  of  a  dome  of  coarse 
and  pebbly  Caradoc  sandstone,  laden  with  casts  of  the  Pentamerus 
oblongus. 

*  Discovered  by  iny  friend  the  Rev.  T.  T.  Lewis. 


90 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  IV. 


S.  c.   Caradoc    sandstone.  d. 

Lower  Wenlock  shale  with  lime- 
stone (Woolhope),  see  Chap.  G. 
(7.)  Gravel  of  the  Valley  of  Pres- 
g?^.fi  teign. 

But  whilst  we  have  in  this  north-eastern  part  of  Radnor,  as  in 
Shropshire,  so  clear  and  conformable  a  succession  from  the  Caradoc  to 
the  Wenlock  formation,  we  behold  a  very  different  state  of  things  by 
merely  following  the  strata  to  the  south-west  into  another  part  of 
the  same  county.  There,  between  Llaudegley  and  Builth,  the 
Llandeilo  formation  is  brought  at  once  into  unconformable  contact 
with  the  Upper  Silurian  Rocks  ;  the  Caradoc  formation  being  entirely 
omitted.  Nothing  short  of  a  most  powerful  dismemberment  will 
account  for  such  contrasting  positions  of  the  strata,  as  are  here  ex- 
hibited in  diagrams  taken  from  the  large  horizontal  sections  of  the 
survey.  In  fact,  the  Llandeilo  Rocks  must  have  been  upheaved  and 
removed  from  the  influence  of  those  waters  under  which  the  Caradoc 
sand  was  accumulated,  to  be  afterwards  submerged  and  covered  by 
Upper  Silurian  strata. 

Both  of  the  following  transverse  parallel  sections  pass  across  a  tract 
in  which  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  (Llandeilo),  with  their  Asaphi, 
Trinuclei,  and  interposed  trap,  and  also  the  Upper  Silurian  Rocks, 
were  formerly  described;  but  I  did  not  then  represent  what  the 
government  surveyors  have  since  made  out,  the  distinct  overlap  of 
one  set  of  beds  upon  the  other,  and  which  shows  how  the  equivalent 
of  the  Caradoc  is  entirely  omitted. 

Unconformable  Relations  of  Llandeilo  Flags  and  Upper  Silurian. 
Near  Builth. 

(Taken  from  Horizontal  Sections  of  the  Government  Survey.) 
S.E.  N.W. 


Chap.  IV.] 


LOWER  SILURIAN  OR  MALVERN  HILLS, 


91 


S.E.  N.W. 


c  "  b    '  *        b    *  b  * 

b.  Llandeilo  formation  with  Ogygia  Buchii,  &c.  *  Trap  rocks,  d.  Wenlock  shale  resting  on 
the  uplifted  edges  of  b,  the  Caradoc  sandstone  (or  c)  being  entirely  omitted.  e.  Lower 
Ludlow.  /.  Upper  Ludlow. 


The  relations  of  the  silicious  strata  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Llan- 
dovery and  Llandeilo  have  been  previously  explained,  and  the  reasons 
assigned  for  having  formerly  considered  such  beds  to  be  the  re- 
presentatives, though  in  a  very  diminished  form,  of  the  Caradoc  of 
Shropshire. 

Seeing  in  that  tract  the  comparative  tenuity  of  all  the  formations 
above  the  Llandeilo,  I  simply  termed  the  whole  of  the  inferior  mass 
*^  Lower  Silurian,"  as  distinguished  from  another  and  overlying 
mass  of  small  thickness,  which,  being  wanting  in  subdivisionary 
characters,  was  called  "Upper  Silurian"  (see  sections,  p.  72,  73.). 
It  was  only  in  those  examples,  where  strata  between  the  lowest  beds 
with  true  Llandeilo  fossils,  and  others  with  Upper  Silurian  fossils, 
were  of  a  sandy  or  silicious  nature,  that  I  applied  the  word  Caradoc. 
And  there  is,  in  truth,  so  perfectly  an  apparent  conformity  between 
all  these  Silurian  rocks  in  Carmarthenshire  (the  whole  being  within 
the  range  of  a  bomb-shell,)  that  if  the  phenomena  of  a  disturbance  and 
overlap  had  not  been  worked  out  in  another  part  of  the  region,  any 
field  geologist,  looking  simply  to  the  order  of  the  beds,  the  character 
of  the  imbedded  fossils,  and  the  structure  of  the  rocks,  must  have  come 
to  the  same  conclusion  as  myself,  and  have  viewed  the  sandy  strata 
of  Carmarthenshire  which  lie  above  the  black  flags  of  Llandeilo,  as 
the  meagre  extensions  of  a  formation  which,  as  Caradoc  sandstone,  is 
fully  developed  only  in  the  more  northern  tracts  of  this  region. 
(See  coloured  sections,  Sil.  Syst.,  PI.  34.)  The  dwindling  out  of 
the  masses  of  sandstone  in  their  range  from  north  to  south,  as  laid 
down  in  the  map  (No.  3.),  sufficiently  indicate  the  phenomenon. 


92  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IV. 

Lower  Silurian  of  the  Malvern  Hills,  Woolhope,  May  Hill,  8fc.  — 
Though  less  copious  in  dimensions  than  in  North  Wales  and  Shrop- 
shire, the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  have,  to  a  considerable  extent,  their 
representatives  on  the  western  flank  of  the  crystalline  and  syenitic 
range  of  the  Malvern  Hills.  The  little  sketch  here  annexed  repre- 
sents the  northern  half  of  the  Malvern  Hills,  or  the  North  Hill,  with 
the  Worcester,  and  Hereford  Beacons,  as  seen  from  the  undulating 
grounds  below  Mathon  Lodge,  or  near  the  outward  flank  of  the 
Silurian  rocks,  the  mass  of  which  occupy  the  intermediate  and  un- 
dulating low  hills. 


North  Hill.  "Worcester  Beacon.  Hereford  Beacon. 

View  of  the  Malvern  Hills  from  the  West. 
(From  a  Sketch  by  Lady  Murchison,  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  409.) 

The  black  schists  which  rise  up  to  the  surface  in  the  elevated  grounds 
between  the  higher  syenitic  hills  and  Eastnor  Castle,  and  which  lie 
to  the  south-east  of  the  foreground  of  the  preceding  sketch,  were 
formerly  described  by  me  as  probably  of  the  age  of  the  Llandeilo  form- 
ation.* A  subsequent  discovery  made  in  them  by  Professor  Phillips 
of  the  small  trilobite  Olenus,  and  a  recent  one  by  Mr.  Strickland  of  the 
Agnostus  pisiformis,  fossils  which  are  peculiar  to  the  lowest  Silurian 
zone  of  other  countries,  have  extended  that  view,  and  have  led  me 
to  believe  that  the  black  Malvernian  schists,  however  diminutive, 
may  be  as  old  even  as  the  Lingula  beds  of  North  Wales.  In  another 
chapter,  and  when  treating  of  the  Silurian  rocks  of  Norway  and 

*  Silurian  System,  p.  416. 


Chap.  IV.]       LOWER  SILURIAN  OF  MALVERN  HILLS.  93 

Sweden,  it  will  be  shown,  that  mere  thickness  of  strata  is  no  true  test 
of  their  age  nor  of  the  time  which  may  have  elapsed  in  their  de- 
position. The  hundreds  of  feet  in  the  beds  on  the  west  flank  of  the 
Malverns  may,  in  short,  be  the  equivalents  in  time  of  thousands  of 
feet  of  strata  in  North  Wales.  I  also  showed,  in  my  former  work, 
the  existence  of  sandstones  which,  overlying  these  black  schists,  and 
charged  with  fossils,  truly  represented  the  Caradoc  sandstone  in 
structure  and  in  fossils.  The  geologist  must,  however,  consider  my 
first  publication  as  an  outline  descriptive  only  of  the  chief  features 
of  these  remarkable  hills,  the  detailed  features  of  which  have  since 
been  more  elaborately  and  ably  worked  out  by  Professor  J.  Phillips, 
to  another  of  whose  discoveries  attention  will  presently  be  called. 

On  this  occasion  I  must  chiefly  restrict  myself  to  the  notice  of 
a  few  data  which  have  been  brought  to  light  since  the  publication 
of  the  "  Silurian  System."  In  a  recent  excursion*  I  observed,  what 
had  not  before  been  detected ;  that  the  same  black  schists  and 
sandy  flagstones,  or  a  portion  of  them,  which  constitute  the  lowest 
fossil-bearing  sediment  of  the  tract,  are  thrown  off  to  the  east  as  well 
as  to  the  west  of  the  eruptive  or  syenitic  chain,  at  Midsummer  Hill  to 
the  S.  of  the  Hereford  Beacon.  This  is  seen  in  traversing  the  ridge 
near  its  south  end,  from  Keys  End  Street  on  the  east,  by  the  White- 
leaved  Oak,  to  the  first  arable  ground  on  the  west.  The  Mal- 
verns are  therefore  represented  in  the  following  diagram,  as  exhibiting 
a  geological  saddle,  having  a  thin  and  partially  metamorphosed  flap 
only  on  the  east  side,  and  several  thick  flaps  on  the  west,  the  lower 
part  only  of  one  of  which  is  in  an  altered  condition.  Among  the 
oldest  strata  which  are  visible  on  the  east  flank  are  the  same  black 
schists  subordinate  to  sandy  flags,  which  on  the  western  slope  of  the 
ridge  of  syenite  have  given  to  the  ground  the  name  of  Coal  Hill  f, 

*  This  excursion  was  made  in  company  with  Mr.  H,  E.  Strickland  and  the 
Rev.  W.  P.  Brodie. 

t  Absurd  trials  for  coal  have  been  made  by  ignorant  persons  in  this  black 
Lower  Silurian  shale  on  both  sides  of  the  eruptive  axis. 


94  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IV. 

and  in  wHich  Professor  Phillips  has  detected  the  three  species  of 
Olenus  already  mentioned. 

The  reader  of  my  former  work  will  therefore  be  pleased  to  look  at 
the  woodcut  (Sil.  Syst.  p.  418.,  and  coloured  section,  pi.  36.  f.  8.,  of 
that  work)  as  somewhat  incomplete,  and  will  understand  that  the  facts 
are  more  correctly  expressed  in  this  little  diagram. 


Section  from  the  Malvern  Hills  to  Ledbury. 
W.  E. 

Ledbury.  Eastnor.  Malvern  Hills- 


j  i  h  g  f  e  f  g        f   e       d  c        b    b*     *  b* 


This  woodcut,  as  taken  from  a  coloured  section  in  the  "  Silurian  System,"  and  slightly 
modified  (pi.  36.  f.  8,),  explains  the  general  order  and  the  undulations  on  the  west  side  of 
the  Malvern  Hills,  in  the  parallel  of  Midsummer  Hill,  Eastnor  Park,  and  Ledbury.  The 
eruptive  rocks  *  of  the  Malvern  ridge  on  the  right  are  seen  to  be  flanked,  on  both  sides,  by 
altered  Lower  Silurian  sandstones  and  schists,  b  *.  To  the  west  these  are  followed  by  other 
schists  with  Olenus,  ft,  and  Caradoc  sandstones  and  conglomerates,  c,  the  upper  portion  of 
which  dip  down  from  the  Obelisk  Hill  of  Eastnor,  and  pass  under  the  Woolhope,  or  Lower 
Wenlock  limestone,  d.  The  latter  is  followed  by  the  Wenlock  shale,  e,  and  the  Wenlock  lime- 
stone, /,  which  last,  bending  under  the  Lower  Ludlow,  g,  reappears  in  a  dome  that  throws  oflF 
towards  Ledburj'  the  whole  of  the  Ludlow  formation,  h  i,  after  a  flexure  in  Wellington  Heath 
under  the  old  red  sandstone,  j. 

Although  it  is  not  within  the  scope  of  this  volume  to  describe  in 
detail  the  former  effects  of  the  eruptive  molten  matter  in  transmuting 
the  character  and  condition  of  the  sediments  through  which  it  burst 
forth,  still  I  would  beg  any  geological  student  who  has  it  in  his 
power  to  examine  this  natural  section.  He  will  then  see  that  as  the 
strata  which  flank  the  ridge  on  either  side  approach  to  its  centre, 
which  is  composed  of  igneous  rocks,  they  gradually  become  more  hard 
and  brittle,  and  that,  their  flaglike  character  gradually  ceasing,  the 
beds  pass  into  thick  and  subcrystalline  amorphous'  masses,  in  which 
the  lines  of  bedding  are  lost,  and  the  substance  is  much  altered  and 
fissured  by  many  devious  joints  with  serpentinous  coatings.  The  cen- 
tral or  eruptive  mass,  as  exposed  in  the  extensive  quarries  of  Mid- 
summer Hill,  near  the  White-leaved  Oak,  is  a  compact  felspar  rock, 
passing  into  syenite,  but,  as  formerly  noted,  the  northern  extensions  of 


Chap.  IV.]  SILURIAN  ROCKS  —  MALVERN  HILLS.  95 

this  same  eruptive  ridge,  as  seen  in  the  Worcestershire  Beacon  and 
the  North  Hill,  contain  many  other  varieties  of  igneous  rocks,  such 
as  syenite  having  a  very  granitic  aspect,  greenstone,  epidote  rock,  &c. 

But  returning  to  the  Silurian  succession.  The  Upper  and  greater 
portion  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  the  Malvern  district  were  first 
classed  by  myself,  and  subsequently  by  Professor  Phillips,  with  the 
Caradoc  formation.  In  my  own  work  they  were  described  as  sand- 
stones and  conglomerates,  often  of  purplish,  sometimes  of  green  and 
brownish  tints,  in  which  many  of  the  same  species  of  shells  occur  as 
in  Shropshire  and  other  localities.*  Assigning  to  the  Lower  Silurian 
of  the  Malverns  a  thickness  of  2000  feet,  Professor  Phillips  correctly 
states,  that  the  Holly-bush  sandstone,  which  contains  no  fossils  except 
fucoids,  is  the  bottom  of  the  whole  series,  and  even  underlies  the 
black  shale  with  certain  small  points  of  interposed  (intruded  ?)  trap 
rock  or  greenstone.  Above  the  black  Olenus  shale  commence  the 
purple  and  grey  conglomerate  and  sandstone,  called  Caradoc  sand- 
stone, here  of  about  1000  feet  thick,  as  seen  at  Howler's  Heath, 
Eastnor  Obelisk,  &c. 

In  delineating  with  great  precision  the  order  of  the  strata  with 
their  flexures  and  breaks.  Professor  Phillips  discovered,  on  the  west 
side  of  the  Worcestershire  Beacon,  that  one  of  the  local  conglomerates 
of  the  Caradoc  age,  and  charged  with  several  of  the  characteristic 
fossils,  contained  also  pebbles  and  fragments  of  the  syenite  and  other 
eruptive  rocks  of  the  Malvern  chain.  Hence  it  was  evident,  that 
along  this  line  there  had  been  eruptions  which  had  left  a  shore  or 
island  of  hard  rock  from  which  the  Caradoc  conglomerate  in  question 
had  been  derived.  It  is,  however,  to  be  inferred  that  the  eruption, 
to  which  I  have  called  attention,  at  the  White-leaved  Oak  and  Keys 
End  Hill,  took  place  at  a  more  remote  period,  and  even  that  the 
erupted  matter  traversed  the  oldest  Silurian  strata  of  the  tract,  or 
the  Holly-bush  sandstones.  This  agency  having  ceased,  a  low  ridge 
*  This  is  the  green  sandstone  described,  Sil.  Syst.  pp.  416 — 418. 


96  SILURIA.  "  [Chap.  IV. 

seems  to  have  been  left,  to  be  acted  upon  by  the  sea  of  the  subsequent 
epoch,  so  as  to  furnish  the  fragments  of  a  younger  portion  of  the 
Caradoc  formation. 

The  posterior  elevation  of  the  Malvern  Hills  in  a  solid  state,  at 
a  subsequent  period,  together  with  the  folding  back  of  the  strata, 
so  as  partially  to  invert  the  order  and  place  the  Caradoc  grits  over 
the  Wenlock  shale  (a  phenomenon  first  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Leonard 
Horner  as  due  to  the  uprise  of  the  syenite),  is  one  of  great  interest, 
and  which  occurs  on  a  vast  scale  in  the  Alps  and  other  countries.* 

At  present,  however,  I  must  pass  from  the  consideration  of  this 
physical  feature,  to  other  natural  appearances  on  the  flank  of  the 
Malvern  Hills,  described  by  Professor  Phillips  and  myself,  to  show 
how  difficult  it  is  to  draw  any  definite  line  between  the  uppermost 
member  of  the  Caradoc  formation  and  the  lowest  portion  of  the 
overlying  Wenlock  shale.  To  the  west  of  the  Worcestershire  Beacon, 
or  near  the  north  end  of  the  chain,  there  occurs  an  impure  limestone, 
occupying  precisely  the  same  position  at  the  summit  of  the  Caradoc 
sandstone,  properly  so  called,  as  the  Hollies  limestone  of  Shropshire 
(p.  86. )•  Now,  although  this  rock  contains  some  fossils  which 
truly  belong  to  the  lower  group,  such  as  Leptaena  sericea,  Atrypa 
hemisphaerica,  and  Orthis  calligramma,  it  possesses  others  which  are 
characteristic  of  the  Upper  Silurian  division.  At  Woolhope,  how- 
ever, as  will  hereafter  be  shown,  a  limestone  occupying  nearly  the 
same  position  is,  through  every  one  of  its  imbedded  fossils,  an  indis- 
putable member  of  the  Wenlock  formation. 

In  Shropshire,  on  the  contrary,  the  calcareous  zone  which  separates 
the  Lower  from  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks  pertains  preeminently,  as 
we  have  seen,  through  its  organic  remains,  to  the  lower,  whilst  in 

*  This  overthrow  of  the  strata,  together  with  an  excellent  account  of  the  mineral 
structure  of  the  Malvern  Hills,  was  first  given  by  Mr.  Leonard  Horner,  Geol. 
Trans.,  old  series,  vol.  i.  p.  281.  The  nature  and  succession  of  the  overthrown  beds 
were  illustrated  in  detail  by  myself,  Silurian  System,  p.  423.,  and  lastly  by  Professor 
Phillips,  Memoirs  Geol.  Survey,  vol.  ii.  p.  67.  et  seq. 


Chap.  IV.J       PASSAGE  FROM  LOWER  TO  UPPER  SILURIAN.  97 

Radnorshire,  a  limestone  apparently  or  very  nearly  in  the  same 
position  is  altogether  Upper  Silurian  in  its  fossils.  The  truth  is,  that 
in  some  tracts  we  must  expect  to  meet  with  links,  both  lithological 
and  zoological,  which  thus  bind  together  the  inferior  and  superior 
divisions  of  the  system  ;  whilst  in  other  districts,  their  separation  will 
be  more  neatly  marked. 

The  reader  may  compare  my  original  description  of  this  inter- 
mediary band  of  limestone,  as  it  ranges  by  Stumps  Wood  and  other 
places  west  of  the  Malverns,  with  the  more  precise  details  of  Pro- 
fessor Phillips.* 

For  although  it  is  quite  clear  that  transitions  like  those  above  men- 
tioned must  be  looked  for,  and  have  in  fact  been  found  to  exist,  over 
large  areas  of  the  earth's  surface,  it  is  well  known  that  a  mass  of  sedi- 
ment which  in  one  tract  is  calcareous  often  becomes  sandy  and  argil- 
laceous in  another ;  and  thus  in  such  cases  very  close  examination  of 
the  fossils  can  alone  decide  the  exact  line  of  demarcation.  In  re- 
ference to  the  original  Silurian  region,  the  uppermost  limb  of  the 
Caradoc  formation,  if  fossils  decide  the  case,  is  an  argillaceous  lime- 
stone in  Shropshire,  and  in  Radnorshire  a  pure  siliceous  grit ;  though 
the  localities  before  alluded  to  are  only  a  few  miles  distant  from  each 
other.  These  local  extensions  of  limestone  will  be  still  more  instruc- 
tively explained  in  describing  the  order  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks. 

In  May  and  Huntley  Hills  in  Gloucestershire,  the  Caradoc  form- 
ation, consisting  of  conglomerate  and  sandstone,  with  certain  cha- 
racteristic fossils,  indicates  a  mineral  transition  upwards  into  the 
Wenlock  formation  through  alternating  beds  of  sandstone  with  shale 
and  impure  limestone,  which  are  of  considerable  thickness.    It  is 

*  In  his  memoir  of  the  Malvern  and  Abberley  hills,  and  their  extension  to 
Woolhope,  May  Hill,  &c.,  Professor  Phillips  has  skilfully  and  elaborately  de- 
veloped all  the  physical  contortions  of  the  strata  in  this  district,  and  the  mineral 
and  palceontological  characters  of  the  rocks.  He  has  further  imparted  great  value 
to  his  work  by  the  philosophical  reflections  with  which  it  is  interspersed.  It  is  a 
monograph  which  reflects  high  credit  on  the  Geological  Survey  of  Great  Britain. 

H 


98 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  IV. 


to  some  of  these  upper  and  transition  beds  of  sandstone  at  May 
Hill,  that  Professor  Sedgwick  has  recently  directed  attention*  as  being 
almost  exclusively  charged  with  fossils,  which  Professor  M'Coy  refers 
to  the  Wenlock  age.  The  government  surveyors,  as  well  as  myself, 
have,  however,  collected  Pentamerus  lens,  if  not  P.  oblongus,  from  the 
same  strata ;  both  species  being  in  my  opinion  typical  of  the  lower 
division.  Such  transitions  and  fossiliferous  changes  must,  I  repeat, 
be  looked  for  in  the  range  of  all  sedimentary  systems,  and  this  case, 
serves  only,  in  my  opinion,  better  to  link  together  the  Lower  and 
Upper  Silurian  rocks.f  This  subject  will  be  specially  reverted  to  in 
the  eighth  and  ninth  Chapters. 

*  On  the  separation  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone,  into  two  distinct  groups.  Geol. 
Soc.  Nov.  1852.  ^ 

t  In  a  minute  re- examination  of  the  Caradoc  district  of  Shropshire,  made  by 
the  Government  Surveyors  whilst  these  pages  are  passing  through  the  press,  I 
learn  that  they  have  detected  on  the  banks  of  the  Onny  a  certain  amount  of 
unconformity  between  the  uppermost  of  the  limestones  (containing  Pentamerus 
oblongus,  and  the  other  fossils,  figured  p.  88.),  and  those  subjacent  beds  of  flagstone, 
shale,  and  sandstone,  in  which,  with  a  few  of  the  same  species,  the  great  mass  of 
fossils  are  those  figured  in  the  woodcut  Foss.  7.  That  this  physical  break  is  a 
local  phenomenon  only,  is  manifest  from  the  fact,  that  in  some  other  tracts  all  the 
strata  of  Llandeilo,  Caradoc,  and  Wenlock  age  are  represented  by  the  same 
surveyors  to  undulate  in  perfect  parallelism.  (Borders  of  Radnor  and  Mont- 
gomery.) It  is  still  my  conviction,  that  whilst  the  limestone  with  the  Pentamerus 
oblongus  is  what  I  always  considered  it  —  the  bed  of  transition  from  the  lower 
to  the  upper  group, — it  ought  still,  from  its  fossils,  to  be  rather  classed  with  the 
former  than  the  latter.  For,  although  the  Orthis  alternaia^  which  is  found  in  the 
subjacent  sandstone  beds,  has  been  introduced  by  mistake  into  the  woodcut  Foss.  8., 
I  cannot  admit  that  a  band  into  which  Pentamerus  oblongus  and  Trinucleus  con- 
centricus  range  upwards  from  the  Llandeilo  formation,  can  be  otherwise  than 
Lower  Silurian.  And  if  several  of  the  other  species  in  this  bed  are  common  to 
the  Wenlock,  as  well  as  to  the  inferior  deposits,  of  which  there  is  no  doubt,  this 
circumstance  only  strengthens  my  view  respecting  the  unity  of  the  Silurian 
System.  In  this  survey  with  Mr.  Aveline,  Mr.  Salter  observed  some  new  quarries 
of  Caradoc  sandstone,  to  one  of  which  the  collector  is  particularly  directed.  It  is 
at  Gretton,  near  Cardington.  All  the  characteristic  Lower  Silurian  fossils  may 
be  there  obtained  in  a  very  brief  space  of  time  in  true  and  original  Caradoc 
sandstone. 


Chap.  IV.]  RESUME  OF  LOWER  SILURIAN.  99 

The  most  eastern  tract  in  England  where  the  Caradoc  sandstone 
has  been  protruded  to  the  surface  is  at  the  lower  Lickey  Hills 
in  Worcestershire,  and  again  near  Barr  in  Staffordshire,  at  both 
of  which  localities  it  supports  the  base  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks 
of  the  adjacent  tracts  of  Dudley  and  Walsall.  At  the  Lickey, 
low  heathy  hills,  which  are  in  truth  miniature  mountains,  are  chiefly 
composed  of  quartz  rocks,  identical  with  those  masses  on  the  flanks  of 
the  Caradoc  and  Wrekin  which  have  been  formed  by  the  fusion 
of  the  same  sandstone.  The  Lickey  quartz  probably  owes  its  litho- 
logical  character  to  a  similar  cause  ;  though  in  this  case  the  internal 
heat  has  not  found  issue  to  the  surface  in  the  form  of  trap  rock  as  in 
Shropshire.  In  other  words,  the  Lickey  quartz  rock  is  supposed  to 
be  on  a  line  of  former  eruption.  On  its  flank  this  rock  graduates 
into  an  ordinary  grit  or  sandstone,  in  which  the  Pentamerus  oblongus 
occurs,  and  thus  all  doubt  of  its  age  is  removed ;  whilst  just  as  in 
the  other  tracts  above  mentioned,  this  sandstone,  particularly  on  its 
eastern  and  southern  parts  (Colmers  and  Kendal  End),  is  conformably 
surmounted  by  a  calcareous  shale  with  a  thin  course  of  limestone 
which,  as  at  Woolhope,  Gorton  near  Presteign,  and  Old  Radnor,  con- 
tains Upper  Silurian  fossils. 

In  concluding  this  chapter,  we  remind  the  reader  that  the  Caradoc 
formation  has  been  shown  by  stratigraphical,  lithological,  and  zoolo- 
gical proofs  to  be  an  integral  part  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  and 
that  its  most  characteristic  fossils  are  species  which  also  occur  in 
the  inferior  Llandeilo  rocks.  It  was  at  the  summit  of  this 
Caradoc  sandstone  that  I  long  ago  drew  the  line  of  demarcation  be- 
tween the  inferior  and  superior  masses  of  the  Silurian  system ;  and 
observations,  since  extended  to  many  distant  regions,  have  confirmed 
the  general  truthfulness  of  that  division. 


H  2 


100 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  V. 


CHAPTER  V. 

UPPER  SILURIAN  ROCKS. 

GENERAL  CHARACTEK  OF  THE  UPPER  SILURIAN  ROCKS,  AS  DIVIDED  INTO  THE  WEN- 
LOCK  AND  LUDLOW  FORMATIONS. 

THE  WENLOCK  FORMATION  OF  SHALE  AND  LIMESTONE,  WITH  ITS  CHIEF  FOSSILS, 
DESCRIBED  IN  ASCENDING  ORDER. 

In  many  parts  of  the  region  of  England  and  Wales  now  under  con- 
sideration, wherever  the  lower  strata  of  the  age  of  the  Wenlock 
formation  are  seen  to  rest  upon  the  older  rocks  which  have  been  last 
described,  they  are  linked  together  in  conformable  positions;  the 
upper  bands  of  the  lower  group  graduating  insensibly  into  the  de- 
posits we  are  now  about  to  consider.  Of  this  succession  several 
examples  have,  indeed,  been  already  cited.   (See  section  below  Map). 

As  the  older  schists  and  slates  of  Wales  were  assuredly  at  one 
period  nothing  more  than  finely  laminated  marine  mud,  so  is  it  still 
more  apparent  that  such  was  the  former  state  of  the  greater  portion  of 
the  Upper  Silurian ;  for  even  at  the  present  day  it  is  an  accumulation 
of  similar  materials,  though  in  a  softer  and  less  coherent  state. 

Whether  these  argillaceous  masses  be  examined  in  the  wilds  of 
Radnor  Forest  and  the  eastern  parts  of  Montgomery,  in  the  western 
parts  of  Shropshire  (Long  Mountain),  or  in  many  tracts  of  North 
and  South  Wales  (see  Map),  they  present  the  same  "  facies "  of  a 
thick,  yet  finely  laminated,  dark,  dull  grey  shale,  in  which  hard  stone 
of  any  strength  or  persistence  is  the  rare  exception.  Their  dominant 
character  is  that  of  "  mudstone." 

Ranging  chiefly  from  S.  W.  to  N.  E.,  and  resting  conformably  upon 


Chap.  V.] 


UPPER  SILURIAN  ORDER. 


101 


Caradoc  and  lower  rocks,  in  numerous  undulations*,  these  mudstones 
assume,  however,  in  Denbighshire  a  much  harder,  flaglike  character, 
and  there  they  have  even  been  so  subjected  to  the  influence  of  a  crys- 
talline transverse  cleavage  as  occasionally  to  form  roofing  slates. 

On  the  whole,  however,  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks  of  North  Wales 
have  very  much  the  lithological  structure  of  large  masses  of  the 
Lower  Silurian  of  South  Wales,  where  slaty  cleavage  has  only  so  far 
operated  as  to  leave  the  mass  in  that  disjointed,  incoherent  state  of 
mudstone,  the  "  rotch  "  of  the  natives,  so  useless  to  the  mason  and  the 
miner,  and  so  cold  and  profitless  to  the  agriculturist.  In  all  such  tracts, 
where  the  subdividing  limestones  are  absent,  or  very  feebly  indicated, 
it  is  only  by  close  observation  of  the  imbedded  fossils,  that  the 
formations,  so  clear  and  typical  in  other  parts,  can  be  recognized. 

When,  on  the  contrary,  we  follow  the  same  deposits  from  North 
and  South  Wales  to  the  exemplar  tracts  of  Herefordshire  and 
Shropshire,  where  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks  were  first  classified 
and  described,  we  find  them  diversified  by  interpolated  courses  of 
limestone;  much  calcareous  matter  being  also  disseminated,  both 
in  nodules  and  in  flagstones. 

With  additions  like  these  to  the  richness  and  variety  of  the  subsoil, 
which  are  so  welcome  to  the  proprietor  and  farmer,  the  geologist 
usually  discovers  a  much  greater  abundance  of  fossil  animal  remains 
than  in  the  same  strata  of  the  sterile  western  tracts.  By  observing 
the  order  of  superposition,  and  by  tracing  the  divisionary  limestones, 
he  reads  off  the  order  of  the  strata,  and  chronicles  with  precision  the 
succession  of  their  respective  fossils. 

*  The  strike  of  the  same  deposits  varies  in  different  districts.  Thus,  in  North 
Wales,  the  prevalent  strike  is  nearly  N.N.E.  to  S.  S.W.  In  Shropshire  the 
prevalent  direction  is  nearly  N.E.,  S.  W. ;  whilst  in  S.  Pembroke  all  the  Silurian 
rocks  range  from  W.  by  N.  to  E,  by  S.,  in  conformity  with  the  direction  of  the 
great  South  Welsh  coal-field  (see  Map).  The  conformable  undulations  of  the 
Caradoc  and  Wenlock  formations  in  various  parts  of  Wales  are  represented  in 
several  of  the  published  horizontal  sections  of  the  Government  Survey. 

H  3 


1 02  SILURIA.  [Chap.  V. 

In  this  way  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks  are  seen  to  consist,  as 
a  whole,  of  the  two  formations  to  which  I  assigned  the  names  of 
Wenlock  and  Ludlow ;  each  of  these  being  subdivided  in  the  manner 
expressed  in  this  woodcut. 

General  Order  of  the  Upper  Silurian  Rocks  between  the  Caradoc  Sandstone 

BENEATH,  AND  THE  OlD  ReD  SaNDSTONE  ABOVE  THEM. 


c.  Pentamerus  limestone  on  the  summit  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone.*  d^.  Wenlock  shale  with 
Lower  or  Woolhope  limestone,  d^.  Wenlock  shale,  d^.  Wenlock  limestone,  e  i.  Lower 
Ludlow.  e  2.  Middle  Ludlow  or  Aymestry  limestone.  e^.  Upper  Ludlow.  /.  Bottom  of 
Old  Red  Sandstone. 

The  inferior  member  of  the  Wenlock  formation  which  rests  on 
the  Caradoc  sandstone,  as  seen  in  Shropshire  and  parts  of  Wales,  is 
chiefly  a  mass  of  dull  argillaceous  dark  grey  shale,  rarely  if  ever 
micaceous. 

Strictly  speaking,  there  is  no  band  of  limestone  (like  d^)  subordi- 
nate to  the  lower  shale  below  the  escarpment  of  Wenlock  Edge  in 
Shropshire ;  the  rock  to  which  attention  is  now  called  being  there 
merely  represented,  as  also  in  some  other  tracts,  by  calcareous  nodules. 

In  following  the  formation  from  Shropshire  into  Herefordshire, 
the  great  limestone,  d^,  above  the  shale,  is  seen  on  the  banks 
of  the  Lugg,  west  of  Aymestry,  to  be  diminished  to  a  thin  irregular 
stratum  chiefly  concretionary.  Further  to  the  south-west,  and  in 
Radnorshire,  that  rock,  still  diminishing,  disappears  entirely  amid  the 
mudstones  above  alluded  to ;  but,  to  the  south  of  Presteign,  an 
inferior  course  of  limestone  sets  in  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  Wenlock 
shale.  This  rock  {d^  of  the  diagram),  which  has  been  alluded  to  in 
the  last  chapter,  merits  special  attention. 

*  It  has  been  explained,  pp.  86.  98.,  that  the  limestone  with  Pentamerus  ob- 
longus,  which  rises  from  beneath  the  Wenlock  shale,  is  still  grouped  by  me  with 
the  Lower  Silurian  of  Britain.    For  Russia  and  N.  America,  see  chaps.  13.  15. 


Chap,  v.]  LOWEST  WENLOCK  ROCKS.  103 

An  examination  of  quarries  now  abandoned  at  Gorton,  one  mile 
south  of  Presteign,  shows  indeed,  that  this  limestone  is  fairly 
subordinate  to  a  shale  (there  of  black  colour),  which  rests  on  the 
Caradoc  grit  and  conglomerate  before  described ;  as  expressed  in  this 
diagram,  which  is  reproduced  from  p.  90. 

Lower  Wenlock  at  Corton,  near  Presteign. 

c.  Cai-adoc  sandstone,  or  coarse 
Corton  girt,  with  Pentamerus 

S.     Corton.  „  Presteign.         N.    oblongus, &c.  d^.  Lower  Wen- 


lock  shale  and  Woolhope  or 
Lower  Wenlock  limestone,  q. 
Gravel  of  the  Valley  of  Pre- 
steign. 


e  q 


And  again,  at  Haxwell,  a  similar  arrangement  w^as  visible  some 
years  ago.  But  between  these  two  upcasts  of  the  Caradoc  sand- 
stone, which  exhibit  the  true  relations  of  the  strata,  lies  the  large 
and  loftier  rock  of  Nash  Scar,  in  which  the  same  limestones,  whether 
thick-bedded  or  nodular,  have  been  run  together  into  one  amorphous 
mass,  in  which  the  stratified  character  has  been  destroyed,  and  the 
shale  driven  off,  as  expressed  in  this  diagram.* 


Altered  Amorphous  Limestone  of  Nash  Scar. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  313.) 


c.  Arch  of  Caradoc  sandstone  throwing  off  limestone  and  shale  (Woolhope),  d    followed  by 
d  *,  or  amorphous  altered  limestone,   o.  Caverns. 

In  tracing  the  strata  southwards  along  this  axis,  other  masses  of 
limestone  more  or  less  amorphous  are  seen  near  Old  Kadnor,  which, 
in  proportion  as  they  approach  the  eruptive  masses  of  Stanner  and 

*  As  the  rocks  of  Nash  Scar  and  Old  Radnor  are  the  only  great  masses  of  lime- 
stone in  this  region,  there  being  no  other  between  this  district  and  the  sea-coast, 
they  are  of  high  value  to  the  Welsh  proprietors ;  the  lime  being  transported  to  very 
great  distances  westwards. 

H  4 


104  SILURIA.  [Chap.  V. 

Hanter  rocks,  and  Ousel  Hill,  or  the  highly  metamorphosed  rock 
of  Old  Radnor  and  Yat  Hill,  are  themselves  subcrystalline,  and 
unbedded,  with  coatings  of  serpentine  upon  the  surfaces  of  the 
joints.  On  the  other  hand,  on  receding  westwards  from  that  line  of 
eruption  and  metamorphism,  into  the  Vale  of  Radnor,  to  the  south- 
east of  Harpton  Court*,  the  limestone  begins  to  resume  its  bedded 
character,  resting  on  the  pebbly  Caradoc  conglomerates  which  range 
by  Old  Radnor  church  and  Yat  Hill.  Whilst  this  section,  taken 
from  one  of  the  coloured  sections  of  the  Government  Survey,  ex- 
hibits the  syenite  and  greenstone  of  Hanter  Hill  throwing  off  the 
Ludlow  rocks  to  the  south-east,  it  is  also  suggestive  of  the  fact,  that 
another  body  of  igneous  rock  lies  subjacent  to  the  Caradoc  con- 
glomerate and  crystalline  limestone  of  Old  Radnor  and  Yat  Hill, 
where  the  coatings  of  serpentine  and  brecciated  and  altered  features 
of  the  stratified  rocks  are,  in  the  eye  of  the  geologist,  conclusive 
evidences  in  favour  of  such  relations. 


N.W.  Yat  Hill.  Hanter  Hill.  S.E. 


e.  Ludlow  rocks,  d"^.  Wenlock  shale,  rfi.  Woolhope  or  Lower  Wenlock  limestone  (par- 
tially altered),  c.  Caradoc  sandstone  (in  parts  altered).  *.  Eruptive  rocks.  (Syenite, 
Greenstone,  and  Hypersthene  rock.) 

The  eruptive  rocks  of  this  tract  are  very  picturesque,  and  as  they 
offer,  in  a  very  small  compass,  phenomena  which  characterize  large 
mountain  masses,  a  sketch  of  them  is  annexed.  The  spectator 
is  placed  near  the  south-eastern  foot  of  Stanner  rocks,  near  Kington, 
which  are  charged  with  hypersthene,  a  mineral  which,  though 
common  in  some  foreign  countries,  and  abounding  at  Loch  Scavig, 
in  Skye,  has  hitherto  been  found  in  one  other  British  locality  only. 

*  The  seat  of  my  esteemed  friend  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  T.  Frankland  Lewis,  who, 
with  his  son,  Mr.  George  Lewis,  first  urged  me  to  put  together  all  my  geological 
documents  respecting  this  region,  and  thus  form  the  work  afterwards  called  the 
"  Silurian  System." 


Chap.  V.] 


OLD  RADNOR  LIMESTONE  AND  TRAP. 


105 


Hanter.  Ousel.  Stanner  Rocks. 


View  from  Stanner  Rocks  (Ousal  Wood,  Hanter  Hill,  and  Hergest  Ridge  being 
successively  seen  in  the  distance). 

(From  Sil.  Syst,  p.  31 L) 

Although  the  greater  expansion  in  Radnorshire  of  the  lower 
Wenlock  limestone,  as  compared  with  the  few  nodular  beds  of 
Shropshire,  must  have  been  in  a  great  measure  due  to  the  original 
deposit,  the  form  of  which,  in  an  unaltered  state,  is  well  seen 
near  Presteign,  its  amorphorus  and  massive  condition  at  Nash 
Scar  and  Old  Radnor  was  doubtless  caused  by  the  action  of  heat 
issuing  along  a  line  of  former  linear  fissure,  which,  in  some 
places,  evolved  the  hypersthenic  rocks  and  greenstones  of  Stanner, 
Ousel,  and  Hanter,  upon  the  line  in  question,  fused  the  stratified 
limestone  and  the  calcareous  nodules  of  the  shale  into  amorphous 
and  heterogeneous  masses,  more  or  less  crystalline,  leaving  coatings 
and  films  of  serpentine  on  their  faces  and  joints. 

All  the  fossils  which  have  been  found  in  the  limestone  of  this 
tract,  whether  by  Mr.  Edward  Davis,  who  discovered  most  of  them, 
and  specially  assisted  me  in  studying  them,  or  subsequently  by 
the  government  surveyors,  are  truly  Wenlock  and  Upper  Silurian 
forms. 


106  SILURIA.  [Chap.  V. 

Some  of  these,  such  as  the  trilobites  Bumastus  Barrlensis,  Phacops 
caudatus,  Encrinurus  yariolaris,  with  the  shells  Leptaena  laevigata,  and 
Xerita  prototypa,  large  encrinite  stems,  and  several  corals,  are  well 
known  published  fossils  of  the  limestones  of  Wenlock  and  Dudley* ; 
and  in  addition  to  these,  even  the  Pentamerus  Knightii  has  also 
been  found,  which,  as  wiU  hereafter  be  stated,  is  a  very  marked 
fossil  of  the  Ludlow  formation. 

Wenlock  formation  of  Woolhope,  the  Malvern  Hills,  May  Hill, 
^T.  —  In  describing  the  upward  development  of  the  Silurian  rocks 
on  the  we^t  flank  of  the  Malvern  Hills,  a  limestone  in  the  same 
position  was  described  by  me  as  containing  a  mixture  of  Caradoc 
and  "Wenlock  fossils,  and  it  was  shown  how  somewhat  further  to  the 
south  the  same  stratum  becomes  an  integral  part  of  the  Wenlock 
formation.  It  is,  however,  on  the  outside  of  the  inner  dome  of  the 
symmetrical  valley  of  elevation  of  Woolhope,  that  the  lower  Wenlock 
zone  is  most  clearly  exposed.  Having  been  raised  equably  on  the 
outward  face  of  a  central  dome  or  nucleus  of  sandstone,  the  nature  of 
the  calcareous  deposit  can  be  seen  in  detail  on  the  sides  of  the  roads, 
whilst  the  best  limestones,  which  have  been  largely  opened  out  since 
I  described  the  tract,  afford  numerous  fossils  which  were  unknown 
when  the  "  Silurian  System  "  was  published.! 


Sectiox  across  the  elevated  Valley  of  Woolhope. 
(From  SiL  Syst.) 

W.S.W.  E.N.E. 


c.  Caradoc  sandstone,  rfi.  Woolhope  or  Lower  Wenlock  limestone  and  shale,  d*.  Wenlock 
shale,  d^.  Wenlock  limestone,  e^.  Lower  Ludlow,  e^.  Middle  Ludlow,  or  Aymestry 
limestone,   e^.  Upper  Ludlow.  /.  Old  Red  Sandstone  (base  of). 

*  See  SU.  Svst.  p.  313. 

t  It  was  my  want  of  acquaintance  with  any  of  these  fossils  in  the  limestone  of 
Woolhope  (for  they  were  unknown  when  I  wrote),  that  led  me  to  class  this  rock 
with  the  upper  part  of  the  Caradoc;  for  if  fossils  should  be  detected  in  it,  I 
naturally  inferred  that  they  would  be  the  same  as  those  of  a  limestone  in  a  similar 
position  in  Shropshire,  which,  from  its  containing  Pentamerus  oblongus,  was 
classed  by  me  as  the  Uppermost  Caradoc.    (See  pp.  86.  98.) 


Chap,  v.]       WOOLHOPE  OR  LOWER  WENLOCK  LIMESTONE.  107 

In  ascending  order,  the  beds  may  be  thus  described.  The  top 
of  the  Caradoc,  or  the  central  dome  of  Woolhope,  c,  with  its  transition 
beds,  is  a  greenish  earthy  sandstone,  containing  the  following  fossils : 
Pentamerus  lens  (Atrypa,  Sil.  Syst.),  Atrypa  reticularis.  Linn.  (A. 
affinis,  Sil.  Syst.),  Petraia  bina,  Lonsdale. 

This  course  is  followed  by  shale  with  calcareous,  gritty  flag- 
stones, containing  the  large  Pentamerus  liratus  (Atrypa  lirata, 
Sil.   Syst.),  Foss.  8.  f.  3.,  and  in  the  more  nodular  portions 
abundance  of  Leptsena  transversalis  and  Atrypa  reticularis.  Then 
succeed  layers  of  an  impure  earthy  limestone,  containing  Stro- 
phomena  depressa,  a  species  which,  though  occurring  in  the  Lower 
Silurian  rocks  of  North  Wales,  becomes  much  more  abundant 
in  the  Wenlock  formation.    In  the  next  overlying  bands  of  shale, 
calcareous  matter  so  increases  as  to  form  strong  beds  of  dark, 
indigo-coloured,  argillaceous  limestone,  which,  as  on  the  west  flank 
of  the  Malverns,  is  characterized  by  cross  veins  of  pink  and  white 
calcareous  spar.    The  strongest  bed  (about  10  feet  thick)  is  a 
tough,  impure,  earthy  limestone,  largely  extracted  for  the  roads, 
which  again  is  covered  by  a  band  of  purer  limestone,  followed 
by  shale  and  an  upper  bastard  limestone.    Now,  although  the 
whole  of  this  subformation,  d  ^,  does  not  contain  limestone  courses 
which  have  an  united  thickness  exceeding  20  or  30  feet ;  still 
the  rock,  together  with  its  interpolated  beds  of  sandy  shale,  is 
seen  to  occupy  a  very  great  surface  on  the  map,  from  its  being 
so  equably  spread  out  at  a  low  angle  of  inclination.  Among 
the  chief  fossils  of  the  limestone,  which  I  have  recently  collected  on 
the  spot,  are  the  two  trilobites  of  the  following  woodcut,  viz. 
Bumastus  Barriensis,  Foss.  9.  f.  2.,  and  Homalonotus  delphinoce- 
phalus,  f.  1.    There  are  also  Phacops  caudatus  (Asaphus,  Sil. 
Syst.) ;   Cornulites   serpularius ;   Orthoceras  annulatum ;  Phrag- 

moceras  sp. ;  Euomphalus  sculptus  ;  Spirifer  elevatus ;  Stropho- 

mena  Phillipsi  (imbrex,  Davidson) ;  S.  pecten ;  S.  depressa ;  Leptsena 


108  SILURIA.  [Chap.  V. 

trans versalis,  Dalm. ;  Orbicula  Forbesii ;  Atrypa  reticularis  ;  Rhyn- 
conella  Wilsoni,  &c. ;  and  rarely  Orthis  elegantula. 

Fossils,  9. 

Trilobites  of  the  Lower  AVenlock  or  Woolhope  Limestone. 


These  figures  are  about  one 
third  the  natural  size. 


Here  again,  as  in  Radnorshire,  we  have  a  great  predominance  of 
true  Wenlock  fossils,  and  one,  the  Rhynconella  Wilsoni,  which,  as 
will  presently  be  seen,  is  most  abundant  in  the  highest  Silurian 
division,  or  Ludlow  rocks ;  and  thus  in  every  respect,  whether  as  to 
position  or  fossils,  the  Woolhope  and  Radnorshire  limestones  are 
identical.  The  overlying  shale,  d'^,  and  the  great  limestone,  d^,  of  the 
preceding  section  of  Woolhope,  p.  106.,  are  precisely  the  same  as  the 
chief  masses  of  the  Wenlock  Edge,  and  these  are  surmounted  by  the 
Ludlow  rocks,  e,  which  dip  under  the  old  red  sandstone,  /. 

The  Silurian  rocks,  which  range  from  the  Malvern  Hills  and  the 
Woolhope  district  to  May  and  Huntley  Hills  in  Gloucestershire, 
exhibit  the  same  general  order  of  succession,  accompanied,  however, 
by  modifications  of  the  lithological  and  zoological  distinctions  of 
the  lower  member  of  the  Wenlock  formation,  which  it  is  right  to 
notice.  Instead  of  being  the  compact,  hard,  tough,  and  strong-bedded 
rock  of  Woolhope,  it  becomes,  on  the  western  flank  of  May  Hill,  a 
group  of  nodules  and  very  irregular  courses  disseminated  in  shale,  and 
thus  simply  forming  rather  a  more  calcareous  base  of  the  Wenlock 
shale  than  what  is  seen  under  the  Wenlock  Edge  and  other  places 


Chai\  v.]     LOAVER  WENLOCK — MALVERN — MAY  IITLL,  ETC.  109 


where  such  nodules  occur.  Here,  indeed,  the  upward  development 
from  a  thick  nucleus  of  red-coloured  Caradoc  sandstone  beneath,  into 
a  series  of  interlaminated  sandstones  and  shale,  which  assume  to  a 
great  extent  the  fossil  characters  of  the  Lower  Wenlock,  is  well 
exhibited.  At  the  same  time,  both  the  Pentamerus  undatus  and 
P.  lens,  which  are  Caradoc  fossils,  occur  amongst  the  shells.  It  is, 
in  fact,  impossible  here  to  draw  a  rigid  line  of  demarcation  between 
the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian.  In  one  part  of  this  region,  as 
on  the  west  flank  of  the  Malverns,  the  lower  type  ascends  rather 
higher,  whilst,  in  another,  the  upper  fauna  expands  downwards. 
In  no  portion  of  Britain,  therefore,  are  the  two  formations  of 
Caradoc  and  Wenlock  better  linked  together  than  in  the  Malvern 
and  May  Hill  region.* 

This  tract,  so  elaborately  described  by  Professor  Phillips,  was 
also  carefully  studied  by  Sir  Henry  de  la  Beche  himself,  when 
the  line  of  demarcation  between  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  rocks 
fixed  upon  by  the  government  surveyors  was  made  the  same  as 
that  which  had  been  originally  suggested  in  the  "  Silurian  System. "t 
On  the  west  flank  of  the  North  Malverns,  the  Caradoc  sandstone  with 
characteristic  fossils  passes  upwards  into,  and  is  interlaced  with,  sub- 
calcareous  shales  and  nodular  bands,  in  which  some  Lower  Silurian 
species  are  intermixed,  with  others  which  are  essentially  Wenlock. 
After  lucidly  explaining  how  such  transitions  are  in  harmony  with 
well  understood  operations  in  nature.  Professor  Phillips  thus  writes: — 
"  Though  practically  we  must  draw  a  line  of  division,  let  us  not  forget, 

*  Professor  Sedgwick  has  recently  endeavoured  to  show,  that  a  sandy  portion  of 
the  beds  on  the  west  flank  of  May  Hill,  which  occupy  this  intermediate  position, 
ought  not  to  be  classed  with  the  Caradoc,  as  before  alluded  to,  as  they  have 
been,  by  the  government  surveyors  and  myself,  but  should,  from  their  fossils,  be 
ranged  with  the  Wenlock.  If  this  suggestion  be  adopted,  it  will  only  strengthen 
the  opinions  of  Professor  Phillips  and  myself,  as  to  the  difficulty  of  every  where 
drawing  a  decisive  fixed  line  between  the  older  and  younger  groups  of  this 
natural  system. 

t  See  Sil.  Syst.  p.  442.  et  seq. 


110  SILUBIA.  [Chap.  V. 

that  in  this  locality  there  is  no  firm  and  hard  boundary  between  the 
Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  periods;  for  both  by  mineral  and  by  organic 
evidence,  the  characteristics  of  these  periods  are  found  to  overpass  each 
other ;  the  older  characters  reappearing  within  the  later  deposits,  and 
the  later  characters  showing  themselves  amidst  the  earlier  deposits." 
"  As  a  general  result,"  he  adds,  "  it  is  quite  evident,  that  the  successive 
changes  of  organic  forms,  as  they  are  exhibited  to  us  in  the  successive 
groups  of  strata,  are  not  simply  dependent  on  the  lapse  of  time,  nor 
explicable  as  a  series  developed  in  proportion  to  the  time,  unless  we 
survey  the  phenomena  over  very  wide  areas,  and  include  in  the  com- 
parative terms  geological  periods  long  enough  to  neutralize  the  in- 
fluence of  peculiar  physical  conditions.  These,"  he  truly  says,  "  on 
account  of  their  local  origin,  limited  area  of  effect,  and  recurrence  at 
indifferent  periods,  have  at  almost  every  geographical  point,  at  some 
epoch  or  other,  broken  or  mingled  the  series  of  organic  life."  *  This  is 
and  has  long  been  my  belief,  as  founded  on  extensive  observation. 

A  limestone  subordinate  to  shale,  and  bearing  precisely  the  same 
relations  to  a  subjacent  sandstone  as  that  of  the  localities  above  cited, 
occurs  on  the  western  and  south-eastern  flank  of  the  Lower  Lickey 
Hills  in  Worcestershire.  There,  the  Silurian  rocks  consist  of  Caradoc 
sandstone,  with  its  usual  fossils,  overlapped  on  its  edge  by  shale,  in 
which  are  courses  of  limestone  (at  Colmer's  End),  the  whole  of  the 
mass  having  been  thrust  up  as  an  irregular  dome  through  the  overly- 
ing coal  measures  and  red  sandstone.  Again,  in  the  adjacent  tract 
near  Walsall,  and  between  that  town  and  the  Barr  Beacon,  the  same 
Lower  Wenlock  or  Woolhope  limestone,  long  worked  at  the  Hay 
Head,  dips  away  from  a  point  of  Caradoc  sandstone  f,  to  pass  at  a 
gentle  angle  of  8°  or  W  under  the  great  body  of  the  shale  with  its 
calcareous  nodules  and  numerous  small  fossils;  the  whole  being 

*  See  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  ii.  p.  75. 

t  Mr.  Jukes  recently  indicated  to  the  Geological  Society  the  existence  of  this 
point  of  Caradoc  sandstone.  See  also  his  published  Survey  of  this  district, 
Mem.  Qeol.  Surv.  vol.  vi. 


Chap.  V.]  LOWER  WENLOCK  SHALE,  ETC.  Ill 

covered  by  the  thick  or  chief  limestone  as  exhibited  in  the  great 
quarries  of  Walsall.  There  also,  as  described  in  my  original  work, 
this  lower  limestone,  with  which  the  Woolhope  limestone  is  now 
identified,  is  of  the  same  small  dimensions  as  in  other  localities.  In 
it  are  nearly  all  the  very  same  fossils  as  at  Woolhope,  and  notably 
the  Bumastus  Barriensis,  Foss.  9.  p.  108.,  named  by  me  from  the 
adjacent  village  of  Barr,  and  known  to  fossil  collectors  as  the  "  Barr 
Trilobite;"  together  with  many  forms  common  to  the  whole  forma- 
tion, including  orthoceratites  or  corals.*  In  this  way,  proofs  have 
been  obtained,  that  a  limestone  whose  real  place  I  indicated  in 
several  detached  districts,  as  being  inferior  to  the  great  mass  of  shale, 
is  truly  by  its  fossils  the  lowest  member  of  the  Wenlock  formation. 

Wenlock  Shale.  —  This  shale,  which  is  infinitely  the  largest  and 
most  persistent  member  of  the  formation,  is  often  distinguished 
by  its  layers  of  deposit  being  marked  by  a  few  small  elliptical  and 
round  concretions  of  impure  and  very  earthy  limestone,  which  increase 
in  purity  as  the  strata  ascend  towards  the  chief  or  upper  limestone. 
This  shale  is  well  exposed  on  the  banks  of  the  Severn,  near 
Coalbrook  Dale  and  the  Iron  Bridge,  where  it  is  called  "  Die 
Earth "  by  the  miners,  and  is  thence  to  be  followed  all  along  the 
escarpment  of  Wenlock  Edge,  occupying  a  broad  valley  of  de- 
nudation between  it  and  the  ridge  of  the  Caradoc,  called  Apes 
Dale,  In  the  Malvern  district  it  is  also  a  mass  of  finely  levigated 
argillaceous  matter,  the  lowest  part  of  which  is  more  charged  with 
calcareous  matter  than  in  Shropshire,  and  in  which  a  large  spheroidal 
structure  is  apparent.  In  that  district  Professor  Phillips  estimates 
the  thickness  of  the  shale  at  about  640  feet.  In  some  parts  of  Wales 
the  Wenlock  shale  is  as  incoherent  as  in  those  English  counties  where 
it  appears;  but  in  Denbighshire,  it  is  a  subcrystalline  slaty  rock. 
(See  map  and  general  section.) 

The  prevailing  fossils  of  the  Wenlock  shale,  exclusive  of  trilobites 
and  corals,  which  are  mostly  of  species  unknown  in  the  lower 

*  See  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  488. 


112  SILURIA.  [CuAP.  V. 

deposits,  are  small  brachiopodous  shells  of  the  genera  Leptaena,  Orthis, 
Strophomena,  Atrypa,  and  Rhynconella.  In  a  general  way  the 
fossils  of  this  stratum,  the  chief  of  which  are  given  in  plates  20.  and 
22.,  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  overlying  limestone. 

The  Orthis  biloba  of  Linnaeus  (Spirifer  sinuatus,  Sil.  Syst.),  O. 
hybrida,  and  the  large  flat  Orthis  rustica,  are  characteristic  shells  in 
this  formation.  Leptaena  laevigata,  and  L.  transversalis ;  Pentamerus 
linguifer,  and  Athyris  tumida,  Dalm.  (Atrypa  tenuistriata,  Sil. 
Syst.);  Khynconella  rotundata;  R.  depressa;  R.  Stricklandi;  R. 
deflexa,  and  R.  sphaerica;  and  in  some  parts  R.  navicula,  are  the  chief 
brachiopodous  shells. 

Among  them,  however,  are  several  common  to  this  deposit  and  the 
Lower  Silurian  rocks,  such  as  Orthis  elegantula,  so  common  in  the 
slates  of  Snowdon  ;  Strophomena  pecten  and  S.  (Leptaena)  depressa, 
Atrypa  marginalis,  and  A.  reticularis,  and  the  Spirifer  plicatellus. 
Most  of  these  have  a  great  range,  and  pass  upwards  through  the 
Wenlock,  high  into  the  Ludlow  formation.  Aviculae,  Nuculae,  and 
a  few  other  bivalve  shells  occur  frequently ;  but  few  of  them  are 
characteristic  except  the  Cardiola  interrupta.  Of  spiral  shells, 
Euomphalus  funatus  and  E.  alatus,  Pileopsis  (Nerita)  Haliotis,  Turbo 
cirrhosus,  Bellerophon  Wenlockensis,  and  B.  dilatatus  are  the  most 
frequent.  Theca  Forbesii  and  T.  anceps  are  pteropod  molluscs,  not 
uncommon  in  this  deposit.  Certain  Orthoceratites,  such  as  O.  an- 
nulatum,  O.  filosum,  and  O.  angulatum,  are  rare ;  but  many  of  the 
thin-shelled  species,  O.  subundulatum,  O.  primaevum,  and  others, 
abound  in  these  muddy  sediments.  They  are  almost  the  only  shells 
in  this  formation,  as  it  is  exhibited  in  Denbighshire  and  other  parts 
of  N.  Wales,  and  occur  there  in  the  greatest  abundance.  Phragmo- 
ceras  of  one  or  two  species,  and  certain  Lituites,  e.g.  L.  articulatus, 
L.  Biddulphii,  and  occasionally  L.  giganteus,  are  conspicuous  forms; 
but  these  two  last-mentioned  genera  are  not  commonly  met  with. 

Of  trilobites,  Encrinurus  punctatus  and  E.  variolaris,  Calymenc 


Chap,  v.]  AV  ENLOCK  LIMESTONE.  113 

Blumenbachii  and  C.  tuberculosa,  Phacops  caudatus  and  its  variety 
P.  longicaudatus,  are  characteristic,  which,  with  many  other  smaller 
species,  are  the  same  with  those  of  the  Wenlock  limestone.  The 
genera  Trinucleus,  Asaphus^  and  Ogygia  are  never  detected  even 
in  the  lowest  portions  of  the  shale,  these  forms  being  essentially 
characteristic  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks.  Cornulites  serpularius, 
pi.  16.  f.  6.,  and  other  annelides,  are  sometimes  found,  as  well  as 
stems  and  portions  of  encrinites,  though  the  perfect  fossils  are  very 
rare  in  the  typical  region.*  With  respect  to  corals,  it  may  be  stated 
generally,  that  they  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Wenlock  limestone, 
but  fewer  in  number;  the  cup  corals,  Cyathophyllum,  Omphyma,  &c., 
Favosites  alveolaris,  and  Stenopora  fibrosa,  being  the  most  conspicuous. 
We  ought  not  to  omit  to  notice  Graptolites  priodon  (Ludensis,  Sil. 
Syst.),  which  is  a  most  abundant  and  characteristic  fossil  of  the 
Wenlock  shale,  and  has  been  already  figured  as  occurring  in  the  Lower 
Silurian  rocks,  Foss.  6.  f,  3.,  and  pi.  12.  f.  4. 

Wenlock  Limestone.  —  The  upper  member  of  the  formation  is  a 
limestone  usually  of  lighter  grey  colours  than  the  lower  band  already 


View  of  Wenlock  Edge,  as  seen  fkoini  the  Hills  of  Ludlow  Kock  on  the  S.W. 

(From  Sil.  Syst.) 

The  linear  ridge  on  the  left  is  the  Wenlock  limestone  dipping  under  the  higher  ridge  of  Ludlow 
Rocks.    The  valley  of  Apesdale  on  the  extreme  left  is  in  the  Wenlock  shale. 

*  One  of  the  most  elegant  of  the  Silurian  encrinites,  the  Actinocrinus  pulcher, 
Salter,  which  is  found  in  strata  of  this  age  in  North  Wales,  will  be  mentioned  in 
chapter  9. 

L 


114  SILURIA.  [Chap.V. 

described,  and  in  every  respect  identical  with  the  well  known  limestone 
of  Dudley,  but  which  I  named  after  the  sharp  rectilinear  ridge  of 
Wenlock  (see  Map),  because  its  relations  to  inferior  and  superior 
deposits  are  there  better  seen  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  British 
Isles. 

It  consists  of  thick  masses  of  grey,  subcrystalline  limestone,  occa- 
sionally, but  very  rarely,  of  light  pink  colour,  in  part  very  argil- 
laceous, in  others  more  crystalline,  which  is  highly  charged  with 
encrinites  and  replete  with  corals.  The  rock  is  essentially  of  a  con- 
cretionary nature,  and  thus  differs  much  from  the  flat-bedded  Wool- 
hope  limestone  ;  being  for  the  most  part  marked  by  nodules  of  small 
size.  Occasionally  the  concretions  are  very  large,  and  are  then 
locally  termed  "  hailstones." 

This  limestone  is  underlaid  and  overlaid  by  shale  of  pale  grey  and 
greenish  tints,  copiously  charged  with  small  nodules  of  argillaceous 
limestone,  of  very  irregular  persistence.  The  large  concretions  or 
"hailstones"  (some  of  which  near  Wenlock  have  a  diameter  of 


Old  Quarries  in  the  Wenlock  Limestone. 


The  dark  cavities  indicate  the  places  from  whence  the  ballstone  or  best  crj'stalline  limestone 
has  been  extracted.  The  fossils  chiefly  occur  in  the  surrounding  layers  of  impure  earthy 
limestone  and  shale. 


Chap.  V.]  WENLOCK  LIMESTONE.  115 

80  feet)  being  more  crystalline,  have  been  quarried  out  as  the  best 
flux  for  the  smelting  of  iron,  and  their  extraction  has  left  caverns  in 
the  quarries,  as  expressed  in  this  woodcut. 

But  though  very  thick  at  Wenlock,  this  limestone  thins  out  so 
rapidly  in  its  course  to  the  south-west,  that  at  Haven  in  the  interior 
of  the  Ludlow  promontory  (see  woodcut  in  the  next  chapter)  it  is 
represented  by  thin  courses  of  small  concretions  only ;  and  on  the 
banks  of  the  river  Lugg,  west  of  Aymestry  (in  both  of  which 
localities  it  was  first  recognized  by  the  Rev.  T.  T.  Lewis),  it  is  alone 
represented  by  a  few  coralline  concretions,  varying  in  size  from 
2  inches  to  2  feet,  but  still  full  of  the  characteristic  fossils.  Thin- 
ning out  entirely  in  Radnorshire,  it  is  scarcely  to  be  recognized 
throughout  the  counties  of  Brecon,  Carmarthen,  and  Pembroke; 
its  place  being  only  marked  in  the  cliffs  of  Marloes  Bay,  to  the 
west  of  Milford  Haven,  by  some  characteristic  fossils  and  a  very 
small  quantity  of  impure  limestone  immersed  in  grey  and  sandy 
shale.    (See  lower,  vignette,  p.  66.) 

In  the  districts  of  Malvern,  Woolhope,  May  Hill,  and  Uske, 
however,  the  Wenlock  limestone  is  copiously  and  instructively  de- 
veloped; and  exhibits  in  numberless  natural  sections  and  quarries 
the  same  characters  as  in  Shropshire.  On  the  west  flank  of  the 
Malverns,  where  in  the  Ridgeway  of  Eastnor  Park  it  assumes  the 
same  linear  outline  as  at  the  Wenlock  Edge,  the  limestone  is 
estimated,  by  Professor  Phillips,  as  having  a  thickness  of  280  feet. 
There,  in  the  flexures  between  the  Ridgeway  and  Ledbury,  it  is 
admirably  exposed,  together  with  the  overlying  Ludlow  formation. 
(See  section,  p.  94.) 

To  the  north  of  the  town  of  Dudley,  this  limestone  rises  up  into 
various  domes  called  the  Castle  Hill,  Wren's  Nest,  and  other  smaller 
elevations,  which  have  been  protruded  from  beneath  the  surrounding 
coal  strata.  The  Castle  Hill  is  here  represented  to  the  left  hand  of 
the  spectator,  who  is  standing  on  the  slopes  of  the  Wren's  Nest, 


116  SILURIA.  [Chap.  V. 

and  looking  over  the  town  of  Dudley,  to  the  hills  of  basalt  near 
Rowley. . 


Castle  Hill.  Rowley  Hills.  Hagley  Hills. 

Dudley,  from  the  Wren's  Nest. 
(From  a  Drawing  by  Lady  Murchison,  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  480.) 


As  the  signs  of  violent  igneous  action  are  apparent,  both  in  the 
subterranean  rocks  of  this  rich  mining  tract,  and  in  the  various 
outbursts  of  basaltic  or  trappean  rocks  which  have  been  extended 
to  the  surface  (Rowley  and  Pouk  Hills,  &c.),  it  is  fair  to  infer 
that  these  domes  have  been  thrown  into  an  inflated  and  arched 
form  by  subterranean  expansion.*  The  Wren's  Nest  and  Castle  Hill 
thus  exhibit  on  each  side  two  courses  of  limestone,  which,  from  its 
superior  quality,  has  been  alone  worked  out,  first  in  open  quarries  and 
afterwards  by  deep  subterranean  galleries.  The  annexed  diagram, 
which  exhibits  a  section  through  the  Wren's  Nest,  shows  how  the 
two  bands  of  the  best  limestone,  d^,  have  been  extracted,  leaving 

*  See  the  account  of  the  igneous  rocks  of  this  district,  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  496. 
First  described  by  Mr.  Keir  and  others,  and  subjected  to  experiments  by  Mr. 
Gregory  Watt,  their  subterranean  relations  to  the  strata,  were  ably  described 
by  Mr.  Blackwall  of  Dudley,  after  the  publication  of  the  "  Silurian  System." 
The  descriptions  of  these  and  other  phenomena  connected  with  the  region  around 
Dudley,  are  given  in  detail  by  the  Government  Surveyors,  Records  of  the  School 
of  Mines,  vol.  i.  pt.  2.  p.  240. 


CiiAP.  v.] 


DUDLEY  AND  ITS  LIMESTONES. 


117 


Section  across  the  Wren's  Nest. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  484.) 


e  d'^  d>         d-^        d^  e 


rfi.  Lowest  Wenlock  shale  (place  of  Woolliope  limestone?).  Wenlock  shale,  d^.  Two 
bands  of  limestone  separated  from  each  other  by  bavin.  They  are  represented  by  the  white 
spaces,  from  which  the  best  limestone  has  been  quarried,  leaving  only  arches  of  support, 
e.  Overlying  bavin  and  shale  passing  up  into  Ludlow  rocks. 

only  a  few  arches  of  support ;  whilst  the  other  beds,  consisting  of 
impure  and  nodular  earthy  limestone,  thus  form  the  framework 
of  the  hill.  The  dotted  arch  indicates  what  the  dome  must  have 
been  when  entire,  whilst  the  tinted  portion  of  the  drawing  repre- 
sents the  body  of  the  hill,  the  upper  surface  of  which,  having  been 
hollowed  out  towards  the  centre,  has  obtained  the  name  of  Wren's 
Nest.  It  is,  therefore,  an  elevated,  inflated  dome,  which  was  probably 
truncated  at  its  summit  during  the  same  period  of  disturbance  and 
denudation  which  gave  to  the  mass  its  peculiar  form. 

When  viewed  from  below  on  its  southern  face,  and  where  neces- 


The  South  End  of  the  Wren's  Nest. 
(From  a  Sketch  by  the  Rev.  W.  Whewell,  D.D.    Sil.  Syst.,  p.  485.) 


The  spectator,  looking  to  the  north,  sees  how  the  limestone  strata  fold  over  a  central 

dome  of  shale. 

I  3 


118  SILURIA.  [Chap.V. 

sarily  the  excavated  outline  of  the  summit  cannot  be  seen,  the  flank 
of  the  dome  of  shale  and  "  bavin,"  from  whence  the  limestone  has 
been  entirely  removed,  presents  this  appearance. 

In  the  exterior  nucleus,  which  also  consists  of  shale,  the  calcareous 
matter  disappears ;  but  the  limestone  itself  is  quite  similar  in  com- 
position, colour,  and  large  hailstones,  as  well  as  in  its  small  con- 
cretions, to  the  rock  at  Wenlock. 

At  Woolhope  in  Herefordshire  (see  p.  106.  and  woodcut)  a  similar 
uprise  from  the  centre  has  there  produced  a  much  grander  pheno- 
menon. Strata  lower  than  any  seen  at  Dudley  are  there,  as  be- 
fore explained,  brought  to  view ;  and  the  denudation  of  the  valleys 
which  lie  between  the  ridges  that  encircle  the  central  dome  has  been 
so  complete,  as  to  render  it  the  finest  known  example,  within  the 
British  Isles,  of  a  valley  of  clean  denudation  as  well  as  of  elevation. 
Not  only  have  no  extraneous  loose  materials  been  translated  to  it 
from  other  tracts,  but  every  fragment  derived  from  the  mass  of  rocks 
which  must  once  have  arched  over  it,  has  been  swept  out  of  the 
central  and  encircling  hollows ;  a  striking  proof  of  the  forcible 
agency  exerted  in  the  denuding  operation.* 

In  making  an  approximate  estimate  of  the  thickness  of  the 
Wenlock  formation  in  the  original  Silurian  region,  I  spoke  of  700 
feet  for  the  shale,  and  about  300  for  the  limestones,  including  the 
nodular  beds.  Subsequently  measuring  the  strata  of  the  same  age 
near  the  Malvern  Hills,  Professor  Phillips  gives  them  a  thickness 
of  about  920  feet,  which,  with  the  addition  of  the  Lower  Wenlock  of 
Woolhope  limestone  and  shale,  which  were  not  incorporated  in  the 
formation  when  I  wrote,  amounts  to  about  my  estimate.  If,  how- 
ever, the  upper  or  chief  limestones,  including  all  the  beds  of 
"bavin"  or  impure  nodular  limestone,  be  measured  at  Dudley,  that 
portion  of  the  formation  must  be  considered  as  considerably  thicker 


Sil.  Spt.,  p.  436. 


Chap,  v.]  WENLOCK  LIMESTONE  FOSSILS.  119 

than  in  Salop  or  Hereford.  In  North  Wales,  though  void  of  lime- 
stone, the  formation  is  often  of  much  greater  dimensions,  amounting 
probably  to  more  than  2000  feet. 

In  the  above-mentioned  districts  of  England,  the  Wenlock  lime- 
stone passes  upwards  gradually  into  a  thick  mass  of  pale-coloured 
shale,  undistinguishable  from  that  beneath  the  solid  rock.  From 
its  physical  relations,  and  from  its  forming  usually  a  part  of  the 
same  hills  as  the  mass  of  the  Ludlow  rock,  it  is  classed  with  that 
formation ;  though  the  reader  must  understand,  that  in  reality  it  is 
only  an  intermediate  band  intimately  connecting  the  Wenlock  and 
Ludlow  in  the  Upper  Silurian  group,  and  is  almost  equally  related 
to  both  by  its  structure  and  fossil  contents. 

The  most  prominent  fossils  of  the  limestone,  among  which  corals 
abound,  have  been  long  known  to  collectors,  who  have  derived  their 


Fossils,  10. 
Corals  of  the  Wenlock  Limestone. 


1.  Favosites  cristata,  Linn.  2.  F.  Gothlandica,  Linn.  3.  Do.  variety,  and  3*,  3**,  magnified 
portions  of  two  varieties.  4.  Favosites  alveolaris,  Goldf.  5.  Alveolites  Labecbii,  Milne  Edw. 
6.  Favosites  oculata,  Goldf.  ?  7.  Stenopora  fibrosa,  Goldf.  8.  Do.  variety  incrusting  shells 
(Alveolites  fibrosa,  Sil.  Syst.). 

chief  supplies  from  Dudley  and  its  environs.  My  friends  who 
are  searching  for  Wenlock  fossils,  may,  however,  be  told  that  their 
labour  will  be  better  rewarded  by  a  search  at  the  northern  end  of  the 


120  SILURIA.  [Chap.  V. 

Wenlock  Edge,  near  Coalbrook  Dale,  than  even  at  Dudley.  The 
corals,  encrinites,  and  shells,  along  this  rich  escarpment,  are  not 
only  more  easily  detached  from  the  matrix,  but  are  less  eagerly 
collected  by  dealers.  I  would  particularize  Benthall  Edge,  which 
overhangs  the  Severn  in  so  picturesque  a  form,  and  Gliddon  Hill, 
as  excellent  localities.*  This  rock  is  indeed  distinguishable  from 
all  the  inferior  strata,  by  the  very  great  abundance  of  its  corals, 
the  profusion  of  which  make  it  resemble  in  many  places  a  coral 
reef.  These  fossils  were  admirably  described  for  me  in  the  original 
Silurian  System'*  by  my  valued  friend  Mr.  Lonsdale. 

Fossils,  11. 
Corals  of  the  Wenlock  Limestone. 

Millepore  Corals  of  the  genus  Heliolites  (Porites,  Sil.  Syst.),  most  nearlj-  related  to 
the  "  blue  coral  "  Heliopora  cserulea,  Blainv.,  of  the  Australian  coral  reefs. 


1.  Heliolites  tubulata,  Lonsd.   2.  H.  petalliformis,  Lonsd.   3.  H.  megastoma,  M'Coy. 
4,  5.  H.  interstinctus,  Wahl. 

Three  woodcuts,  representing  the  most  common,  perhaps,  of  these 
corals,  will  be  given  in  chapter  9. 

In  addition  to  the  Haly sites  catenulatus,  or  universal  chain-coral, 
Foss.  12.  f.  6.  ;  and  the  Stenopora  fibrosa,  Foss.  10.  f.  7.;  which  are 

*  Some  of  the  finest  corals  originally  published  in  the  "  Silurian  System,"  were 
collected  by  the  Rev.  T.  T.  Lewis,  in  the  gorge  of  the  river  Lugg,  above 
Aymestry. 


Chap.  V.] 


WENLOCK  LIMESTONE  FOSSILS. 


121 


Fossils,  12. 
Corals  of  the  Wenlock  Limestone. 


no  less  common  in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  (see  chap.  8., 
p.  176.),  the  following  species  of  corals  are  everywhere  typical  of 
the  Wenlock  limestone :  — 

Heliolites  interstinctus  (Pontes  pyriformis  of  my  old  work),  Foss.  11.  f.  4.,  5., 
both  the  large  and  small-celled  varieties;  H.  tubulatus,  f  1.;  H.  petalliformis, 
f.  2.;  Favosites  alveolaris,  Foss.  10.  f .  4  ;  F.  cristata,  f.  1.;  F.  oculata,  f.  6. ; 
Coenites  juniperiniis,  Foss.  12.  f.  3. ;  Syringopora  ramulosa,  f.  5. ;  and  its  young  or 
creeping  form,  fig.  2.  (Aulopora  serpens,  "Sil.  Syst.")  ;  S.  bifurcata,  f.  4.;  Omphyma 
turbinatum,  chap.  9.  Foss.  34.  f.  4. ;  Cyathophyllum  truncatum,  ib.  f.  2.,  and  C. 
articulatum,  f.  1. ;  Acervularia  ananas,  f.  6. ;  with  many  others. 

Of  the  crinoids  the  more  perfect  of  the  forms  published  in  my 
old  work  are  alone  reproduced,  in  the  plates  of  this  volume.*  Per- 
haps the  large  species  Periechocrinus  (Actinocrinus)  moniliformis, 
pi.  13.  f.  1,  2.,  is  the  most  characteristic;  for  it  covers  large  sur- 
faces of  the  limestone  at  Dudley,  and  is  found  in  disjointed  fragments 
in  many  other  localities. 

Among  the  mollusks  of  this  formation,  which  are  figured  in  plates 
20.  to  33.,  Orthoceratites  are  very  abundant,  O.  annulatum  and  O. 
Brightii  being  frequent  species.  Bellerophon  dilatatus,  B.  Wen- 
lockensis,  and  the  singularly  beautiful  Conularia  Sowerbyi,  pi.  25., 
are  characteristic.  Among  the  most  frequent  spiral  shells  are  five 
species  of  Euomphalus,  viz.,  E.  carinatus,  E.  sculptus,  E.  discors, 
E.  funatus,  and  E.  rugosus  (pi.  24,  25.). 

Ordinary  bivalve  shells  are  less  common  ;  but  Orthonota  cingulata, 

♦  See  Plates  13.  to  15. 


122  SILURIA.  [Chap.  V 

Avicula  reticulata,  Pterinea  retroflexa  and  P.  planulata,  chap.  9. 
Foss.  42.  are  abundant  species.  Of  the  brachiopods,  Strophomena 
euglypha ;  S.  filosa,  and  especially  S.  depressa  ;  Pentamerus  galeatus ; 
Spirifer  plicatellus  (S.  trapezoidalis,  S.  radiatus,  and  S.  interlineatus, 
Sil.  Syst.);  S.  crispus  and  S.  elevatus;  Orthis  rustica,  0.  elegantula, 
and  O.  hybrida,  Leptsena  transversalis,  and  L.  laevigata*,  are  all  of 
them  shells  described  in  the  "  Silurian  System  ; "  and  of  the  Terebra- 
tulae,  Rhynconella  borealis  (R.  lacunosa  of  my  old  work),  pi.  22.  f.  4. 
is  by  far  the  most  common  species ;  it  is  generally  in  company  with 
R.  cuneata,  K.  Salterii,  and  E.  Wilsoni  —  the  latter  sometimes  very 
abundant. 

Trilobites  are  very  common;  the  most  frequent  of  them  is  the 
so  called  Dudley  Locust  or  Calymene  Blumenbachii,  a  species  which, 
as  we  have  seen,  also  occurs  deep  in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks, 
and,  as  we  shall  presently  find,  ascends  also  into  the  Upper  Ludlow. 
Other  forms  of  these  creatures  are  also  prevalent;  a  few  may  be 
noticed.  Encrinurus  punctatus,  chap.  9.  Foss.  46.  f.  5.  and  E. 
variolaris,  f.  6.  are  very  common  in  both  the  limestone  and  the  shale. 
Phacops  Downingiae  is  one  of  the  most  characteristic  trilobites,  par- 
ticularly in  the  environs  of  Dudley.  The  Phacops  Stokesii  (Caly- 
mene macrophthalma  of  my  former  work),  Phacops  caudatus, 
Acidaspis  Brightii,  and  Cheirurus  bimucronatus,  are  frequent  fossils, 
and,  as  before  stated,  belong  also  to  the  inferior  formations.  The 
Phacops  caudatus  is  especially  abundant  in  the  Malvern  Hills; 
whilst  the  Calymene  Blumenbachii  is  the  reigning  fossil  at  Dudley. 
Bumastus  Barriensis  and  Homalonotus  delphinocephalus,  which  have 
been  cited  from  the  lower  Wenlock  or  Woolhope  limestone,  are 
also  found  in  this  rock,  the  former  very  frequently.  The  annelides 
Cornulites  serpularius  and  Tentaculites  ornatus  occur  on  almost 
every  specimen  of  the  limestone  at  Dudley, 


*  See  Plates  20.  to  22. 


Chap,  v.]  WENLOCK  LIMESTONE  FOSSILS.  123 

A  further  acquaintance  with  the  fossils  of  the  Wenlock  formation 
must  be  obtained  by  consulting  the  9th  chapter,  as  also  the  nu- 
merous descriptive  monographs  mentioned  in  the  Preface.  The 
object  of  this  work  is  not  to  direct  attention  to  rare  and  curious 
species,  but  chiefly  to  those  forms  which  are  characteristic  of  the 
rocks. 


124 


SILUKIA. 


[Chap.  VI. 


CHAPTER  VI. 
UPPER  SILURIAN  ROCKS  —  continued. 

THE  LUDLOW  TORMATION,  GENERAL  CHARACTER  OF.  ITS  SUBDIVISION  IN  THE 
TYPICAL  DISTRICTS,  INTO  LOWER  LUDLOW  ROCKS,  AYMESTRY  LIMESTONE,  AND 
UPPER  LUDLOW  ROCKS. 

In  a  general  sense  the  Ludlow  rocks  of  the  Silurian  region  of 
England  and  Wales  must  be  viewed  as  a  continuation  of  the 
same  argillaceous  masses  which  prevail  in  the  underlying  Wenlock 
formation.  Such,  however,  is  more  particularly  the  case  in  the 
lower  beds  of  this  deposit.  The  central  portion  consists  in  several 
tracts  of  an  argillaceous  dark-grey  limestone.  The  upper  member 
being  more  sandy  and  somewhat  calcareous,  and  yet  retaining  in 
parts  much  of  the  "mudstone"  matrix,  is  in  great  measure  an  im- 
perfect, thin-bedded,  grey-coloured,  earthy  building  stone.  Occa- 
sionally the  highest  stratum  is  composed  of  light*coloured  sandy 
freestones  and  tilestones,  through  which  the  formation  graduates 
lithologically  and  conformably  into  the  lowest  beds  of  the  Old  Red 
or  Devonian  rocks. 

Such  is  the  general  order  near  the  town  of  Ludlow,  which  stands 
upon  the  higher  strata  of  the  formation.  Its  central  and  inferior 
masses  are  best  seen  either  in  the  escarpments  of  the  adjacent  hills 
on  the  S.  W.,  or  in  that  ridge  which  for  a  distance  of  twenty 
miles  on  the  N.  E.  is  interposed  between  the  Wenlock  Edge  and 
the  old  red  sandstone  of  Corve  Dale  and  the  Glee  Hills.  The 
section  and  view  at  pp.  102.  113.,  will  give  the  reader  an  adequate 
idea  of  the  succession.    (See  also  Map  and  coloured  section.) 

In  following  the  formation  from  the  Ludlow  tract  on  its  strike  or 


Chap.  VI.] 


THE  LUDLOW  ROCKS. 


125 


direction  to  the  S.  W.,  its  included  limestone,  like  that  of  the  sub- 
jacent deposit,  is  also  soon  seen  to  thin  out  and  disappear.  Scarcely 

Ludlow  Castle. 
(From  a  Sketch  by  Lady  Harriet  Clive,  Sil.  Syst.  p.  195.) 


In  this  sketch  the  river  i'eme  is  seen  to  flow  in  a  chasm  of  tlie  Lpper  Ludlow  Rocks,  the  strata 
on  which  the  spectator  is  supposed  to  be  standing,  being  the  same  as  those  on  which  the 
castle  is  built    The  basaltic  Titterstone  Clee  Hill  is  in  the  distance. 

has  the  geologist  quitted  the  north-western  corner  of  Herefordshire, 
than  he  finds  the  central  band  attenuated  to  a  mere  course  of  cal- 
careous grit,  which  is  entirely  lost  in  Radnorshire.  There  the  upper 
Silurian  rocks  of  the  mountain  of  Radnor  Forest,  which  are  laid  open 
in  the  ravine  of  "  Water  break  its  Neck"  and  other  gullies,  expose  a 
gradual  succession  from  the  Wenlock  through  the  whole  of  the 
Ludlow  formation  up  to  the  junction  beds  of  the  old  red  sandstone, 
and  with  scarcely  a  trace  of  limestone.  As  such  also  the  formation 
ranges  for  the  most  part  through  Brecon  and  Carmarthen,  the  central 
part  being  nowhere  a  workable  limestone,  and  only  here  and  there 
calcareous,  except  through  the  occasional  presence  of  the  shelly 
remains  of  a  few  fossils.  In  Marloes  Bay,  Pembrokeshire,  where 
the  Silurian  rocks  are  exposed  in  the  sea-cliffs  (see  view,  p.  66.), 
it  is  difficult  to  say  more  than  that  sandy  calcareous  shale  and  very 
impure  limestone  containing  Wenlock  fossils,  are  surmounted  by 
ferruginous  and  hard  sandstone,  rarely  calcareous,  and  in  parts  a 
conglomerate,  but  full  of  characteristic  Ludlow  rock  fossils.  Though 
the  uppermost  of  these  beds  are  not  unlike  some  of  the  rocks  of 


126 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  VI. 


Ludlow,  yet  without  this  change  in  mineral  character,  the  same 
order  of  superposition  prevails  in  Pembroke  as  in  Salop  and 
Hereford,  or  in  the  Clyro  and  Begwm  Hills,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Wye,  between  Hay  and  Builth,  where  I  first  marked  this  succession. 
(See  Map,  and  Sil.  Syst.,  pp.  5.  312.). 

Let  us  now  consider  the  nature  of  the  different  members  of  the 
Ludlow  formation,  where  they  are  most  conspicuously  characterized 
by  a  diversity  of  mineral  matter  and  the  greatest  quantity  of  fossil 
remains. 

Lower  Ludlow  Rock. — These  strata,  which  are,  I  repeat,  simply  an 
upward  prolongation  of  the  uppermost  member  of  the  Wenlock 
formation,  are  composed  of  dark  grey  shale,  very  rarely  in  any  degree 
micaceous,  with  small  concretions  of  impure  limestone.  My  chief 
reason  for  grouping  them  with  the  Ludlow  rather  than  with  the 
Wenlock  rocks  was,  that  every  where  in  the  typical  districts  of 
Shropshire  and  Herefordshire,  these  shales  occupy  the  base  of  the 
escarpments  of  the  same  ridges  of  which  the  harder  masses  of 
Aymestry  limestone  and  Upper  Ludlow  rocks  form  the  summits  and 
outward  slopes. 

The  clearest  and  finest  examples  of  this  are  seen  in  the  deeply 
excavated  interior  of  the  Ludlow  promontory,  particularly  in  de- 
scending from  the  Comus  Wood  of  Milton*  into  the  depression  of 

Section  across  the  Ludlow  Promontory. 

(From  Sil.  Svst.,  pi.  31.  f.  5.) 
N.W.  "  S.B. 

Brindgwood.  Gatlev.  Whiteway 

R.  Onny.  VVigmore.  '  Head. 


d*.  Wenlock  shale,   d 2.  Genlock  limestone,   ei.  Lower  Ludlow,   e^.  Aymestry  limestone. 
e^.  Upper  Ludlow.  /.  Old  Red  Sandstone  (bottom  beds  of). 


*  Milton  passed  some  time  in  Ludlow  Castle,  in  his  day  a  border  Welsh 
fortress,  and  his  "  Mask  of  Comus"  was  performed  in  it.  The  scene  immor- 
talized by  the  name  of  Comus  Wood  is  one  of  the  deep  depressions  which  vary 
the  surface  of  the  Ludlow  promontory. 


Chap.  VI.]  LOWER  LUDLOW  ROCK.  127 

Mary  Knoll  Dingle,  and  thence  into  the  great  valley  of  denudation 
of  Wigmore,  in  which  the  Wenlock  formation  is  exposed  as  ex- 
pressed in  the  preceding  section. 

The  inferior  strata,  for  the  most  part  argillaceous,  are  often  ar- 
ranged in  spheroidal  masses,  showing  a  tendency  to  concretionary 
structure,  which  rapidly  exfoliate  under  the  atmosphere,  and  break 
into  shivery  fragments.  Calcareous  nodules,  differing  only  from 
those  of  the  Wenlock  deposit  in  being  usually  of  a  blacker  colour, 
have  often  been  formed  around  an  Orthoceras,  Trilobite,  or  other 
fossil,  as  a  nucleus. 

One  of  the  most  prevalent  of  these  fossils  is  our  old  friend  Caly- 
mene  Blumenbachii,  whose  acquaintance  the  collector  may  have  first 
made  in  the  lower  rocks.  (See  also  ch.  8.)  It  is  accompanied  very  fre- 
quently by  the  long-tailed  Asaphus,  or,  as  it  is  now  called,  Phacops 
longicaudatus.  These  two  may  be  considered  the  characteristic  tri- 
lobites  of  the  formation,  though  there  are  several  other  species.  And, 
with  these,  the  Graptolites  priodon,  or  Ludensis  *,  occurs  abundantly. 
Nor  are  the  Cardiola  interrupta,  pi.  23.  f.  12.,  and  Murchisonia 
Lloydii,  pi.  24.  f.  5.,  less  characteristic  fossils. 

In  ascending,  the  strata  become  somewhat  more  sandy,  consti- 
tuting thick,  earthy,  and  very  slightly  calcareous  flagstones,  the 

pendle "  of  the  workmen,  in  which  orthoceratites  prevail,  the 
flaglike  separation  being  due  to  laminae  of  sand. 

These  strata  form  the  support  of  the  Aymestry  or  Ludlow  lime- 
stone, from  which  they  are  usually  separated  by  soft  soapy  beds, 
in  parts  an  imperfect  fuller's  earth.  It  is  the  decomposition  of 
this  unctuous  fuller's  or  "  Walker's "  earth  of  the  natives,  be- 
neath heavy  masses  of  the  limestone,  which  rest  upon  it,  which 
has  occasioned  numerous  landslips  both  near  Ludlow  and  in  other 
parts  of  Herefordshire,  one  of  the  most  striking  of  which  will 
presently  be  mentioned. 

*  Ludensis  is  the  Latin  word,  signifying  "  of  Ludlow." 


128  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VI. 

The  lower  shale  occupies  the  escarpments  and  contiguous  valleys 
of  the  Ludlow  rocks  which  range  from  Shropshire  by  Presteign  to 
Kadnor  Forest,  and  also  large  undulating  tracts  of  the  western 
parts  of  Shropshire  or  contiguous  parts  of  Montgomeryshire,  such 
as  the  Long  Mountain,  and  other  tracts  around  Welshpool  and 
Montgomery  (see  Map).  From  the  escarpments  west  of  Kington, 
it  extends,  together  with  the  upper  members  of  the  Ludlow  rocks, 
to  the  banks  of  the  Wye,  and  is  finely  exposed  in  the  noble  escarp- 
ment at  the  western  end  of  the  Forest  of  Mynydd  Epynt  in  Breck- 
nockshire. A  good  idea  of  the  outline  of  that  tract  is  .conveyed  by 
a  sketch  given  in  the  10th  chapter,  where  the  rounded  and  soft 
outline  of  the  escarpment  in  the  middle  ground,  as  seen  from  the 
slaty  hills  on  the  west,  is  due  to  the  soft  nature  of  this  deposit. 
The  same  rock  is  also  well  developed  in  the  Malvern  tract,  where 
Professor  Phillips  assigns  to  it  a  thickness  of  about  750  feet. 
(See  also  section,  p.  94.) 

In  the  Woolhope  elevation  and  the  group  of  Usk,  or  as  lying 
between  the  Dudley  and  Sedgley  (Wenlock  and  Aymestry)  lime- 
stones in  Staffordshire,  it  is  everywhere  the  same  dull,  non-micaceous 
shale,  which,  from  its  incoherence,  has,  for  the  most  part,  been 
denuded;  thus  giving  rise  to  a  deep  valley,  which  separates  the 
harder  parts  of  the  Wenlock  and  Ludlow  rocks  from  each  other. 

In  the  environs  of  Ludlow,  and  in  many  parts  of  the  Silurian 
region,  this  inferior  member  of  the  Ludlow  rocks  is  specially  charac- 
terized by  a  profusion  of  straight  or  curved  chambered  shells,  Ortho- 
ceratites,  Lituites,  and  Phragmoceras,  a  genus  named  by  my  friend 
Mr.  Broderip,  and  which  was  unknown  before  the  publication  of 
the  "  Silurian  System."  Orthoceratites  abound ;  not  less  than 
eleven  species  having  been  originally  figured  as  characteristic  of 
this  rock.  But  extended  researches  have  shown  that,  in  this 
case  as  in  many  instances  of  other  fossils  alluded  to,  several 
of  these  chambered  sliells  occur  in  much  older  as  well  as  much 


Chap.  VI.]  LOWER  LUDLOW  FOSSILS.  129 

younger  members  of  the  system.  Among  the  orthoceratites,  the 
largest,  and  perhaps  the  most  common,  are  the  O.  Ludense,  pi.  28. 
f.  1.,  and  0.  filosum,  pi.  27.  f.  1. ;  these  are  generally  accompanied  by 
a  smaller,  thin-shelled  species,  which  appears  to  be  the  O.  sub- 
undulatum  of  Portlock,  Foss.  44.  f.  3.  The  others,  though  often 
found,  are  by  no  means  so  abundant  or  characteristic.  Of  Lituites, 
the  only  common  species  is  a  very  large  one,  eight  or  ten  inches  in 
diameter  —  the  L.  giganteus  of  pi.  33.  f.  1,  2.  The  Phragmoceras, 
just  noticed,  is  a  most  remarkable  shell  with  the  mouth  or  opening 
contracted  into  the  shape  of  a  key-hole.  Some  of  its  forms  are 
flattish,  broad,  and  shaped  like  a  hatchet-head  (pi.  32.);  whilst  others, 
known  as  the  pear  orthoceratites  (pi.  30.),  are  suddenly  swelled  into 
a  balloon-like  shape  above,  and  end  below  in  a  tapering  point. 

Among  the  lamellibranchiate  shells,  Cardiola  interrupta,  Broderip, 
is  the  most  common  (pi.  23.  f.  12.);  yet  this  same  species,  formerly 
believed  to  be  peculiar  to  this  zone,  has  also  been  found  in  the  Llan- 
deilo  formation !  Another  bivalve  equally  characteristic,  and  as  yet 
known  only  in  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  is  the  Cardiola  striata 
(pi.  23.  f.  13.).  This,  in  company  with  the  chambered  shells  above 
noticed,  is  to  be  found  in  all  the  fossil-bearing  localities  of  Shropshire 
and  the  neighbouring  regions.  Orthonota  rigida,  pi.  23.  f.  8.,  and 
Pterinea  retroflexa,  f.  17.,  are  not  such  common  species ;  and  the 
latter  is  far  more  frequent  in  the  Upper  Ludlow  rock. 

Many  species  of  fossils  have  indeed  been  found  common  to  this 
stratum  and  the  Wenlock  formation ;  and  this  is  especially  the  case 
with  the  brachiopodous  shells.  Among  these  may  be  cited  the  Pen- 
tamerus  (Atrypa)  galeatus,  Strophomena  depressa  and  S.  euglypha, 
Leptffina  laevigata,  Atrypa  reticularis,  and  Rhynconella  (Terebratula) 
Wilsoni.  Nor  are  there  any  brachiopods  strictly  peculiar  to  it, 
unless  it  be  the  small  but  very  characteristic  Lingula  lata,  pi.  20. 
f.  6.  In  this  view,  the  Lower  Ludlow  shale  might  be  classed  with 
the  Wenlock  formation;  but  the  other  forms  of  mollusks,  above 

K 


130  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VI. 

noticed,  give  to  it  nevertheless  a  distinct  character,  and  entitle  us  to 
class  it  in  the  Ludlow  formation. 

Aymestry  or  Ludlow  Limestone, — The  want  of  persistence  over 
wide  areas  of  any  mass  of  solid  limestone  in  the  centre  of  the  Ludlow 
formation  has  been  already  adverted  to.  In  some  parts  of  South 
Wales,  where  the  calcareous  matter  is  absent,  it  is  even  diflficult  to 
trace  the  place  of  this  band  in  the  Ludlow  rocks ;  but  in  Hereford- 
shire and  Shropshire,  and  again  at  Sedgeley  in  Staffordshire  (near 
Dudley),  it  is  a  dark-grey  limestone,  worked  pretty  extensively  for 
use.  And  even  where  the  lime  is  very  sparingly  distributed,  the 
rock  is  a  highly  calcareous  flagstone,  and  may  generally  be  re- 
cognized by  its  predominant  fossils  and  well-defined  joints. 

This  central  member  of  the  Ludlow  formation  was  named  by  me 
after  the  beautiful  village  of  Aymestry,  where  the  rock  is  well  laid 
open,  and  where  its  relative  position  and  fossil  contents  were  ela- 
borately worked  out  by  my  friend,  the  Rev.  T.  T.  Lewis.*  It  is  a 
subcrystalline,  earthy  limestone,  arranged  in  beds  from  one  to  five  feet 


Whiteway  Head,   (Escarpment  of  Amyestry  Limestone.    Strata  dipping  to  the  S.  F.) 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  243.    Sketched  by  the  late  Rev.  W.  R.  Evans.) 


*  See  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  201. 


Chap.  VI.]  AYMESTRY  OR  LUDLOW  LIMESTONE.  131 

thick;  the  laminae  of  deposit  being  marked  by  layers  of  shells  and 
other  fossils.  In  the  escarpment  of  the  south-western  limb  of  the 
Ludlow  promontory,  this  rock  is  frequently  seen  to  form  bluff  cliffs, 
the  inclined  strata  of  which  appear,  as  in  the  centre  of  the  preceding 
woodcut,  resting  upon  the  Lower  Ludlow  shale,  and  plunging 
under  the  Upper  Ludlow  rock. 

When  quarried  into,  the  rock  is  of  an  indigo  or  bluish  grey  co- 
lour, in  parts  mottled  by  the  mixture  of  white  calcareous  spar.  The 
quarries,  like  those  in  all  the  harder  bands  of  the  Ludlow  form- 
ation, present  natural  backs  or  divisions,  as  in  the  above  diagram, 
usually  coated  by  a  dirty  yellow  or  greenish  shale.  These  are  the 
faces  of  joints  more  or  less  vertical,  which,  when  open,  occasion 
the  rock  to  separate  into  rhomboidal  masses,  which  are  easily  de- 
tached where  the  strata  are  much  inclined.  The  rock  is,  therefore, 
subject  to  slides  or  subsidences,  particularly  where  the  underlying 
saponaceous  "  Walker's,  or  Fuller's  Earth "  prevails.  Examples  of 
these  slides  may  be  seen  at  many  spots,  but  no  where  more  instruc- 


The  Palmer's  Cairn  Landslip. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  248.) 

The  woodcut  exhibits  the  slope  of  the  beds  and  the  vertical  joints,  which  in  conjunction  with 
the  upper  and  lower  lines  of  bedding  divide  the  rock  into  lozenge-shaped  detached  lumps. 


132  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VI. 

lively  than  at  the  Palmer's  Cairn,  or  Churn  Bank,  S.  W.  of  Ludlow, 
as  represented  in  the  foregoing  woodcut.  The  area  there  affected 
exceeds  fifty  acres. 

This  limestone  often  occupies  the  summit  or  capping  of  the  escarp- 
ment of  Ludlow  rocks,  as  in  the  ridges  of  Mary  Knoll  and  Brindg- 
wood  Chase  west  of  Ludlow ;  and  in  the  hills  extending  from  the 
View  Edge  and  Norton  Camp,  where  it  forms  a  conspicuous  band 
parallel  to,  and  loftier  than,  the  Wenlock  Edge  (see  woodcut, 
p.  113.). 

At  Aymestry,  the  limestone  occupies  both  banks  in  the  gorge  of 
the  river  Lugg ;  but,  as  above  said,  it  rapidly  thins  out  to  the  south- 
west. On  the  whole  it  is  much  less  of  a  concretionary  character  than 
the  subjacent  Wenlock  limestone,  and  partakes  more  of  the  flat- 
bedded  character  which  is  observable  in  the  "  pendle "  beds  beneath, 
and  is  indeed  characteristic  of  all  parts  of  the  Ludlow  formation. 

In  the  Woolhope  valley  of  elevation,  the  Aymestry  rock  (see 
section,  p.  106.)  assumes  precisely  the  same  external  or  geographical 
features  as  on  the  flanks  of  the  Ludlow  promontory,  in  having  from 
its  hardness  resisted  denudation  better  than  other  portions  of  the 
deposit.  It  thus  forms  the  crest  of  the  external  and  encircling  ridge, 
and  is  prominent  in  the  hills  of  Harden,  Seager,  and  Backbury. 
Although  it  there  differs  in  being  less  of  a  limestone  than  near 
Ludlow,  it  contains  many  of  the  same  fossils,  even  the  Pentamerus 
Knightii,  its  characteristic  shell  (pi.  21.  f.  10.),  having  been  found  in 
the  Woolhope  district  since  the  "  Silurian  System"  was  published. 

On  the  outermost  western  slopes  of  the  Malvern  Hills,  and  on  the 
sides  and  summits  of  their  northern  prolongation  the  Abberley  Hills, 
the  Aymestry  rock,  though  containing  less  calcareous  matter  than 
near  Ludlow,  is  still  the  well-defined  central  portion  of  the  forma- 
tion. In  some  of  these  tracts  (as  near  the  Hundred  House)  it 
might  be  used  for  lime,  if  the  Wenlock  limestone  of  such  superior 
quality  were  not  in  juxtaposition.    The  same  may  be  said  of  the 


Chap.  VI.]  UPPER  LUDLOW  ROCK.  133 

districts  of  May  Hill,  Usk,  &c.,  where  this  limestone  is  represented  by 
the  harder  and  somewhat  calcareous  central  part  of  the  Ludlow  rocks. 

At  Sedgeley,  in  Staffordshire,  the  rock  again  becomes  once  more 
a  complete  limestone,  in  w^hich  the  predominant  Aymestry  fossil,  the 
Pentamerus  Knightii,  abounds.  There  it  is  known  as  the  "  black 
limestone,"  in  contradistinction  to  that  of  Dudley,  on  which,  with  an 
intermediate  shale  or  "  bavin,"  it  reposes.* 

The  fossils  which  pervade  the  Aymestry  limestone,  in  addition  to 
the  Pentamerus  Knightii,  are  the  Khynconella  (Terebratula)  Wilsoni, 
Lingula  Lewisii,  Bellerophon  dilatatus,  Avicula  reticulata,  &c.,  and 
many  of  the  same  shells,  corals,  and  trilobites,  which  are  common 
in  the  subjacent  Wenlock  limestone.  Indeed,  except  in  the  less 
number  of  species  and  the  occurrence  of  some  of  the  shells  more 
characteristic  of  the  next  member  (the  Upper  Ludlow  rock),  this 
limestone  is  scarcely  to  be  distinguished  by  its  fossil  contents  from 
the  Wenlock  limestone. 

In  some  tracts  the  place  of  this  rock  is  marked  only  by  the  shelly 
courses,  which  near  Ludlow  form  its  immediate  cover ;  and  wherever 
that  stratum  occurs  it  is  replete  with  the  Ehynconella  (Terebratula) 
navicula  (pi.  22.  f.  12)  and  the  small  Lept^ena  laevigata.  It  is  this 
band  which  forms  the  base  of  the  Upper  Ludlow  rock. 

Upper  Ludlow  Rock.  —  This  is  the  most  diversified  in  structure  and 
contents  of  the  three  subdivisions  of  the  highest  Silurian  formation, 
and  is  remarkably  interesting  in  exhibiting  a  transition  from  its 
highest  members  into  the  next  overlying  system,  the  Old  Red,  or 
Devonian.  Its  lowest  stratum  may  be  considered  the  calcareous 
shelly  band,  charged  with  Rhynconella  (Terebratula)  navicula,  which 
has  just  been  mentioned  as  forming  the  roof  of  the  Aymestry  lime- 
stone, and  which  occasionally  attains  a  thickness  of  30  or  40  feet. 
This  is  surmounted  by  grey,  argillaceous  masses  so  common  throughout 
the  Silurian  rocks,  and  which  from  their  incoherent  nature  easily  de- 

*  See  Silurian  System,  sections,  p.  481.  etseq. 
K  3 


134 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  VI. 


compose  to  mud.  Like  other  sediments  of  higher  antiquity  in  the 
same  system  of  rocks  and  fossils,  it  has  a  tendency  to  run  into  large 
spheroids,  and  occasionally  contains  small  concretions  of  sandy  clay, 
which,  being  more  destructible  than  the  pure  argillaceous  matrix, 
have  often  weathered  out  in  the  faces  of  the  escarpments,  and  exhibit 
the  lines  of  stratification  by  small  elliptic  cavities  like  swallow-holes. 

The  chief  and  distinguishing  portion  of  the  Upper  Ludlow  con- 
tains more  calcareous  matter  and  sand  than  the  beds  immediately 
beneath.  It  is,  on  the  whole,  a  slightly  micaceous  thin-bedded 
stone  of  bluish-grey  colour  within,  but  weathering  externally  to  a 
brown  and  rusty  grey,  and  remarkable  for  its  transverse,  symmetrical 
joints,  as  exhibited  in  this  view. 


Upper  Ludlow  Rocks  at  the  Bone  Well.* 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  250.) 


*  This  well  is  so  named  because  bones  of  mice,  frogs,  and  other  small  animals, 
are  from  time  to  time  washed  out  from  the  open  joints  of  the  impending  rock,  and 
offer  what  was  formerly  considered  a  great  marvel.  Old  Drayton,  in  his  Polyolbian, 
makes  the  bones  of  frogs  into  those  of  fishes :  — 

"  With  strange  and  sundry  tales 
Of  all  their  wondrous  things ;  and  not  the  least  in  Wales  ; 
Of  that  prodigious  spring  (him  neighbouring  as  he  past) 
That  little  fshes'  bones  continually  doth  cast." 


Chap,  VI.]  UPPER  LUDLOW  ROCK.  135 

Though  quarried  extensively,  these  stones,  either  when  not  well 
selected  or  not  placed  in  the  wall  in  the  direction  of  the  layers,  are 
very  prone  to  decomposition.  Some  strata  of  this  character  appear 
in  the  foreground  of  the  vignette,  p.  125.,  which  represents  the 
Castle  of  Ludlow  standing  on  the  rock  out  of  which  it  was  built. 

I  have  elsewhere  compared  this  member  of  the  Upper  Ludlow 
with  the  "  Macigno  "  of  Italy,  and  particularly  with  those  dark 
greyish  portions  of  it  which  occur  between  Perugia  and  Florence. 
This  close  lithological  resemblance  of  so  old  a  rock  to  so  young 
a  deposit  (for  the  Italian  Macigno  is  no  older  than  the  London  clay), 
is  cited  to  show  how  similar  sandy,  muddy,  and  calcareous  materials, 
collected  at  the  bottom  of  a  sea,  often  necessarily  resemble  each  other 
when  formed  into  stone,  though  originally  deposited  at  such  very 
widely  separated  periods.  In  this  comparison  it  is  also  to  be  specially 
noted,  that  the  "  Macigno,"  or  young  Italian  rock,  is  infinitely 
more  hard,  compact,  and  durable,  than  the  ancient  stone  of  Ludlow.* 

The  surfaces  of  these  Upper  Ludlow  rocks  are  occasionally 
covered  by  small  wavy  ridges  and  furrows,  here  and  there  crossed  by 
little,  tortuous,  raised  bands,  the  first  of  which  are  supposed  to  have 
resulted  from  the  rippling  action  of  waves,  w^hen  the  sediment  was 
accumulating  under  the  sea,  and  the  last  to  have  been  the  traces 
left  by  worm-like  animals  frequenting  a  sandy  and  muddy  shore 
as  the  tide  receded. 

It  is  chiefly  in  this  portion  of  the  formation,  that  the  best  de- 
fined organic  remains  are  found,  often  preserving  the  sharpness  of 
their  forms,  and  the  remains  of  their  original  shelly  coverings. 
Here  we  meet  with  a  profusion  of  the  following  fossils :  Chonetes 
(Leptsena)  lata,  pi.  20.  f.  8. ;  Orthonota  amygdalina,  pi.  23.  f.  7. ; 
Goniophora  cymbaeformis,  pi.  23.  f.  3. ;  Avicula  lineata,  f.  16.; 
Pterinea  retroflexa,  f.  17.;  Orbicula  rugata,  pi.  20.  f.  1,  2.;  Orthis 

*  See  my  description  of  the  Macigno  of  Italy,  Alps,  Apennines,  &c.  Quart. 
Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  v.  p.  280.,  where  I  showed  that  it  was  of  tertiary  age. 


136  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VI. 

elegantula  (var.  orbicularis),  pi.  20.  f.  9, 10.;  O.  lunata,f.  11.;  Ehyn- 
conella  (Terebratula)  nucula,  pi.  22.  f.  1.;  Turbo  corallii,  pi.  24.  f.  1.; 
T.  octavia,  f.  4.  &c. ;  and  the  coiled  shelly  serpuline  body,  Serpulites 
longissimus,  pi.  16.  f.  1.  The  Cornulites  serpularius,  and  a  small 
Tentaculite  are  far  from  uncommon. 

Corals  are  but  scarce ;  yet  Stenopora  (Favosites)  fibrosa  is  found 
frequently  encrusting  particular  species  of  shells, — Turbo  corallii  and 
Murchisonia  corallii,  as  their  names  imply,  being  its  favourite 
habitats ;  it  is  figured  in  a  previous  woodcut,  p.  119.    Foss.  10.  f.  8. 

Orthoceratites,  occasionally  of  large  size,  occur,  and  trilobites. 
Of  the  latter,  Phacops  caudatus  and  the  Encrinurus  punctatus,  with 
a  rare  sample  of  the  Calymene  Blumenbachii,  reach  the  top,  but 
they  are  not  common ;  nor  indeed  are  trilobites  at  all  abundant, 
except  a  fine  species  of  the  genus  Homalonotus,  H.  Knightii, 
pi.  19.  f.  7.,  which  may  be  found  throughout  the  whole  range  of  this 
formation,  sometimes  of  very  large  size. 

In  the  cliffs  at  Ludlow,  the  chief  rocks  are  surmounted  by  what 
I  termed  the  fucoid  bed.  This  is  a  greenish-grey  argillaceous  sand- 
stone, almost  entirely  made  up  of  a  multitude  of  small,  wavy, 
rounded,  stem-like  forms,  which  resemble  entangled  sea-weeds.  In 
this  mass  is  found,  and  always  in  a  vertical  position,  the  singular 
body  (pi.  15.  f.  4.)  named  Cophinus  dubius.  It  is  generally  of  an 
inversely  pyramidal  shape,  and  its  sides  are  scored  with  elegant 
transverse  grooves.  I  am  assured  by  Messrs.  Sowerby  and  Salter, 
who  have  studied  it  attentively,  that  it  is  the  impression  made  by 
the  stems  of  encrinites,  which,  rooted  and  half  buried  in  the  micaceous 
mud,  produced,  by  their  wavy  and  somewhat  rotatory  motion,  the 
beautiful  pattern,  every  line  of  which  answers  to  one  of  the  project- 
ing bosses  or  rings  of  the  jointed  stem.  The  best  proof  that  such 
has  been  the  cause,  is  that  these  stems  are  always  present,  and  lying 
contiguous  to  the  markings.  The  slow  trailings  of  these  stems  have 
probably  left  their  traces  in  virtue  of  the  micaceous  character  of  the 


Chap.VL]  upper  LUDLOW  FISHES.  137 

mud,  which  may  have  impeded  the  perfect  fusion  of  the  separated 
portions  of  the  semifluid  mass  after  the  stem  had  passed  through 
them. 

The  Upper  Ludlow  rock  is,  in  this  respect,  the  most  interesting  of 
the  divisions  of  the  Upper  Silurian  group,  that  it  is  the  oldest  band 
in  which  any  remains  of  fishes  and  land  plants  have  been  discovered. 
The  upper  and  lower  parts  of  this  stratum,  as  seen  at  Ludlow,  are 
finely  laminated,  earthy,  greenish-grey  sandstones,  containing  a  few 
remains  of  ichthyolites,  with  several  shelly  remains  characteristic  of 
the  Upper  Ludlow.  It  was  the  central  part  only  of  this  stratum, 
or  a  gingerbread-coloured  layer  of  a  thickness  of  three  or  four 
inches  only,  and  dwindling  away  to  a  quarter  of  an  inch,  which 
exhibited,  when  first  my  attention  was  directed  to  it  *,  a  matted  mass 
of  these  bony  fragments,  for  the  most  part  of  very  small  size  and 
of  very  peculiar  character.  These,  with  a  very  few  remains  of 
shells,  and  a  rare  crustacean,  the  Pterygotus  problematicus,  occur  in 
a  cement  in  which  varying  proportions  of  carbonate  of  lime,  iron, 
phosphate  of  lime,  and  bitumen  are  disseminated.  Some  of  the 
fragments  of  fish  were  of  a  mahogany  hue,  but  others  of  so  bril- 
liant a  black,  that,  when  discovered,  the  bed  conveyed  the  impres- 
sion of  being  a  heap  of  broken  beetles. 

The  supposed  fishes  of  this  bed,  as  exhibited  in  plate  4  of  my 
original  work,  must  now,  however,  be  reduced  in  number.  At  all 
events,  besides  the  remarkable  Pterygotus,  which  is  here  figured  in 
pi.  19.  f.  4,  5.,  and  which  was  removed  by  Agassiz  himself  to  the 
class  of  crustaceans.  Professor  M'Coy  has  diminished  the  list  of  fish 
remains  by  proving,  that  some  of  the  supposed  fish  defences  should 
also  be  removed  to  that  group.  One  of  these,  to  which  he  has  apphed 

*  This  course  was  discovered  by  my  friends  and  excellent  Ludlow  coadjutors,  the 
Rev.  F.  T.  Lewis  and  Dr.  Lloyd,  the  latter,  now  alas !  removed  by  death.  By 
their  assistance,  and  that  of  the  late  Rev.  J.  Evans,  I  traced  this  fish-bed  in 
several  other  parts  of  the  Ludlow  promontory.    See  Sil.  Syst.  p.  198.  605. 


138 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  VI. 


the  name  Leptocheles  Murchisoni  (see  pL  19.  f.  1,  2.),  is  figured 
in  my  original  work  as  an  Onchus,  or  fish  defence.* 

This  bed,  enclosing  minute  fragments  of  fish-bones  and  skin  or 
shagreen,  has  since  been  detected  in  tracts  very  distant  from  Ludlow. 

The  upper  portion  of  the  Ludlow  formation,  or  capping  of  the 
bone-bed,  is  composed  of  light-coloured,  thin-bedded,  slightly  mica- 
ceous sandstones,  in  which  quarries  are  opened  out  near  Downton 
Castle  on  the  Teme.  (The  Downton  Castle  stone,  Sil.  Syst.  p.  197.) 
The  uppermost  layers  of  the  whole  system,  and  which  form  a  transi- 
tion into  the  Old  Red  sandstone,  consist  of  tilestones  and  sand- 
stones, occasionally  reddish,  in  which,  besides  other  fossils  found  in 
the  Ludlow  rock,  the  Lingula  cornea,  pi.  34.  f.  2.,  with  crustaceans 
(pi.  19.  f.  1.  3.),  and  defences  of  fishes,  often  occur. 

Being  compelled  in  my  researches  to  draw  a  line  of  demarcation 
between  the  upper  part  of  the  Ludlow  formation  and  the  bottom 
of  the  overlying  Old  Red  sandstone,  I  formerly  included  the 
tilestones  in  the  latter ;  particularly  as  in  most  parts  of  the  region 
they  decompose  into  a  red  soil,  and  thus  they  afford  a  clear  physical 
line  of  demarcation  between  them  and  the  inferior  rocks,  which 
facilitated  the  construction  of  the  geological  map.f 

Even  then,  however,  the  fossils  which  were  figured  as  charac- 
teristic of  such  tilestones  exhibited  little  else,  as  I  showed,  than 

*  For  further  illustration  of  this  point,  see  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond. 
vol.  ix.  p.  12. 

f  The  reader,  who  may  refer  to  my  original  map,  must  recollect,  that  it  was 
constructed  between  the  years  1831  and  1836,  when  even  the  geographical  outlines 
of  a  large  portion  of  the  country  had  not  been  defined  by  the  publication  of  the 
sheets  of  the  Ordnance  Survey.  Geologists  who  have  had  to  labour  with  little 
topographical  assistance  in  a  region  like  this,  which  had  been  wholly  unexplored  by 
miners,  are  not  those  who  will  criticise  those  errors  of  detail,  which  have  been 
remedied  by  the  government  surveyors  who  followed  me.  The  classification  and 
chief  outlines  of  my  map  and  sections,  as  far  as  they  relate  to  my  own  Silurian 
rocks,  have  indeed  been  completely  sanctioned  by  Sir  Henry  de  la  Beche  and  his 
associates ;  and  this  is  the  highest  reward  which  a  pioneer  like  myself  could  expect 
to  receive. 


Chap.  VI.]  UPPER  LUDLOW  ROCK.  139 

species  common  to  the  Ludlow  rock  itself.  This  zoological  fact, 
and  subsequent  researches  in  other  parts  of  England,  above  all 
those  of  Professor  Sedgwick  in  Westmoreland,  where  the  Upper 
Ludlow  strata  are  much  developed,  have,  for  eleven  years,  led  me 
to  classify  these  tilestones  with  the  Silurian  rocks,  of  which  they 
form  the  natural  summit.  For,  even  in  their  range  from  Shropshire 
through  Hereford  and  Radnorshire,  into  Brecon  and  Carmarthen- 
shire, whether  they  are  of  red  or  yellow  colours,  they  are  charged 
with  Orthoceras  buUatum,  Chonetes  (Leptaena)  lata,  Spirifer  elevatus, 
Orthis  lunata,  Ehynconella  nucula,  Cucullella  ovata,  Bellerophon 
trilobatus,  B.  expansus,  Trochus  helicites,  Holopella  (Turritella) 
obsoleta,  and  the  minute  bivalved  crustacean,  Beyrichia  tuberculata. 
(See  pi.  34.  and  its  figures).  All  of  these  are  the  most  common  fossils 
of  the  Upper  Ludlow  rock ;  although  a  few  of  them  descend  as  low 
as  the  Caradoc  sandstone. 

Including  the  Downton  Castle  building  stones,  this  band  of 
transition  contains  the  oldest  traces  of  terrestrial  vegetation  yet 
known  in  the  British  Isles.  The  specimens  which  I  found  were 
usually  small,  and  little  more  than  carbonized  stains.  At  the 
bottom  of  the  detached  basin  of  Old  Red  sandstone  of  Clun  Forest 
in  Shropshire,  I  detected  thin  layers  of  matted  and  broken  vege- 
tables (frequently  carbonized)  in  the  tilestone  or  "firestone"  beds  of 
that  tract  (Sil.  Syst.  p.  19L).  Since  then,  the  government  collectors 
have  enlarged  our  acquaintance  with  them,  and  in  the  museum  in 
Jermyn  Street  there  are  to  be  seen  many  more  specimens  of  this 
stratum,  among  which  are  the  minute  globular  bodies,  pi.  35.  f.  30., 
called  bufonites  "  in  the  "  Silurian  System,"  but  which,  as  will 
presently  be  explained,  are  now  shown  to  be  vegetables. 

Though  not  every  where  divisible  into  the  portions  above  de- 
scribed, the  Upper  Ludlow  rock  maintains,  on  the  whole,  a  decisive 
aspect  and  position  in  its  range  from  Shropshire  through  Hereford 
and  Radnorshire  into  Brecon  and  Carmarthenshire,  until  last  seen 


140  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VI. 

in  the  cliffs  of  Marloes  Bay  in  Pembrokeshire.  Frequently  some- 
what calcareous,  the  deposit  is  for  the  most  part  a  harder  and 
sandier  stone,  partaking  much  more  of  the  character  of  the  Italian 
"  Macigno,"  as  before  said,  than  any  other  rock  of  the  Silurian  system. 

On  the  eastward  slopes  of  Bradnor  and  Hergest  Hills,  near  King- 
ton, and  particularly  in  the  ridges  extending  thence  by  Gladestry 
and  Pains  Castle  to  the  Trewerne  Hills  on  the  banks  of  the  Wye, 
this  sub-group  is  admirably  exposed  in  slightly  inclined  masses  re- 
plete with  fossils.  In  the  escarpment  of  the  Trewerne  and  Begwm 
Hills  *,  and  in  many  other  places,  this  grey,  shelly,  thin-bedded  mass 
of  rock  is  strikingly  exhibited,  dipping  under  the  bottom  beds  of 
the  Old  Eed  sandstone,  as  in  the  long  sectional  woodcut  in  the 
10th  chapter. 

Along  the  outer  or  western  edge  of  the  Malvern  Hills,  the  Upper 
Silurian,  reposing  on  the  Lower  Silurian  as  before  described,  p.  94. 
exhibits,  in  like  manner.  Upper  Ludlow  rocks  dipping  under  the  Old 
Bed  marls,  descriptions  of  which,  as  occurring  at  many  places,  from 
Ledbury  northwards,  may  be  consulted  in  the  "  Silurian  System," 
and  in  the  monograph  of  Professor  Phillips. f 

Like  passages  upwards,  from  an  inferior  grey-coloured  series,  to  a 
superior  red  system,  are  observable  at  Usk,  and  in  tracts  around 
that  town,  where  these  beds  repose  on  Wenlock  limestone.  J 

In  Brecknockshire,  to  the  south  of  Builth,  the  Ludlow  rocks,  sur- 
mounting a  noble  escarpment  of  the  other  members  of  the  Upper 
Silurian  division  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Wye,  but  in  which  no 
limestones  occur,  exhibit  a  fine  upward  development,  as  they  pass 
under  the  expanse  of  the  Old  Red  sandstone  in  the  wilds  of  Mynydd 
Epynt  (see  the  long  vignette,  chapter  10.).  There  the  Upper  Ludlow 
rises  from  beneath  the  Old  Red,  in  a  rapid  anticlinal  flexure  at  Alt- 

*  This  was  my  first  Silurian  section,  1831,  in  passing  from  the  known  Old  Red  to 
the  then  unknown  Ludlow  rocks,  Sil.  Syst.  p.  5,  312.. 

t  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  Gt.  Brit.,  vol.  ii.  part  1 .  J  Sil.  Syst.  p.  408. 


Chap.  VI.]  UPPER  LUDLOW  ROCK.  141 

fawr  and  Corn-y-fan,  as  here  represented;  the  central  and  lower 
members  of  the  formation  forming  the  underlying  strata. 

Brecon  Anticlinal  of  Ludlow  Rocks,  throwing  off  Old  Red  Sandstone. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  211.) 

Alt  fawr  and  O  T? 


e3  / 

ci.  Lower  Ludlow,   e^.  Middle  Ludlow  with  a  calcareous  band  representing  the  Aymestry  lime- 
stone.  e3.  Upper  Ludlow.  /.  Old  Red  junction  beds. 

Thence  into  Carmarthenshire,  the  junction  of  the  Ludlow  rocks 
with  the  Old  Red  sandstone  is  well  laid  open  in  numerous  places, 
especially  in  the  narrow  valley  of  Cwm  Dwr,  between  Trecastle  and 
Llandovery,  where  the  tilestones  on  which  Horeb  Chapel  stands, 
are  full  of  the  casts  of  shells,  among  which  are  characteristic  forms, 
such  as  the  Trochus  helicites.  Turbo  Williamsi,  Bellerophon  trilo- 
batus,  and  many  others. 

The  banks  of  the  river  Sowdde,  in  Carmarthenshire,  east  of  Llan- 
gadock,  also  expose  a  good  junction  of  these  highly  micaceous 
Upper  Silurian  flagstones  with  overlying  Old  Ked  marl ;  the 
whole  at  very  high  angles  of  inclination.  Thence,  in  their  range 
to  the  mouth  of  the  Towy,  the  Upper  Ludlow  becomes  a  compact 
hard  sandstone,  every  where  surmounted  by  Old  Red.* 

In  Pembrokeshire,  similar  junctions  with  the  Old  Red  sandstone 
are  seen  near  Tavern  Spite,  Narberth,  Freshwater  East,  Freshwater 
West,  and  in  Marloes  Bay.  In  all  these  places,  strata  of  dull 
greenish- grey  argillaceous  sandstone,  minutely  micaceous,  differing 
chiefly  from  the  type  of  the  Upper  Ludlow  of  Shropshire  in  being 
harder  and  thicker  bedded,  and  which  repose  on  rocks  with  Upper 
Silurian  fossils,  plunge  under  red  and  green  strata  (the  red  rab 
of  Pembroke),  or  bottom  beds  of  the  Old  Red  sandstone.  (See  p.  66.) 

*  See  woodcuts,  pp.  72,  73. 


142  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VI. 

In  the  valley  of  Woolhope,  the  same  succession  is  very  apparent 
all  round  the  external  rim  of  that  remarkable  elliptical  elevation  (see 
diagram,  p.  106).  In  nearly  all  parts  of  that  circumference,  the  Upper 
Ludlow  is  well  exposed,  and  occasionally  contains,  in  one  or  two 
spots,  the  rare  remains  of  fishes. 

At  Hagley  Park,  distant  only  two  miles  from  the  north-western 
end  of  the  Woolhope  ellipse,  and  four  miles  east  of  Hereford,  the 
uppermost  beds  of  the  Ludlow  formation  have  been  recently  unco- 
vered from  beneath  their  covering  of  red  clay  and  marl ;  and  there 
the  thin  bed,  containing  fish-bones  and  the  crustacean  Pterygotus, 
has  been  found  by  Mr.  H.  Strickland  to  be  just  in  the  same  relative 
position  as  at  Ludlow.*  This  spot  marks  a  minor  undulation,  or 
dome  of  the  Ludlow  rocks,  the  surface  of  which  only  is  visible ; 
whilst  a  much  greater  mass  of  the  formation  protrudes  in  the  ad- 
jacent hill  of  Shucknall,  as  formerly  described  (Sil.  Syst.).  At 
Hagley  Park,  the  fish  bed,  scarcely  exceeding  an  inch  in  thickness, 
lies  between  the  beds  of  brownish  and  yellowish  sandstone  (the 
Downton  Castle  stone)  and  a  grey  micaceous  shaly  rock  full  of  Upper 
Ludlow  fossils.  The  fish  remains  are  chiefly  those  of  the  minute 
shagreen  scales  (pi.  35.  f.  18.),  the  fish  defences  Thelodus  parvidens  and 
Onchus  tenuistriatus  (fig.  15  and  17.),  with  Coprolites  (fig.  21-27.); 
whilst  in  the  sandy  beds  above  these  there  are  the  remains  of  car- 
bonized vegetables,  and  among  them  Mr.  Strickland  detected  some 
of  the  minute  globular  or  spherical  bodies  mentioned  above,  which 
Dr.  Hooker  has  ascertained  to  be  a  fossil  of  the  natural  order  of 
Lycopodiacese.  Similar  vegetable  traces  have  been  observed,  again, 
at  various  places  around  the  external  rim  of  the  Woolhope  ellipse.  . 

Again,  in  the  southernmost  prolongation  of  the  Silurian  group 
of  May  Hill  and  Huntley  Hill,  where  I  formerly  described  the 

*  I  have  visited  the  spot  since  the  discovery,  in  company  with  Mr.  Strickland. 
See  his  descriptions  of  these  beds  in  the  S.  of  Herefordshire  and  in  Gloucester- 
shire.   Quart.  Journ.  Geol  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  viii.  p.  381.,  and  ib.  vol.  ix.  p.  8. 


CiiAP.  VL]  RANGE  OF  LUDLOW  BONE-BED.  143 

whole  Silurian  series  as  reduced  to  one  thin  mass  of  Ludlow  rock, 
having  the  Old  Red  sandstone  on  one  side,  and  the  New  Red  on  the 
other,  my  friend,  Mr.  Strickland,  has  very  recently  detected  the 
existence  of  the  very  same  thin  fish-bone  layer  in  precisely  the 
same  place  as  at  Ludlow. 

Lastly,  in  the  arched,  or  dome-shaped  masses  of  Upper  Silurian 
rocks,  which  rise  out  from  beneath  the  Old  Red  sandstone  at  Pyrton 
Passage  on  the  Severn,  Professor  Phillips  has  noted  the  remains 
of  small  fish-bones  in  the  Upper  Ludlow  rocks.* 

The  recognition  of  this  thin  band  of  the  uppermost  Ludlow  rock, 
in  which  the  oldest  recognizable  land  plants  and  fishes  are  associated 
with  certain  shells  for  a  distance  of  some  forty-five  miles  from  the 
tract  in  which  I  first  described  it,  is  truly  remarkable.  For  whilst  it 
shows  the  value  of  close  and  minute  researches,  it  is  a  strong  proof 
that,  after  many  years  of  hard  labour,  the  Ludlow  rock  still  re- 
mains, as  formerly  described  by  me,  the  lowest  stage  in  the  crust  of 
the  globe  in  which  any  ichthyolites  have  been  detected,  a  fact  which 
will  be  reverted  to  in  ensuing  chapters. 

*  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  of  Great  Brit.,  vol.  ii.  part  1.  The  succession  of  the 
Silurian  rocks  in  the  dislocated  tract  of  Tortworth,  to  the  S.E.  of  Pyrton  Passage, 
is  described  in  detail  in  the  Silurian  System,  p.  99. 


144 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  Vll. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

SILURIAN  ROCKS  OF  BRITAIN  BEYOND  THE  TYPICAL  REGION  OF  ENGLAND 
AND  WALES,  AS  SEEN  IN  CORNWALL,  THE  NORTH-WEST  OF  ENGLAND, 
SCOTLAND,  AND  IRELAND. 

Though  occupying  large  spaces  in  other  parts  of  the  British  Isles^ 
the  Silurian  rocks,  as  separated  into  formations  and  characterized  by 
fossils,  are  no  where  so  clearly  defined  as  in  that  typical  region  of 
which  we  have  taken  leave.  In  no  other  tract  of  the  United 
Kingdom  have  geologists  been  able  to  show  so  clearly  the  relations 
of  the  lowest  fossiliferous  or  protozoic  rocks  to  others  beneath  them 
which  exhibit  no  signs  of  former  life  ;  nor  is  there  any  where  else  so 
clear  an  ascending  order  from  the  Silurian  into  the  next  overlying 
deposit,  the  Old  Eed  Sandstone  or  Devonian  rocks. 

In  Cornwall,  for  example,  the  discovery  Avithin  the  few  last 
years  only  of  certain  fossils,  has  proved  that  some  of  the  quartzose 
sandstones  forming  its  southern  headlands  are  Lower  Silurian.  The 
fossiliferous  sandstone  in  question  passing  to  the  south  of  the  Dod- 
man,  and  coming  out  to  view  in  Gorran  Haven,  contains  several 
species  of  Orthidce  as  well  as  trilobites  most  characteristic  of  that 
division.* 

There,  however,  no  one  can  show  an  unbroken  descending  se- 
quence beneath  those  beds,  nor  an  ascending  order  from  them  to  the 
contiguous  and  younger  deposits  of  Devonian  age ;  and  as  large 

*  These  fossils  were  collected  by  Mr.  Peach,  and,  from  their  inspection  and  a 
visit  to  their  chief  localities  in  1846,  I  pronounced  the  rocks  in  which  they 
occur  to  be  Lower  Silurian  rocks  (Trans.  Roy.  Geol.  Soc.  Cornwall,  1846,  p.  3l7.)j 
and,  as  such,  they  were  inserted  in  a  new  edition  of  my  Geological  Map  of 
England  and  Wales,  published  by  the  Society  for  the  Diffusion  of  Useful  Know- 
ledge. 


Chap.  VII.]  SILURIANS  OF  CORNWALL,  ETC.  145 

portions  of  the  strata  of  Cornwall  have  been  highly  altered,  and 
mineralized,  so  is  this  southern  tract  much  dislocated.  In  such  a 
region,  therefore,  we  cannot  expect  to  meet  with  proofs  of  suc- 
cession. It  is  sufficient  to  state,  that  the  band  of  siliceous  grits  and 
quartzites  in  the  south  of  Cornwall,  which  I  had  termed  Silurian 
in  1846,  presents  much  of  the  character  and  aspect  of  the  oppo- 
site rocks  of  France,  which  the  French  geologists  have  mapped 
and  described  as  Lower  Silurian,  as  will  hereafter  be  noticed.  Thi& 
is  precisely  one  of  those  broken  and  insulated  tracts  of  older  sedi- 
mentary rocks,  where  the  geologist  has  no  other  test  by  which  he 
can  recognize  their  age  than  by  their  imbedded  organic  remains. 

Professor  Sedgwick,  who  has  visited  the  localities  since  I  de- 
scribed them,  shows,  indeed,  that  these  strata  are  inverted ;  the 
Lower  Silurian  (which  he  now  calls  Cambrian)  overlying  the  De- 
vonian or  Old  E-ed  rocks.  At  the  same  time,  the  chief  fossils  de- 
fined by  Sowerby  and  M''Coy  *,  consist  of  the  simple  plaited  Orthidaa 
so  very  common  in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  viz.,  Orthis  calli^ 
gramma,  0.  flabellulum,  with  O.  elegantula,  and  O.  testudinaria ; 
Strophomena  grandis ;  and  the  trilobites  Homalonotus  bisulcatus  ;. 
Calymene  brevicapitata  of  Portlock,  and  Phacops  apiculatus,  Salter. 
That  these  are  true  and  original  Lower  Silurian  types  cannot  be^ 
doubted. 

In  the  north-western  and  mountainous  part  of  England  the 
Silurian  rocks  appear  in  great  force  in  the  counties  of  Westmoreland 
and  Cumberland  and  the  adjacent  tracts  of  Lancashire  and  York- 
shire. Though  some  of  their  members  there  assume  a  different 
lithological  aspect  to  what  they  maintain  in  the  Silurian  and  Welsh 
region,  they  have  been  clearly  paralleled  by  several  geologists 
with  those  original  types.  Professor  Sedgwick,  who  has  most 
studied  the  lake  region  (which  I  have  traversed  on  three  occasions 

*  See  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond,  vol.  viii.  p.  13, 
L 


146  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VII. 

for  purposes  of  general  comparison),  and  who  has  described  it  in 
a  series  of  valuable  memoirs,  has  recently  grouped  the  lowest  fossili- 
ferous  limestones,  or  those  of  Coniston,  in  his  Cambrian  rocks, 
though  during  several  years  he  identified  them  by  means  of  the 
published  fossils  with  the  Lower  Silurian  and  even  with  its  upper 
portion. 

In  truth,  the  region  of  Siluria,  as  geologists  now  admit,  afforded 
the  key  by  which  the  fossiliferous  strata  in  the  north-western  tracts 
of  England  were  brought  into  order  and  had  their  proper  places 
assigned  to  them.  For,  in  Cumberland,  where  the  lowest  members 
of  this  primeval  series  rise  up  into  the  lofty  mountains  of  Skiddaw 
and  Saddleback,  the  inferior  masses  of  crystallized  schists  which  pass 
downwards  into  fine,  glossy,  chiastolite  slates,  have  been  too  much 
metamorphosed  by  eruptive,  granitic  rocks,  to  allow  us  to  hope  for 
the  detection  in  them  of  any  regular  order  or  symmetry,  still  less 
of  fossil  contents.  These  beds  are  followed  by  green  slates  and 
porphyries,  in  which  also  no  fossils  have  been  found,  owing,  as  it 
is  believed,  to  the  great  abundance  of  igneous  matter.  In  vain, 
therefore,  in  such  a  country,  does  the  geologist  seek  for  the 
equivalents  of  the  bottom  rocks,  described  in  the  earlier  chapters  as 
overlaid  conformably  by  strata  with  Lingulae  and  trilobites.  No 
where  in  the  lake  region  have  the  repeated  labours  of  geologists  or 
fossil  collectors,  including  that  close  searcher  Mr.  John  Kuthven,  de- 
tected the  lower  fossil  band  or  the  Lingula  flags  of  North  Wales, 
unless  it  be  represented,  as  Professor  Sedgwick  thinks  probable, 
by  the  few  graptolites  and  fucoids  of  the  Skiddaw  slate.  With  the 
exception  of  rare  sea-weeds  and  zoophytes,  not  a  trace  of  any  thing 
has  been  detected  in  the  thousands  of  feet  of  strata,  which,  with 
interpolated  igneous  matter,  intervene  between  the  slates  of  Skiddaw 
and  the  Coniston  limestone,  with  its  overlying  flagstones,  &:c.  At 
that  zone  only  do  we  begin  to  find  any  thing  like  a  true  fauna; 
and  judging  from  its  remains  it  may  be  admitted  to  be  a  repre- 


Chap.  VII.]     SILURIANS  —  WESTMORELAND^  CUMBERLAND,  ETC.  147 

sentative  of  the  Llandeilo  formation  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks. 
For,  among  the  fossils,  the  same  species  of  simple  plaited  Orthidae, 
with  trilobites  and  corals,  are  again  met  with  which  characterize 
the  limestones  of  Llandeilo  or  Bala. 

From  physical  data,  and  the  great  thickness  of  the  strata,  we  may 
indeed  hypothetically  admit,  that  Professor  Sedgwick  is  right  in 
assigning  to  the  schists  of  Skiddaw  (in  which  one  or  two  graptolites 
alone  have  been  found)  as  high  an  antiquity  as  the  lowest  fossil 
beds  of  North  Wales  and  Shropshire.  But  all  w^e  can  safely  say  is, 
that,  reasoning  from  the  graptolites,  the  whole  is  a  Lower  Silurian 
series,  which  is  metamorphosed  and  obscured  by  igneous  eruptions 
in  its  lower  parts,  and  exhibits  beneath  it  no  clear  representative 
whatever  of  the  Longmynd  or  bottom  rocks. 

In  proceeding,  however,  to  the  south  and  south-east  from  the  more 
crystalline  and  mountainous  part  of  this  north-western  tract  of  Eng- 
land, the  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  whether  they  be  ranged  with  the 
Llandeilo  or  with  the  Caradoc  subdivision,  are  seen  to  be  suc- 
ceeded by  younger  deposits,  which,  though  of  very  different  mineral 
characters,  unquestionably  represent  by  position  and  fossils  the  Wen- 
lock  and  Ludlow  formations.  I  cannot  more  tersely  and  clearly  ex- 
press these  relations  than  in  the  language  which  Professor  Sedgwick 
himself  applied  to  this  region  in  1845,  i.  e,  six  years  after  the 
publication  of  the  "  Silurian  System."  "  Thus,  the  fossiliferous 
slates,"  says  he,  "  present,  first,  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  in  a  very 
degenerate  form,  and  secondly,  the  Upper  Silurian  in  a  noble  series,''"'* 

Nor  can  I  convey  a  better  idea  of  the  succession  of  rocks  in  this 
district  than  by  referring  the  reader  to  sections  and  descriptions  by 
the  same  author,  published  in  1846,  when  combined  with  his  last 
memoirs  of  1852.  It  is  enough  for  me,  on  this  occasion,  to  state, 
that  these  show  a  conformable  succession  of  deposits  from  the 
crystalline  chiastolite  schists,  resting  on  a  granitic  nucleus  or  centre, 
*  See  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  i.  p.  443. 


148  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VII, 

up  through  Skiddaw  slates,  and  a  vast  thickness  of  green  slates  and 
porphyry,  to  a  thin  band  of  limestone  (Llandeilo  and  Bala),  and  a 
considerable  thickness  of  overlying  flagstone,  with  Lower  Silurian 
fossils,  followed,  as  the  Professor  has  recently  discovered,  by  the 
equivalent  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone  (the  "  Coniston  Grits").  These 
are  surmounted  by  a  copious  Upper  Silurian  series,  in  which  the 
Wenlock  and  Ludlow  formations  are  recognized  by  their  position 
and  fossils,  though  in  their  mineral  aspect  they  differ  much  from  the 
original  types. 

This.  Upper  Silurian  series,  forming  the  rocks  on  both  sides  of 
Windermere,  and  thence  extending  far  to  the  south,  consists  in  the 
first  instance  of  the  Ireleth  slates.  These  rocks  have  a  slaty 
cleavage  oblique  to  the  beds,  are  in  parts  calcareous,  and  have 
proved  to  be  the  equivalents  of  the  Wenlock  formation,  or  more 
particularly  of  its  hard  slaty  form  which  occurs  in  Denbighshire. 
The  overlying  masses  are  sandy  and  pebbly  rocks.  Then  follow 
other  coarse  slates,  grits,  and  flags,  called  by  Mr.  Sharpe  "  Winder- 
mere rocks,"  in  which  Lower  Ludlow  fossils  occur,  and  then  a  very 
distinct  representative  of  the  Upper  Ludlow,  as  proved  both  by 
position  and  fossils,  but  differing  in  being  a  much  harder  sandy 
flagstone  than  the  rocks  of  like  age  in  Siluria.  The  series  ter- 
minates upwards  in  true  tilestones,  which,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Lune  and  near  Kendal,  are  the  exact  counterparts  of  the  uppermost 
Silurian  zone,  and  are  charged  with  numerous  fossils,  some  of  the 
most  striking  of  which  will  be  treated  of  in  chap.  9.*). 

*  The  reader  who  desires  to  study  the  data  by  which  our  present  knowledge  of 
the  geology  of  the  Lake  district  has  been  acquired  must  read  the  various  memoirs 
of  Professor  Sedgwick  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Geological  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  675., 
and  the  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  i.  p.  442.,  vol.  ii.  p.  106.,  vol.  iii.  p.  133., 
vol.  iv.  p.  216.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  35.  136.;  the  Memoirs  of  Mr.  Sharpe,  Proc.  Geol. 
Soc,  vol.  iv.  pp.  23,  70.;  and  those  by  Professor  Phillips,  Geol.  Trans.  If.S., 
vol.  iii.  p.  1.,  and  vol.  iv.  p.  95. 


Chap.  VII.] 


SILURIANS  OP  SCOTLAND. 


149 


In  this  region,  however,  the  ascending  series  is  interrupted,  as 
Professor  Sedgwick  has  shown.*  Instead  of  a  complete  series  of  the 
Old  Eed  Sandstone,  as  it  has  been  described  in  Shropshire,  Here- 
fordshire, or  South  Wales,  and  a  conformable  gradation  and  passage 
upwards  into  its  overlying  sandstones  and  marls,  the  Silurian  rocks 
of  all  ages  are  at  once  unconformably  overlapped  by  red  masses, 
chiefly  coarse  conglomerates,  which  alone  represent  the  great  and 
complex  group  to  be  considered  next  in  order. 

Silurian  Rocks  of  Scotland,  —  In  the  early  days  of  Scottish  geo- 
logy, its  illustrious  founders  Hutton  and  Playfair  considered  the 
schistose  mountains  in  the  south  of  Scotland  to  be  void  of  all 
traces  of  life,  until  their  able  associate.  Sir  James  Hall,  detected  a 
few  fossil  shells  in  a  limestone  at  Wrae  Hill,  in  Peebleshire,  which 
had  been  considered  to  be  primary.  The  merit  of  transferring 
these  strata  from  the  primary  to  the  transition  class  is  also  in 
great  measure  due  to  our  contemporary  Professor  Jameson;  for 
though  he  made  little  account,  as  was  usual  when  he  wrote,  of 
organic  remains,  he  gave  a  clear  general  view  of  the  rocks. 

"  On  the  one  discovery  of  Sir  James  Hall  at  Wrae  Hill,  our 
Scottish  geologists,"  says  Hugh  Miller  in  a  recent  sketch,  "  seem 
to  have  hybernated  for  more  than  forty  years."  f 

It  was  not  until  some  years  after  the  publication  of  the  "  Silurian 
System"  that  the  researches  of  Professor  Nicol  first  really  indi- 
cated the  relations  of  the  Wrae  fossils  and  the  associated  schistose 

*  Besides  this  general  transgression  and  unconformity,  it  has  been  pointed  out 
by  Professor  Sedgwick,  that  this  "  old  red"  contains  many  fragments  of  the  Silurian 
tilestones,  which  must  have  been  solid  before  the  conglomerate  was  formed.  — 
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  i.  p.  449. 

•j"  For  a  complete  historical  sketch,  see  a  notice  by  Mr.  Hugh  Miller  (Witness 
newspaper,  November  24th  and  27th,  1852).  A  single  fossil  was  found,  but  not 
described,  by  Laidlaw,  the  friend  of  Walter  Scott ;  and  orthoceratites  were  after- 
wards discovered  by  Mr.  Charles  Maclaren  in  the  Pentland  Hills,  and  noticed 
in  his  excellent  work,  entitled  "  the  Geology  of  Fife  and  the  Lothians,"  1839. 

L  3 


150  SILURIA.  [Chap.  Vir. 

masses  to  the  known  members  of  the  series ;  and,  since  then,  other 
researches  of  that  author,  as  well  as  of  Moore,  Sedgwick,  Cun- 
ningham, Stevenson,  Harkness,  and  myself  have  brought  the  Scottish 
masses  into  a  distinct  comparison  with  their  true  types. 

Silurian  rocks,  and  particularly  their  lower  members,  are  now 
known  to  occupy  a  very  large  region  of  the  south  of  Scotland. 
Ranging  on  the  whole  from  E.N.E.  to  W.S.W.,  they  appear  in  con- 
siderable masses  in  Berwickshire  and  Roxburghshire,  and  thence 
spread  out  in  still  larger  areas  over  the  counties  of  Selkirk,  Peebles, 
Dumfries,  Kirkcudbright,  Galloway,  Wigton,  and  Ayr.  In  short, 
they  constitute,  on  the  whole,  the  undulating  moory  hills,  which, 
from  their  prevalent  wildness  of  aspect,  have  been  called  the  South 
Highlands.  Subjected,  as  they  have  been,  to  numerous  eruptions  of 
granite,  syenite,  porphyry,  greenstone,  and  other  igneous  rocks, 
some  of  these  grey wacke  schists  have  long  been  known  to  geologists 
for  the  remarkable  curvatures  they  exhibit  in  the  sea-cliffs  of  Ber- 
wickshire.    A  drawing  is  here  annexed,  whicli  represents  such 


View  of  the  Cliffs  near  St.  Abb's  Head. 
(From  a  sketch  by  Sir  A.  Alison,  Bart.) 


Chap.  VII.] 


SILURIAN  AXIS  —  SCOTLAND. 


151 


flexures  and  breaks,  as  seen  in  the  cove,  called  Petticur  Wick, 
near  St.  Abb's  Head.* 

As  numerous  similar  contortions  are  also  seen  to  have  taken  place 
in  the  western  prolongation  of  the  same  great  series  to  the  coast  of 
Wigton  and  Ayr,  we  ought  to  be  cautious  in  drawing  determinate 
sections  across  the  interior  portions  of  a  region  where  the  surface  of 
the  round  and  undulating  hills  is  obscured  by  moss,  heath,  and  bog, 
and  where  exposures  of  the  bare  rock  are  rarely  to  be  met  with. 

Difficult,  however,  as  it  has  been  to  determine  the  oldest  portion 
of  these  inland  masses  of  the  Scottish  greywacke,  we  have  now 
reached  that  starting-point.  When  traversing  the  tract  between 
Dumfries  and  Moffat,  in  1850,  it  occurred  to  me  that  the  dull  reddish 
or  purple  hard  greywacke  to  the  north  of  the  former  town,  which  so 
resembled  the  bottom  rocks  of  the  Longmynd,  Llanberis,  and  St. 
David's  t,  would  prove  to  be  of  the  same  age,  and,  therefore,  the  true 
South  Scottish  axis.  For,  this  rock  (in  great  part  similar  to  the 
hard  greywacke  of  St.  Abb's  Head)  seemed  evidently  to  throw  off 
anthracitic  schists,  with  graptolites,  both  to  the  south  and  to  the 
north.  Mr.  Harkness  established  this  order,  after  my  visit,  by  de- 
tailed sections  in  that  parallel,  ranging  by  the  Dryfe  Water. | 

Professor  Nicol,  who  led  the  way  in  opening  out  the  proofs,  both 
physical  and  fossiliferous,  that  the  South  Scottish  Hills  were  really 
Silurian,  has  now  satisfied  himself  that  this  real  axis  of  the  old  un- 
fossiliferous  greywacke  ranges  by  Teviotdale.  §     Proceeding  from 

*  The  woodcut  is  taken  from  one  of  several  rapid  but  very  clever  sketches  made 
in  my  note-book,  in  the  autumn  of  1833,  by  the  historian  Sir  Archibald  Alison, 
from  a  boat  in  which  Sir  John  Hall  of  Dunglass  and  Professor  Sedgwick  were 
also  my  companions.  Some  of  the  lower  buttresses  are  porphyries  and  other 
igneous  rocks,  which  form  the  adjacent  headland  of  St.  Abb's.  The  convoluted 
masses  form  a  portion  of  the  Longmynd  or  bottom  rocks  of  the  region. 

f  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  vii.  p.  162. 

X  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  p.  52.,  and  vol.  viii.  p.  393. 

§  Meeting  of  British  Association,  Belfast,  1852. 

L  4 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  VII. 


'UOIJL'IUJOJ  ]B03  pUB 

•/'ajeaaiuoiSuoo  p»jj  pio 


J*  span  uonug 


g 
o 

IN 

•S3JBIS  aapnuoqx 
H 

•sa^Bis  uoisauo 


•suoisanin  3bji^\ 


•/'auojspnES  pay  piQ 


•^'sppg 

-fBOa  pUB  3U01S 


•iaiqdjoj  puB  dcax 


m 


II 
<5<! 


S  Q,  1) 

Si 

0<j 


S  c  h  e 


that  centre,  he  has  prepared  the 
annexed  general  section,  which 
(minor  flexures  being  omitted) 
exhibits  a  short  ascending  section 
to  the  Cheviot  Hills  on  the  south, 
and  a  very  long  one  to  the  Pent- 
land  Hills,  near  Edinburgh,  on 
the  north. 

This  traverse  shows  in  the 
clearest  manner  an  upward  de- 
velopment of  the  lowest  divisions 
of  the  series ;  so  that  after  placing 
other  transverse  sections  in  pa- 
rallel with  it,  whether  along  the 
east  coast  or  from  Dumfries  and 
Moffat,  we  will  then  pass  to  the 
west  coast,  where  we  meet  with 
hio^her  and  much  more  fossili- 
ferous  masses  of  the  Silurian 
system. 

Casting  his  eye  over  this  dia- 
gram*, the  reader  will  readily  un- 
derstand the  comparison  which 
is  drawn  between  these  Scottish 
strata  and  those  of  the  typical 
region  of  Siluria  and  Wales,  de- 
scribed in  the  second,  third,  and 
fourth  chapters.  Beginning  at  the 
geological  axis  in  Teviotdale,  he 

*  Reduced  from  a  large  coloured  sec- 
tion exhibited  at  the  Belfast  Meeting  of 
the  British  Association  for  the  Advance- 
ment of  Science,  1852. 


Chap.  VII.  J  LOWER  SILURIAN  —  SCOTLAND.  153 

perceives  that  the  older  and  unfossiliferous  greywacke,  a,  which  is 
the  Longmynd  or  bottom  rock,  throws  off  schists,  5^  both  to  the 
south  and  to  the  north;  the  former  passing  under  the  old  red 
sandstone  and  carboniferous  strata  associated  with  porphyries  of 
the  Cheviot  Hills.  To  the  north  of  the  Teviot  axis,  the  schists  and 
greywacke,  5^,  which  are  in  parts  alum  slates  (Etterick),  may  be 
well  supposed  to  represent  in  time,  as  suggested  by  Professor  Nicol, 
the  schists  of  North  Wales  with  Lingulae,  though  as  yet  the  Scotch 
strata  have  afforded  no  such  fossils.  These  are  surmounted  by  an- 
thracitic  schists,  containing  many  coiled  annelids  or  sea-worms,  h'^y 
and  form  the  base  of  a  vast  thickness  of  graptolite  schists,  which, 
after  a  synclinal  flexure  in  the  Yarrow  Hills,  show  another  anti- 
clinal in  the  valley  of  the  Tweed,  6*.  Whilst  the  Thornielee  slates, 
with  their  graptolites,  annelides  (Nereites,  Crossopodia),  &c.,  are  in- 
clined southward,  the  Grieston  slates,  on  the  north  bank  of  the 
anticlinal,  plunge  to  the  north,  and  then,  for  the  first  time  in  as- 
cending order,  we  find  trilobites  in  addition  to  the  graptolites  and 
annelids. 

Associated  with  felspar  porphyries  (the  whole  representing  pretty 
fairly  the  trappean  and  graptolitic  group  of  North  and  South 
Wales)  these  rocks  rise  into  mountains  2200  feet  above  the  sea,  and 
from  them  the  sources  of  the  Clyde,  as  well  as  of  the  Tweed, 
take  their  rise.  Thence  the  northern  dip  being  continued,  the 
whole  of  the  preceding  masses  are  seen  to  be  overlaid  by  the  Wrae 
limestone  of  Peebleshire,  h^,  which,  from  its  organic  remains  of  tri- 
lobites and  shells,  has  been  paralleled  with  the  Llandeilo  limestone,  f 

■j-  Among  the  fossils  of  the  Wrae  limestone  found  by  Professor  Nicol  are 
the  Illsenus  Bowmanni,  Salter ;  Harpes  parvulus,  M'Coy  ;  Asaphus  tyrannus,  Sil. 
Syst.?  ;  Phacops  Odini  ? ;  Cheirurus  ;  Orthoceras  arcuo-liratum,  Hall ;  Orthis  cal- 
ligramma,  Dalman ;  O.  biforata,  Schlotheim  ;  Strophomena  tenuistriata,  Sil.  Syst, 
Salter,  in  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  iv.  p.  205.,  and  Professor  M'Coy 
in  the  "  Pal.  Foss.  Woodw-  Mus."  passim. 


154  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VII. 

All  the  associated  schists  and  greywacke  were,  therefore,  termed 
by  Professor  Nicol,  Silurian  (1846);  the  more  so  as  the  fossiliferous 
limestone  reposed  on  schists  containing  graptolites.  In  pursuing 
this  traverse  northwards,  other  schists  and  greywacke  rocks  are  seen 
to  overlie  the  Llandeilo  limestone  of  Wrae,  though  these  are  soon  lost 
under  and  covered  over  by  the  old  red  sandstone,  /,  and  the  carboni- 
ferous formation  of  the  Lothians,  g.  Beneath  those  deposits,  y,  ^7,  we 
know  not  what  flexures  may  have  occurred  in  the  subjacent  or  older 
rocks  of  the  great  intervening  trough ;  but  on  reaching  the  Pentland. 
Hills,  hard  greywacke  strata  are  again  met  with,  nearly  parallel  to 
those  we  have  left,  and,  like  them,  inclined  to  the  N.  N.  W.,  at  very 
high  angles.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  impossible  to  assign  to 
this  greywacke  of  the  Pentland  Hills  any  very  definite  place  in  the 
Silurian  system.  Penetrated  as  it  is  by  igneous  rocks,  and  often  in 
a  much  altered  condition,  this  rock  has  still  afforded  some  casts  of 
orthoceratites ;  so  that  with  this  fact  and  an  apparent  superposition, 
it  may  be  suggested  that  these  strata  are  not  far  removed  from  the 
age  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone. 

A  second  traverse  of  the  chain  near  the  eastern  coast  or  towards 
the  sea-board  of  the  Lammermuir  Hills,  exposes  the  lower  members 
of  the  series  just  described.  There  the  Teviotdale  anticlinal  axis,  a, 
is  marked  by  the  course  of  the  Lower  Tweed.  Thus,  the  purple 
greywacke  seen  to  the  north  of  Berwick,  and  of  part  of  which  the 
outlines  have  been  sketched  (p.  150.),  appears  to  belong  to  the 
same  bottom  rocks  of  the  series.  Further  northwards,  higher  beds, 
the  equivalents  of  the  Peebleshire  groups,  occur,  and  in  these,  Mr. 
Stevenson  of  Dunse,  who  has  published  some  valuable  observations 
on  this  district*,  has  found,  on  the  Dye  near  Byrecleugh,  a  grap- 
tolite,  an  obscure  corallme,  and  slates  with  annelid  impressions. 

*  See  Proc.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  iv.  pp. '29.  and  79. ;  and  Quart.  Journ.  Geol. 
Soc.  Lond.,  vol,  vi.  p.  418.  I  long  ago  examined  the  purple  greywacke  or  bottom 
rock,  near  Dunse,  in  company  with  i\Ir.  William  Stevenson. 


Chap.  VII.]  SOUTH  SCOTTISH  LOWER  SILURIAN.  155 

As  these  beds  lie  in  the  line  of  strike  of  the  Grieston  and  Thor- 
nielee  slates,  they  probably  coincide  with  them  in  age.  The  pre- 
dominating dip  of  the  strata  is  to  the  north-west,  showing  a  general 
ascending  section,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  convolutions, 
which  are  beautifully  seen  on  the  coast,  as  already  adverted  to. 

A  third  traverse  of  these  South  Scottish  hills,  made  along  the  line 
of  the  Caledonian  railroad*,  exhibits  the  same  general  features,  and 
many  of  the  same  details,  as  the  preceding  parallel  sections.  The 
Dumfries  axis  of  the  older  and  unfossiliferous  greywacke,  before 
alluded  to,  throws  off  anthracitic  and  graptolitic  schists  to  the  south 
at  Lockerby,  and  at  Moffat  to  the  north.  The  details  of  these  must 
be  sought  for  in  the  memoirs  of  Professor  Harkness,  who  has 
shown  to  what  a  great  extent  some  of  the  schists  are  charged  with 
graptolites.  Among  them  may  be  cited  the  wide-spread  forms  of  the 
Llandeilo  flags — Diplograpsus  pristis,  D.  folium,  D.  teretiusculus,  and 
Graptolites  Sagittarius — all  found  in  the  alum  slates  of  Sweden; 
Graptolites  lobiferus,  a  Bohemian  fossil,  with  other  species  found 
in  Lower  Silurian  strata  elsewhere  in  the  British  Isles,  or  peculiar 
to  these  deposits.  About  twenty  species  have  already  been  enumer- 
ated from  this  district  alone. f    (See  Foss.  6.  p.  46.) 

All  these  rocks,  anthracitic  and  aluminiferous,  which  are  charged 
with  graptolites  and  annelids,  dip  northwards  from  Moffat  to  Ab- 
ington,  and  thus  pass  under  the  only  other  masses  of  Silurian  age 
which  are  visible  in  this  direction.  These  strata,  which  occupy  the 
tracts  of  the  I^ead  Hills  and  other  lofty  summits,  are  metalliferous 
schists  and  greywacke,  in  parts  much  altered,  which,  penetrated  by 
felspar  porphyries  and  other  igneous  rocks,  were  celebrated  for  yield- 
ing gold  ore  in  the  reigns  of  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  James  of  Scotland. 

*  Professor  Nicol  and  myself  examined  this  section  together  in  1850.  See 
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  p.  137. 

t  See  Harkness,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  vii.  p.  48  ;  M'Coy,  Palaeo- 
zoic Fossils,  Cambridge  Museum. 


156  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VII. 

With  them,  or  rather  overlying  them,  is  a  rude  breccia,  in  parts 
calcareous,  which  may  possibly  represent  the  Wrae  limestone  of  the 
preceding  diagram.  But,  further  northward,  other  and  still  thicker 
strata  of  Silurian  age  are  visible ;  the  edges  of  the  older  strata  being 
covered  by  the  coal-fields  of  Lanarkshire.  Though  satisfactory  in 
exhibiting  a  good  ascending  series  from  an  unfossiliferous  base  of 
the  sedimentary  series,  this  section  is  less  perfect  in  carrying  out 
the  order  to  beds  on  or  above  the  horizon  of  the  Llandeilo  lime- 
stone, than  that  which  is  figured  above,  (p.  153.) 

The  fourth,  or  west  coast  traverse,  from  Luce  Bay  across  Wigton- 
shire  and  the  north  part  of  Ayr,  does  not  develope  the  order  of 
the  lower  masses,  but  adds  much  to  our  acquaintance  with  higher 
and  more  fossiliferous  strata  of  the  Silurian  system,  in  exhibiting 
beds  more  copiously  charged  with  fossils  than  any  rocks  of  this  age 
in  Scotland.* 

It  is  to  the  northern  portion  of  this  region  that  I  have  paid  most 
attention.  So  contorted  and  fractured  are  the  strata  of  the  southern 
portion  of  this  series,  that  it  is  indeed  no  easy  matter  to  place  the 
component  parts  in  their  exact  relative  places;  not  even  after 
much  labour  bestowed  on  the  coast  sections  of  his  native  county  by 
my  friend  Mr.  John  Carrick  Moore.  The  black  glossy  slates  of 
Cairn  Kyan,  and  certain  red  schists  containing  graptolites,  might  lead 
us,  from  analogy,  to  suppose  that  they  represented  the  older  grapto- 
litic  portion  of  the  previous  sections,  which  lie  above  the  Longmynd 
or  bottom  rocks.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  associated  with  a 
coarse  conglomerate,  containing  pebbles  of  granite  and  porphyry,  with 
here  and  there  blocks  two  feet  in  diameter,  and  this  conglomerate 

*  Accompanied  by  Professor  Nicol,  I  examined  this  tract  in  1850.  Our  fossil 
collector  was  Mr.  Alexander  M'Callum,  of  Girvan,  who  has  searched  every  locality 
with  great  assiduity,  and  is.  specially  recommended  to  geologists  visiting  those 
parts.  See  details  in  my  Memoir  on  the  Silurian  Rocks  of  the  South  of  Scotland, 
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  p.  137. 


Chap.  VIT.]  SILURIANS  OF  AYRSHIRE.  157 

SO  resembles  a  rock  of  the  Ayrshire  district  about  to  be  described, 
which  clearly  dips  under  certain  fossiliferous  schists  (Kennedy's 
Pass),  that  the  pebble-beds  of  Wigton  and  Ayr  may  be  eventually 
placed  on  the  same  parallel.  They  are,  however,  separated  by  so 
much  intrusive  and  eruptive  trap,  which  ocdlipies  the  coast  from 
Correrie  Burn  to  the  Stinchar  River,  that  it  becomes  impossible, 
without  long  and  continuous  labour,  accurately  to  coordinate  the 
disrupted  masses.  From  the  mouth  of  the  Stinchar  to  Kennedy's 
Pass,  south  of  Girvan,  the  eruptions  of  porphyry,  greenstone,  and 
syenite  are,  indeed,  on  a  still  grander  scale  (Knockdolian,  Bennan 
Head,  &c.).  There,  owing  to  these  great  extrusions  from 
beneath,  accompanied  by  much  serpentine  and  some  metamorphosed 
schists,  the  Silurian  strata  have  been  thrown  into  at  least  three 
flexures  in  the  horizontal  space  of  a  few  miles,  on  each  of  which, 
or  along  the  Stinchar,  Assell,  and  Girvan  rivers,  limestones  of  the 
age  of  the  Llandeilo  flags  are  brought  to  the  surface.  These  lime- 
stones are  overlaid  in  the  contiguous  troughs  by  other  rocks,  some 
of  which,  consisting  of  coarse  conglomerates  and  shelly  sandstone, 
may  represent  either  the  Upper  Llandeilo  or  the  Caradoc  sandstones, 
whilst  certain  flagstones  and  schists  might  seem,  by  some  of  their 
fossils  (though  other  forms  oppose  it),  to  indicate  a  passage  into  the 
lower  member  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks. 

Referring  for  details  to  the  memoir  above  cited,  I  will  here  very 
briefly  describe  some  of  the  salient  features  of  these  Ayrshire 
deposits.  The  limestones  in  the  Stinchar  and  the  Girvan  rivers 
contain  the  following  fossils:  —  Orthis  calligramma,  Dalm. ;  O  con- 
finis,  Salter ;  O.  elegantula,  Dalm.  ;  Leptaena  sericea ;  Cheirurus 
gelasinosus,  Portl. ;  Pleurorhynchus  dipterus.  Salt. ;  and  some  tere- 
bratuloid  shells,  with  corals  of  the  genera  Heliolites,  Favosites, 
Omphyma,  Strephodes,  &c. 

All  these  are  Lower  Silurian  types,  and  with  them  is  also 
found  a  species  of  the  genus  Maclurea  of  Hall,  which  is  peculiar 


158 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  VII. 


to  the  Trenton  limestone,  one  of  the  marked  Lower  Silurian  deposits 
of  North  America.  * 

These  limestones,  usually  of  dark  grey  colours,  are  supported  by 
schists,  and  overlaid  by  shelly,  fine  micaceous  dark-grey  sandstones, 
separated  by  thin  c^)urses  of  shale,  in  which  many  fossils  occur, 
particularly  in  the  Mulloch  Hill,  on  the  right  bank,  and  in  the 
Saugh  Hill,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Girvan  water. 

Among  the  fossils  are :  —  a  variety  of  Atrypa  Lemisphserica,  Sil.  Syst. ;  Orthis 
reversa,  Salt. ;  0.  biforata,  Schloth. ;  O.  elegantula  (canalis,  Sil.  Syst.)  ;  Stropho- 
mena  pecten,  Dalm. ;  Bellerophon  dilatatus,  Sil.  Syst. ;  Murchisonia  cancellatula, 
M'Coy,  a  beautiful  fossil;  M.  simplex,  a  Welsh  species;  Trochus  Moorei, 
M'Coy ;  together  with  the  well-known  Silurian  corals,  Heliolites  (Porites)  inter- 
stinctus  and  H.  tubulatus  ;  Petraia  subduplicata,  Favosites  alveolaris  ;  Ptilodictya 
(Stictopora)  acuta. 

Almost  all  these  forms  occur  in  the  Llandeilo  flags,  though 
some  of  them,  such  as  the  Atrypa  hemisphasrica,  which  is  by  much 
the  most  abundant  of  the  shells,  are  also  cliaracteristic  of  the  Upper 
Caradoc  sandstone.  Again,  among  the  trilobites,  we  have  here  the 
Lichas  laxatus,  a  common  species  in  the  limestone  at  Llandeilo  in 
South  Wales,  and,  in  the  very  same  matrix,  the  Calymene  Blumen- 
bachii.  Now,  although  this  last-mentioned  crustacean  has  been 
found  throughout  nearly  the  whole  system  elsewhere,  it  is  by  far 
more  common  in  the  Upper  than  the  Lower  Silurian,  and  is  here 
associated  with  the  Phacops  Stokesii,  and  Encrinurus  punctatus, 
both  of  them  fossils  which  usually  pertain  to  the  Wenlock  forma- 
tion. So  that  here  again  in  Scotland,  as  in  England  and  Wales, 
and  particularly  as  we  ascend  in  the  series,  we  meet  with  rocks 
in  which  the  upper  and  lower  types  are  mixed  together. 

It  may  also  be  remarked,  that  in  the  greywacke  sandstones 
of  Saugh  Hill,  wherein  the  Atrypa  hemisphaerica  abounds,  we 

*  This  species,  which,  though  differing  in  some  particulars,  closely  resembles  the 
M.  magna.  Hall,  has  been  so  named  by  Professor  M'Coy,  who  has  described  for 
Professor  Sedgwick  the  fossils  collected  in  this  tract  by  Mr.  John  Ruthven. 


Chap.  VII. J  SILURIANS  OF  AYRSHIRE.  159 

have  also,  for  the  first  time  in  the  Scottish  ascending  series,  Pen- 
tamerus  oblongus*,  Petraia  subduplicata,  and  Tentaculites,  which 
fossils,  though  occasionally  found  in  lower  strata,  are  peculiarly 
abundant  in  the  '  Upper  Caradoc,  properly  so  called,  of  Siluria ;  and 
in  North  America,  as  in  England,  these  fossils  mark  the  division  be- 
tween Lower  and  Upper  Silurian. 

Although  the  moory,  mossy,  and  covered  nature  of  the  hilly 
grounds,  which  intervene  between  the  upcasts  of  the  lower  lime- 
stone and  the  shelly  greywacke  which  they  throw  olF,  prevent  very 
clear  sections,  I  am  disposed  to  consider,  as  stated  elsewhere, 
that  the  conglomerates,  orthoceratite  schists,  and  shelly  sandstones 
of  the  coast  section  south  of  Girvan,  are  among  the  youngest 
masses  of  these  environs.  They  contain  a  large  orthoceratite, 
which  Professor  M'Coy  has  recently  published  as  O.  politum,  and 
which  M.  Barrande  has  identified  with  a  species  occurring  in  the 
lower  part  of  his  Upper  Silurian  group  of  Bohemia:  whereas  in 
Ayrshire  it  is  associated  with  Lower  Silurian  graptolites.  Here, 
also,  we  have  the  Orthoceras  angulatum  (virgatum),  which  I  pub- 
lished as  an  Upper  Silurian  form.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a 
large  orthoceratite,  not  to  be  distinguished  from  the  O.  vaginatum, 
Schloth.,  so  common  in  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Scandinavia  and 
Kussia,  and  also  O.  bilineatum,  a  Lower  Silurian  fossil  of  America. 

The  Cyrtoceras,  a  genus  which  is  also  here,  was,  a  few  years  ago, 
known  only  in  the  upper,  but  it  is  now  found  also  in  the  lower  rocks ; 
and  with  this  fossil  occurs  a  thin,  finely  striated  Orbicula,  the  O. 
crassa,  Hall,  closely  resembling  O.  striata  of  the  Ludlow  rocks. 

*  Several  of  the  species,  particularly  the  Atrypa  hemisphasrica,  and  Pentamerus 
oblongus,  occur  in  the  Clinton  group  which  forms  the  base  of  the  Upper  Silurian 
of  the  United  States.  In  addition  to  the  Upper  Silurian  fossils  mentioned  in 
the  text,  Professor  Wyville  Thomson  has  recently  informed  me  that  he  has  de- 
tected, near  Girvan,  the  Bumastus  Barriensis  in  the  same  beds  with  the  Calymene 
Blumenbachii. 


160  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VII. 

There  are,  too,  both  double  and  single  graptolites,  —  the  latter  be- 
longuig  to  a  Lower  Silurian  species. 

Whether,  therefore,  I  judged  from  the  clear  proofs  exhibited  on 
the  coast  near  Kennedy's  Pass,  where  these  fossiliferous  schists 
repose  upon  a  great  mass  of  coarse  conglomerate  and  sandstone,  or 
from  the  specific  character  of  many  of  their  imbedded  fossils,  I  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  they  indicate  an  ascending  series  in  Ayrshire, 
although  they  chiefly  contain  Lower  Silurian  forms. 

Although  this  is  no  place  for  details,  a  few  words  must  be  said  of 
the  very  striking  powerful  conglomerate  which  underlies  the  above- 
mentioned  sandy  schists.  Among  its  rounded  and  waterworn  pebbles. 
Professor  Nicol  and  myself  distinguished  upwards  of  twenty  varieties 
of  rock,  varying  in  size  from  musket-bullets  to  blocks  of  two  and 
three  feet  diameter.  They  consist  of  small  specimens  of  earthy 
greywacke,  and  larger  blocks  of  hard  silicious  greywacke,  Lydian 
stone,  hornstone,  felspar  porphyries  of  various  colours,  greenstone, 
syenite,  and  granite.  If  my  view  be  correct,  this  conglomerate,  on 
which  the  above  fossil  strata  rest,  is  of  about  the  same  age  as  the 
pebble-beds  of  the  typical  region  which  occur  towards  the  higher  part 
of  the  Lower  Silurian. 

Such  conglomerates,  which  may  be  indicative  of  the  powerful  and 
long-continued  action  of  waves  on  a  coast,  are,  however,  only  to 
be  viewed  as  local  phenomena,  and  may  therefore  be  looked  for  in 
various  parts  of  the  primeval  series  of  Scotland ;  just  as  they  have 
been  shown  to  occur  at  various  levels  in  the  Silurian  rocks  of  Eng- 
land and  Wales.  They  occasionally  appear,  indeed,  in  the  coarse 
grits  of  the  Longmynd  or  bottom  rocks ;  and.  even  w^hilst  I  write,  I 
am  reminded  by  Professor  Eamsay  that  coarse  conglomerates  occur 
in  the  same  unfossiliferous  subjacent  greywacke  of  Carnarvonshire. 

All  the  shelly  Silurians  of  Ayrshire  being  covered  towards  the  north 
by  the  old  red  and  carboniferous  deposits,  there  is  no  evidence  of  a 


Chap.  VII.]  SCOTTISH  SILURIAN  ROCKS.  161 

younger  order  of  things  beyond  what  may  be  viewed  as  the  transi- 
tion from  the  Lower  to  the  Upper  Silurian. 

On  the  opposite  side  of  the  South  Scottish  axis,  however,  it  would 
appear,  judging  from  their  fossil  contents,  that  the  highly  convoluted 
strata  which  form  the  southern  headlands  of  Kirkcudbright  Bay 
(Balmae  Head  and  Little  Ross),  and  the  rocks  on  the  east  side  of 
Kirkcudbright  Bay,  are  of  the  age  of  the  Wenlock  shale.  Hard  and 
intractable  as  the  Ireleth  slates  of  Cumberland,  which  have  been 
placed  in  the  same  parallel,  and  containing  only  very  rarely  nodules 
slightly  calcareous,  these  argillaceous  and  siliceous  schists  have  yielded 
at  one  or  two  spots  a  good  many  fossils.  In  them  we  find  the  lower 
forms,  it  is  true,  of  Orthoceras  tenuicinctum  (p.  195,),  and  the  Lep- 
taana  sericea,  Sil.  Syst. ;  but  from  the  same  beds  Mr.  Salter  has 
catalogued  the  following  Upper  Silurian  types,  viz.,  Phacops  cau- 
datus,  Beyrichia  tuberculata,  Orthoceras  annulatum,  Chonetes  sarci- 
nulata  (Leptsena  lata  of  the  "  Sil.  Syst."),  Rhynconella  nucula, 
Avicular  lineata,  Grammysia  (Orthonota)  cingulata.  With  these  are 
associated  other  fossils  which  pervade  the  whole  system,  such  as 
Atrypa  reticularis,  Haly sites  catenulatus,  Graptolites  priodon,  and 
Bellerophon  trilobatus.  The  last,  which  in  Siluria  occurs  in  the 
uppermost  Ludlow  rocks,  is,  in  Ireland,  associated  with  lower  types, 
and  may  therefore  belong  to  either  division. 

In  this  way  we  have  no  means  of  defining,  with  greater  precision, 
the  age  of  the  fossil  promontories  of  Kirkcudbright,  than  by  saying 
that,  being  unequivocally  Silurian,  they  seem  to  overlie  the  great 
mass  of  the  older  Silurians ;  and,  containing  a  fauna  of  younger 
date  in  that  era  than  any  other  part  of  Scotland  has  afibrded, 
they  are  more  referable  to  the  Wenlock  than  to  any  other  for- 
mation. It  may  also  be  surmised,  that  the  time  was,  when  there 
existed  a  large  and  visible  upward  development  of  still  younger 
Silurian  rocks,  which  ranged  from  the  south  of  Scotland  to  meet  the 
equivalents  of  the  Wenlock  and  Ludlow  rocks  of  the  Cumbrian  or 

M 


162  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIL 

Lake  districts  of  England  —  all  which,  if  such  existed,  are  now 
concealed  beneath  the  sea. 

In  Scotland,  however,  still  more  than  in  the  north-west  of  England, 
great  links  are  wanting  in  the  upward  continuation  of  the  palaeozoic 
succession,  which  is  so  well  exhibited  in  the  Silurian  region  of  Eng- 
land and  Wales ;  for  along  the  shores  of  Kirkcudbright  these  Upper 
Silurians,  some  of  which  indicate  that  they  have  been  formed  on  a 
shore,  are  at  once  unconformably  surmounted  by  strata  of  the  car- 
boniferous age.* 

In  this  sketch  of  the  older  sedimentary  strata  of  the  South  of 
Scotland,  I  have  made  but  few  allusions  to  the  great  masses  of 
igneous  rocks  which  have  been  intruded  among  the  Silurians.  In 
numberless  cases,  whether  around  the  granite  of  Criffel  and  Cairnsmuir 
or  the  porphyry  of  Tongueland  immediately  to  the  north  of  Kirkcud- 
bright, the  schists  which  are  in  contact  with  such  eruptive  masses  are 
so  highly  metamorphosed,  that  no  one  who  looks  at  such  effects  can 
doubt  as  to  the  cause.  So  far  we  deal  with  facts  only.  At  the  same 
time,  desirous  as  I  am  of  avoiding  speculative  geology  in  a  work  like 
this,  I  am  bound  to  state,  that  the  view  of  much  more  extended  meta- 
morphism,  to  which  I  have  long  inclined,  and  which  I  suggested 

*  The  phenomenon  of  the  unconformable  superposition  of  the  carboniferous 
strata  (with  mountain  Umestone,  fossils,  &c.)  to  the  Silurian  rocks,  along  the  coast 
of  the  parish  of  Kerrick,  in  Kirkcudbright,  has  very  recently  been  described  in 
great  detail  by  Mr.  Harkness,  in  a  memoir  read  before  the  Greological  Society, 
April  1853.  This  author  has  also  explained,  by  elaborate  sections,  the  extreme  cur- 
vatures of  all  the  rocks  which  he  considers  to  be  Upper  SUurian,  and  parts  of  which 
he  shows  were  shore  deposits.  He  further  indicates  the  points  or  dykes  of  porphyry 
which  protrude  among  them,  and  has  endeavoured  to  mark  the  line  of  separation 
between  them  and  the  Lower  Silurian,  which  on  the  whole  rise  up  to  the  N.N".  W., 
their  upper  beds  being  conglomerates  and  coarse  sandstones.  Professor  Nicol  and 
myself  examined  Balmae  Head  in  1851.  Mr.  Stevenson  described  the  nodular 
shale  of  Little  Ross  Head,  Ed.  Phil.  Mag.,  voL  xxxv.  The  organic  re- 
mains above  alluded  to  were  collected  by  the  Earl  of  Selkirk  and  Mr.  Fleming. 


Chap.  VII.]  METAMORPHOSED  SILURIANS.  163 

publicly  in  1851*,  has  recently  received  a  vigorous  support  from 
my  friend  Professor  Nicol,  who  has  for  some  time  also  entertained 
similar  ideas.  I  then  endeavoured  to  show,  that  certain  bands  of 
clayslate,  chloritic  and  micaceous  schist  of  the  southern  zone  of  the 
Highlands,  with  their  interstratified  limestones,  were  probably 
nothing  more  than  metamorphosed  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  similar  in 
age  to  the  natural  strata  we  have  been  considering,  and  which, 
ranging  parallel  to  them,  come  out  again  in  broad  undulations, 
associated  with  many  granitic  and  other  eruptive  rocks,  to  the 
north  of  the  great  Caledonian  trough  of  old  red  sandstone,  and  its 
overlying  coal-fields,  f 

One  of  these  great  undulations,  which  occur  in  the  rugged  moun- 
tains of  the  west  called  Argyll's  Bowling  Green,  exhibits  an  axis  of 
mica-schist  throwing  olF  to  the  north  and  south  great  thicknesses  of 
chloritic  schist  and  altered  sandstone  with  included  and  regularly 
stratified  limestones ;  all  trending  from  W.  S.  W.  to  E.  N.  E.,  or 
parallel  to  the  Silurian  rocks  of  the  south  of  Scotland. 

In  a  subsequent  memoir,  Professor  Nicol  has  supported  this  idea 
by  striking  facts  and  good  reasoning.  Describing  the  geological 
structure  of  Cantyre,  and  stating  that  the  so-called  mica-slate  of 
that  tract  is  only  a  partially  altered  micaceous  sandstone,  which 
seems  almost  to  pass  upwards  into  the  old  red  sandstone,  he  shows 
how  all  the  other  crystalline  strata  comform  and  bend  round  the 
granitic  nucleus  of  Goatfell  in  Arran.  In  confirmation  of  the 
probable  identity  of  some  of  the  crystalline  strata  of  the  north 
with  the  Silurian  rocks  of  the  south,  he  mentions  the  illustrative  fact, 
that  calcareous  matter  prevails  most  extensively  towards  the  western 
extremity  of  both  groups  of  rocks.  In  the  South  Scottish  or  Silurian 
strata,  no  calcareous  beds  are  known  at  their  eastern  termination ; 


*  See  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  vii.  p.  168.        f  lb.  p.  160. 

M  2 


164  SILURIA.  LChap.  VII. 

limestone  only  begins  to  appear  in  feeble  courses  in  Peebleshire,  near 
the  centre  of  the  chain,  and  becomes  very  abundant  (as  above  de- 
scribed) in  Ayrshire.  It  is  the  same  with  the  crystalline  strata  of  the 
north.  In  the  coast  section  from  Stonehaven  to  Aberdeen,  no 
calcareous  bands  occur;  in  Forfarshire  and  Perthshire  several  are 
known ;  they  become  still  more  abundant  in  the  north  of  Argyle- 
shire ;  and  in  Cantyre  (as  in  Ayr)  we  have  a  great  group  of  limestone 
rocks.* 

The  probability  of  the  change  of  large  portions  of  the  Scottish 
Lower  Silurians  into  crystalline  rocks  will  presently  be  rendered 
more  evident  by  an  example  derived  from  the  west  of  Ireland. 

Silurian  Rocks  of  Ireland.  —  Rocks  which  from  their  included 
organic  remains  must  be  classed  as  Silurian,  occupy  a  large  portion 
of  Ireland.  In  a  retrospect,  however  hasty,  of  the  progressive  steps 
in  the  palseozoic  classification  of  Irish  rocks,  the  first  allusion  is  due 
to  the  veteran  geologist  Weaver.j  The  first  publication,  however,  in 
which  any  of  the  fossils  of  this  ancient  date  were  illustrated,  was  the 
detailed  survey  of  parts  of  the  North  of  Ireland  by  Colonel  Portlock, 
in  which  that  author  described,  from  a  single  small  district  of  schistose 
greywacke,  near  Pomeroy,  in  Tyrone,  a  multitude  of  interesting 
types,  which  enabled  him  distinctly  to  class  these  strata  with  the 
Lower  Silurian  group,  t 

When  the  first  edition  of  the  geological  map  of  Ireland,  by 
Griffith,  appeared,  the  existence  of  rocks  containing  fossils  of  this 
age  had  been  ascertained  only  in  a  few  localities,  and  the  term 
Silurian  was  restricted  by  him  to  the  precise  spots  from  which  those 
organic  remains  were  described,  expressly  for  that  important  work, 

*  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  vii.  p.  23. 

t  See  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  v.  old  ser.  p.  117. 

+  See  Report  on  Londonderry  and  parts  of  Tyrone  and  Fermanagh.  Dublin, 
1843. 


Chap.  VII.]  BOTTOM  ROCKS  IN  IRELAND.  165 

and  under  that  name,  by  Mr.  M'Coy.*  But  the  progress  of  re- 
search, of  late  years,  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Griffith  and  his  assistants,  has 
much  extended  the  areas  in  Ireland  in  which  Silurian  fossils  occurred, 
and  has  prodigiously  increased  their  lists  of  fossils. 

The  labours  of  the  government  surveyors,  first  under  Professor 
Oldham,  and  now  under  Mr.  Jukes,  have  since  led  to  a  still  more 
methodical  elucidation  of  these  rocks.  In  this  way  it  has  been  ascer- 
tained that  under  the  one  term  of  greywacke,  the  following  masses 
were  grouped :  —  First,  the  old  dull  red  and  purplish  schist  and  grey 
quartzite,  to  the  south  of  Dublin,  or  bottom  rock  of  the  Longmynd, 
in  which  no  other  fossils,  as  before  stated,  have  ever  been  found,  ex- 
cept the  small  zoophyte  Oldhamia  (p.  32.)  Occupying  the  head- 
lands of  Bray,  the  mountains  of  the  Sugarloaf,  and  the  gorge  of  the 
Dargle,  to  the  south  side  of  Dublin  Bay  (and  probably  many  other 
parts  of  the  kingdom,  as  yet  undetermined),  these  elder  or  bottom 
rocks  are  succeeded  by  schists,  which  contain  undoubted  Lower 
Silurian  remains  at  intervals,  and  range  in  large  but  broken  bands  to 
the  south,  through  Wicklow  and  Wexford,  reappearing  from  beneath 
the  old  red  sandstone  and  carboniferous  limestone  in  the  cliffs  of 
Waterford  to  the  south  of  the  bay  of  that  name.  Flanked,  as  these 
Lower  Silurians  are,  on  their  western  side  by  dominant  ridges  of 
eruptive  granite  that  form  the  Wicklow  mountains,  they  are  there 
either  in  a  crystalline  or  subcrystalline  state,  and  thus  exhibit  a  third 
condition  of  the  greywacke  of  old  authors,  which,  in  the  new  maps  of 
the  geological  surveyors,  is  distinguished  by  a  peculiar  tint. 

The  silvery  sheets  of  the  well-known  waterfall  of  Powerscourt  are 
precipitated  over  highly  inclined  crystalline  chloritic  and  micaceous 
schists  of  this  class,  which  in  Ireland  are  the  equivalents  of  the  crys- 
talline rocks  of  Anglesea  (see  p.  23.).  In  the  central  parts  of  the  south 
of  Ireland,  or  on  the  western  side  of  the  granite  of  the  Wicklow 

*  Griffith's  Silurian  Fossils  of  Ireland,  described  by  M'Coy.  1846. 

M  3 


166  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VII 

Hills,  the  limestones  and  schists  of  the  Chair  of  Kildare,  which 
are  so  replete  with  fossils,  or  the  schists  on  the  flanks  of  the 
Slieve  Bloom  Mountains,  are  classed  as  Lower  Silurian.*  So  also  are 
several  masses  of  these  rocks  to  the  north  of  Dublin,  as  at  Portrane, 
and  especially  near  Pomeroy,  in  Tyrone,  the  locality  so  rich  in  fossils, 
which,  as  above  stated,  was  the  first  clear  Silurian  type  described  in 
this  island.  It  is  truly  remarkable  that  so  many  of  the  charac- 
teristic fossils  of  the  Llandeilo  formation  should  have  been  de- 
tected by  Colonel  Portlock  in  this  small  tract,  and  one  of  no  larger 
dimensions  in  Fermanagh.  Several  of  the  Trinuclei  and  other 
trilobites,  such  as  Phacops,  Calymene,  and  Illaenus,  are  identical  in 
species  with  those  from  Shropshire  and  Wales ;  and  so  is  it  with 
the  single  plaited  Orthidae,  Leptasnae,  and  Strophomenae,  some  spiral 
shells,  and  many  orthoceratites.  Commingled,  however,  with  these 
are  peculiar  forms,  first  made  known  from  this  district,  and  which 
are  very  rare  indeed  in  any  other  tract  in  our  islands.  Such,  for 
example,  among  the  trilobites  are  the  Remopleurides,  Foss.  31. 
f.  5.  in  chap.  8.  Harpes,  ib.  f.  4.,  Amphion,  Bronteus,  and,  lastly, 
the  smooth  forms  of  Asaphus,  called  Isotelus  by  American  authors, 
and  which  in  Ireland,  as  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic,  are 
very  abundant,  whilst  they  are  exceedingly  rare  in  Wales  or 
England,  and  not  known  at  all  on  the  Continent. 

In  Wexford  and  Waterford,  as  at  the  Chair  of  Kildare,  the  older 
strata  have  been  so  much  disturbed  and  insulated,  that  it  is  difficult 
to  detect  anything  like  a  good  sequence  of  order.  But  still  the 
fossils,  together  with  the  physical  characters  of  the  rocks,  clearly 
mark  the  Lower  Silurian  era.  In  the  cliffs  on  the  bank  of  the  river 
Suir,  below  Waterford,  and  in  the  maritime  headlands  of  Newtown 
near  Tramore,  and  of  Bon  Mahon,  the  schists,  with  feeble  impure  con- 

*  It  is  believed  that  the  schists  of  Down  are  of  the  same  age  as  the  graptolite 
schists  of  Wigton  and  Galloway. 


Chap,  VII. ] 


IRISH  SILURIANS. 


167 


cretionary  limestones,  are  charged  with  the  simple  plaited  Orthidse, 
trilobites  of  the  genera  Trinucleus,  Asaphus,  and  Phacops,  double 
graptolites  (Diplograpsus),  and  the  coral  Stenopora  fibrosa,  var. 
Lycopodites,  in  as  great  abundance  as  in  the  strata  of  the  same  age 
in  Scandinavia.* 

In  the  western  districts  of  Cork  and  Kerry  the  extent  has  not  yet 
been  well  ascertained  to  which  strata,  as  distinguished  by  fossils*  or 
infraposition,  are  separated  from  the  large  masses  of  the  old  red 
sandstone  or  Devonian  system,  which  there  rise  into  the  loftiest 
mountains  of  Ireland  (including  Macgillicuddy's  Keeks  and  Man- 
gerton),  around  the  Lakes  of  Killarney,  and  whose  flanks  are  ex- 
tended to  the  west  coast  opposite  to  the  Island  of  Valentia. 

In  the  district  of  Dingle,  however,  or  the  western  part  of  Kerry, 
which  I  have  personally  examined,  a  vast  number  of  fossils  (trilobites, 
mollusks,  and  corals)  have  been  of  late  years  found,  which  I  have 
recently  inspected,  either  in  the  cabinets  of  Mr.  GriflSth,  or  those  of 
the  government  surveyors. 

Some  of  these  fossils,  particularly  from  the  eastern  parts  of  this 
promontory,  may  belong  to  the  same  Lower  Silurian  type  which 
prevails  through  Wicklow,  Kildare,  Wexford,  and  Waterford. 
Others,  however,  including  most  of  the  species  found  in  Ferriter's 
Cove  and  at  Dunquin,  are  as  certainly  Upper  Silurian  fossils,  w^hich 
are  well  known  in  England  and  Wales.  Among  the  commonest  of 
these  may  be  mentioned,  Euomphalus  funatus,  Cardiola  interrupta, 

*  Most  of  the  fossils ,  described  by  Mr.  Weaver  in  his  memoir  on  the  south  of 
Ireland,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  iv.  old  series^  are  now  known  to  pertain 
to  the  carboniferous  system ;  but  certain  localities  which  he  notices,  such  as 
Smerwick  Harbour  or  Ferriter's  Cove,  and  Bon  Mahon,  near  Waterford,  were 
long  ago  recognized  by  Mr.  Griffith,  and  his  able  assistant  IVIr.  Kelly,  to  be  Silurian. 
In  addition  to  the  public  collections  in  Stephen's  Green,  Dublin,  and  the 
rich  collection  of  Mr.  Griffith,  the  geologist  will  find  an  instructive  assemblage  of 
these  Lower  Silurian  fossils  of  Waterford  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Nevin,  of  that 
city. 

M  4 


168  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VII. 

Murchisonia  Lloydii,  Pterinea  (Avicula)  retroflexa,  Orthis  lunata, 
O.  elegantula,  Rhynconella  (Terebratula)  Wilsoni,  R.  navicula,  Pha- 
cops  ( Asaphus)  caudatus,  Encrinurus  punctatus,  and  a  multitude  of 
common  Upper  Silurian  corals. 

It  is,  therefore,  to  be  hoped,  that  the  exact  order  of  that  promon- 
tory between  Dingle  and  Tralee  Bays  may  soon  be  unravelled.  I 
have,  indeed,  little  doubt,  from  what  I  have  been  told  by  Sir  Henry 
de  la  Beche,  Mr.  Jukes,  and  Professor  E.  Forbes,  that  the  public 
will  soon  have  presented  to  them  a  complete  ascending  order  in  this 
region,  of  the  south  of  Ireland,  from  Lower  through  Upper  Silurian 
rocks  into  a  full  development  of  the  old  red  sandstone  surmounted  by 
the  carboniferous  limestone. 

In  passing  along  the  west  coast  to  the  Connemara  district  in  the 
county  of  Gal  way,  the  geologist  again  meets  with  tracts  lying  to  the 
north  of  the  picturesque  mountains,  known  as  the  Bins  of  Connemara, 
which  are  charged  with  Silurian  fossils.  These  fossil  bands  occupy  the 
bold  and  precipitous  sides  of  the  deep  bay  of  Killery,  and  range  over 
a  considerable  space  eastwards,  by  Leenane,  Maam,  and  Oughterard, 
to  the  shores  of  Loughs  Corrib  and  Mask. 

Whilst  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  island  the  eruption  of  the  granite 
of  the  Wicklow  mountains  has  metamorphosed,  as  above  said,  the 
contiguous  Lower  Silurians,  so  in  Connemara  on  the  west,  we 
have  a  still  more  striking  example  of  the  metamorphism  of  a  very 
large  mass  of  strata  which,  in  my  opinion,  must  be  also  considered 
inferior  members  of  the  same  series.  The  annexed  diagram  is  reduced 
from  one  of  Mr.  Griffith's  transverse  coloured  sections  across  this 
remarkable  district,  which,  after  a  personal  survey  of  most  of  the 
Silurian  tracts  of  Ireland,  has  appeared  to  me  best  adapted  to  explairi 
how  certain  crystalline  rocks  which,  from  their  mineral  aspect,  have 
hitherto  been  supposed  to  be  of  higher  antiquity,  are,  in  all  pro- 
bability, nothing  more  than  the  altered  lower  members  of  the  sedi- 
mentary deposits  under  consideration. 


Chap.  VII.] 


«  Pi 


O  'S 

o  o 

w  .2 


CO  'O 

O  £ 


O  c8 

H  a 

o  o 

02  Et< 


•«  1-62 
•BqSBJopung 


•y  sees 


-JJOTiX 
'i^stuaig  uag 


•Xeg  auojspuno^ 


P3    cS  S 


1^  «o 

O  *0  "rt  ^ 

.2  Is  S  g 


§  -p.  c  -a 

03    O!  S  c3 

w  §  »  g 

1  I 

.2    2  2  ™ 


5  H  ^  2 
1 .1  § 


a>  tc 

§  "  -  I 

o  -S  ^  ^ 

S  ?2  - 


SILURIANS  OF  GALWAY.  169 

In  proceeding  from  Round- 
stone  Bay  on  the  south,  low  isles 
and  headlands  of  granite,  *,  fol- 
lowed by   syenitic  and  horn- 
blendic  rocks,  f,  throw  off  highly 
altered  micaceous  and  quartzose 
schists,  with  courses  of  white 
and  grey  crystalline  limestone,  a, 
which,  as  you  ascend  the  moun- 
tain of  Ben  Glenisky,  one  of  the 
twelve  Bins  of  Connemara,  are 
seen  to  be  followed  by  strong 
masses  granular,  white,  quartz 
rock  (manifestly  an  altered  sand- 
stone) which  alternate  with  mica- 
slate,  b. 

Interlaced  in  the  lower  part  of 
this  series,  and  lying  in  depres- 
sions between  Ben  Glenisky  and 
Ben  Bawn  (2300  feet  above  the 
sea),  and  thence  ranging  to  the 
west,  are  certain  crystalline  lime- 
stones,  one    course  of  which 
is  grey  and  white,  and  another 
is  the  beautiful  green  serpen- 
tinous  marble,  or  serpentine  of 
Connemara.    These  are  again 
I   overlaid  by  the  granular  quartz 
I  2  ^  I  I   rocks  and  mica-slates,  b,  which, 
S  o  S  ^      occupying  the  greater  portion 
1  ^  ^  ^  of  these    moun tarns,  are,  in 

S      O      O  * 

I  "     I  g   some    places,   surmounted  on 

§  a  2 

^      ^^^.^  northern  face  (with  a  slight 


-2  s  ^ 

2  ^  a 

O  u 

(D           C  <u 

a  ^  ^  5s 


n  m 

03  «  .3 

b^.2 

Ml 

2  ^  » 

P  ^  o 


i  «  i 
^  2  a 


170 


SILURIA. 


LChap.  VII. 


unconformity*  only)  by  conglomerate  sandstone  and  schists,  c,  con- 
taining fossils,  as  seen  at  Lettershanbally,  Blackwater  Bridge, 
Leenane,  Maam,  and  other  places.  Now,  these  fossils,  all  unequi- 
vocally Silurian,  are  by  no  means  types  of  the  lowest  members 
of  the  system.  On  the  contrary,  though  some  of  them  are  found 
in  Lower  Silurian  strata,  their  prevalent  species  refer  the  beds 
rather  to  the  upper  part  of  the  Llandeilo,  or  even  to  the  Caradoc 
formation.  In  fact,  the  strata  resemble,  both  zoologically  and 
lithologically,  the  fossiliferous  greywacke  on  the  banks  of  the 
Gii'van  water,  in  Ayrshire ;  many  of  the  same  species  occurring  in 
the  two  districts.  (See  p.  159.).  Several  of  the  Irish  fossils  are, 
indeed,  much  more  common  in  the  Upper  Silurian  of  England  and 
Wales. 

For  instance,  in  the  beds  near  Maam,  Professor  Nicol  and  myself 
collected  fossils,  some  of  which  would  be  considered  Lower  and 
others  Upper  Silurian;  there  being  among  the  latter  the  Belle- 
rophon  trilobatus,  first  published  from  the  tilestones,  or  summit  of 
the  Ludlow  rocks.  With  the  widely  spread  fossils  Strophomena 
depressa  and  Atrypa  reticularis,  which  occur  in  nearly  all  the 
Silurian  rocks,  we  here  met  with  such  shells  as  Pentamerus  oblongus, 
Orthis  calligrarama  (virgata),  0.  reversa,  Atrypa  hemisphaerica, 
which  elsewhere  are  only  known  in  the  lower  division,  associated 
with  Rhynconella  cuneata  and  R.  Wilsoni,  Bellerophon  trilobatus, 

*  In  a  traverse  of  this  tract,  which  I  made  from  Clifden  to  Killerj  Bay, 
in  the  company  of  Professor  Xicol,  the  green  marble  seemed  to  me  to  be  enclosed 
in  mica-schist  and  quartzose  rocks.  We  also,  however,  met  with  a  grey  limestone, 
subordinate  to  the  upper  portion  of  the  mica-schist,  which,  as  in  Argyleshire  on 
both  sides  of  Loch  Fyne,  exhibits  many  of  the  appearances  of  ordinary  stratified  lime- 
stone, in  respect  to  bedding,  joints,  and  wayboards;  but  we  could  detect  no  fossUs 
in  it.  Though  the  above  section  exhibits  the  strata,  c,  containing  Silurian  fossils, 
reposing  with  a  slight  unconformity  only  on  these  micaceous  rocks,  there  are 
mauy  other  such  junctions  (as  around  Maam)  where  the  relations  are  quite 
discordant. 


Chap.  VII.]  METAMORPHIC  SILURIAN.     GALWAY.  171 

and  some  lamellibranchiate  shells,  such  as  the  Pterinea  or  Avicula 
retroflexa,  and  Cucullella  antiqua,  which  were  described  as  true 
Upper  Silurian  fossils.  Here,  also,  in  beds  of  junction  with  the 
mica-slates,  are  the  chambered  shells,  Cyrtoceras  approximatum, 
Orthoceras  bullatum,  O.  ibex  and  0.  angulatum, —  species  formerly 
supposed  to  mark  the  Upper  Silurian  only,  but  since  also  found 
in  some  of  the  lower  strata.  Among  the  trilobites  we  have  even 
our  constant  friend  Calymene  Blumenbachii,  and  the  Encrinurus 
(Amphion)  punctatus,  together  with  a  genus  only  yet  known  in 
Lower  Silurian  strata,  the  Asaphtis,  apparently  the  same  species, 
found  in  Tyrone,  and  Cyphaspis  megalops,  a  Dudley  fossil.  Again, 
the  corals  from  one  locality  (Kilbride)  present  us  with  such  species 
as  Favosites  polymorpha,  F.  Gothlandica,  F.  multiporata,  &c.,  which 
are  usually  upper  types,  commingled  with  shells,  some  of  which  are 
Upper,  whilst  perhaps  still  more  are  Lower  Silurian. 

This  statement  is  not  made  to  weaken  the  value  of  the  separation 
on  a  general  scale  of  the  Silurian  system  into  two  groups ;  but 
simply  to  show  that  there  are  many  tracts  where  the  appropriation 
of  certain  strata  absolutely  to  one  or  the  other  becomes  very  dif- 
ficult, if  not  impossible. 

In  addition  to  the  clear  types  described  by  Portlock  from  the  centre 
of  the  north  of  Ireland,  we  have  indeed  the  best  proofs,  in  a  multi- 
tude of  trilobites,  orthid^e,  and  other  remains,  that  the  lower  fossil- 
bearing  schists  of  Wicklow,  Kildare,  Wexford,  and  Waterford,  as 
well  as  the  Tyrone  beds,  are  unquestionably  Lower  Silurian ;  whilst 
in  Connemara  and  the  adjacent  tracts  the  indications  are  as  clear,  that 
we  have  reached  much  higher  members  of  the  series,  while  around 
Dingle  Bay  the  fossils  of  the  upper  division  preponderate.  Where, 
then,  is  the  true  lowest  Silurian  in  the  Connemara  tract?  My 
belief  is  that  it  is  represented  by  the  great  underlying  crystalline 
masses  of  the  Bins  of  Connemara,  and  that  the  limestones  included 
in  those  mica-schists  are  nothing  more  than  the  altered  Lower 


172  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VII. 

Silurians ;  some  of  them  being  of  the  age  of  Llandeilo  and  Bala  in 
Wales,  or  of  Wrae  and  Girvan  in  Scotland. 

In  this  Galway  region  we  cannot,  indeed,  pursue  a  clear  ascending 
order,  any  more  than  in  Scotland.  We  can  only  observe  that  a 
coarse,  chloritic,  quartzose  conglomerate  overlies  the  fossiliferous  beds 
in  question  —  a  conglomerate  which,  according  to  Mr.  Griffith,  rises 
into  mountainous  masses  on  the  north  side  of  the  Killery  Bay. 
Alternating  with  green  and  purple  slate  and  interstratified  felspar 
porphyries,  f,  these  rocks,  after  an  undulation,  repose  upon  a  vast 
mass  of  greenish,  grey,  and  reddish  slate,  «*.  The  base  of  the 
fossiliferous  series  to  the  north  of  the  Killery  harbour  is  composed  of 
a  dark  and  reddish  brown  sandstone,  under  which  is  a  conglomerate 
of  mica-schist  and  other  rocks ;  the  whole  resting,  as  on  the  other 
side  of  the  trough,  on  mica-schist.  (See  section.)  Then  follows  a  boss 
of  granite,*  (Knockaskeheen),  which  throws  off  crystalline  schists  on 
both  flanks,  —  the  masses  in  the  north  being  subtended  by  the  un- 
conformable and  horizontal  carboniferous  limestone  of  Clew  Bay  in 
Mayo. 

The  reddish-brown  sandstone  of  this  tract,  occasionally  fossili- 
ferous, which  is  well  seen  a  little  to  the  north  of  Maam,  has,  indeed, 
a  mineral  aspect  which  so  much  resembles  the  old  red  sandstone  of 
other  countries,  that  if  the  same  rock  should  accidentally  have  been 
misnamed  in  some  parts  of  Ireland  where  fossils  do  not  occur,  the 
mistake  is  one  which,  in  a  region  so  broken,  and  which  is  to  so  great 
an  extent  obscured  by  drifted  materials  (the  escar  "  of  Ireland),  must 
almost  necessarily  have  been  made  before  the  classification  of  rocks 
through  their  organic  remains  was  established.  Considerable  masses 
of  the  brown  and  purple  sandstone  of  Ireland  will  be  found  to  belong, 
I  apprehend,  to  the  Silurian  age. 

The  progress  of  research  will  also,  I  trust,  bring  out  other  evidences 
to  support  the  views  here  entertained  respecting  metamorphism ; 
and  if  the  proofs  of  a  still  more  perfect  Silurian  series  be  obtained 


Chap.  VII.]  SILURIANS  OF  BRITISH  ISLES.  173 

in  the  Dingle  and  Killarney  districts,  then  the  above  interpretation  of 
the  Connemara  tract,  with  its  crystalline  and  highly  altered  bottom 
rocks  and  fossiiiferous  upper  strata,  may  be  applied  to  the  still  more 
altered  and  crystalline  rocks  of  Donegal.  The  latter  may,  indeed, 
be  brought  into  coordination  and  connection  with  those  true  and 
shelly  Silurian  rocks  in  Fermanagh  and  Tyrone  which  have  been 
described  by  Colonel  Portlock.  This  is  a  task  worthy  of  the  govern- 
ment surveyors,  and  which,  I  have  no  doubt,  they  will  ably  ac- 
complish. No  one  who  has  examined  the  small  patch  near  Pomeroy  * 
could  imagine,  from  the  aspect  of  the  schists,  whether  argillaceous  or 
quartzose,  that  it  could  have  proved  so  highly  fossiiiferous;  and 
hence  we  need  not  despair  of  finding  many  more  such  former  burying- 
places  in  various  parts  of  the  large  area  of  Ireland,  over  which 
Silurian  rocks  are  believed  to  extend ;  but  which  are  now  to  so  great 
an  extent  metamorphosed,  and  so  sterile  in  organic  remains. 

Besides  many  fossils  which  are  common  in  Great  Britain,  Ireland 
presents  us  with  other  species  of  crustaceans  and  shells,  a  full  ac- 
quaintance with  which  must  be  sought  for  in  the  works  of  Portlock 
and  M'Coy,  in  the  tables  of  Griffith,  and  in  the  illustrations  of 
Irish  geology  which  are  preparing  for  publication  by  the  govern- 
ment surveyors. 

Some  of  the  most  characteristic  of  these  fossils  will  be  noticed  in 
the  two  ensuing  chapters,  which  treat  of  the  chief  organic  remains  of 
the  Silurian  system. 

Vertical  dimensions  of  the  Silurian  rocks  of  the  British  Isles.  We 
have  as  yet  no  means  of  accurately  estimating  the  thickness  of  the 

*  I  recently  examined  the  Tyrone  tract  under  the  guidance  of  Mr.  John 
Kelly,  the  assistant  of  Mr.  Griffith,  an  excellent  and  exact  field  geologist,  to  whom 
I  am  indebted  for  valuable  assistance  in  examining  other  localities  of  Silurian  rocks 
(Dublin  district,  Chair  of  Kildare,  Dingle,  &c.)  We  were  accompanied  in  the 
Pomeroy  district  by  M.  de  Verneuil,  M.  Pierre  de  Tchihatcheff,  and  Professor 
NicoU 


174  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VII. 

older  deposits  of  Scotland  and  Ireland  which  have  been  treated  of  in 
this  chapter ;  but  I  find,  on  consulting  with  Professor  James  Nicol, 
that  the  Scottish  section  given  at  p.  152.  can  hardly  represent  less 
than  50,000  feet,  although  we  have  no  indication  that  the  bottom 
of  the  sedimentary  series  is  reached,  nor  have  we  any  thing  like  a 
completion  of  the  upper  Silurian  rocks.  With  the  extension  of  the 
geological  survey  to  Ireland  (a  benefit  which  it  is  hoped  Scotland 
may  also  soon  enjoy),  we  may  ere  long  be  furnished  with  the  re- 
quisite data  respecting  the  sister  isle. 

In  the  meantime,  reverting  to  the  typical  region  of  Wales  and 
the  adjacent  English  counties,  as  described  in  the  earlier  pages  to 
Chapter  V.  inclusive,  we  can  appeal  to  the  admeasurements  of  the 
Government  surveyors.  In  Shropshire,  the  Longmynd  or  unfossili- 
ferous  bottom  rocks  (the  Cambrian  of  the  Survey)  are  said  to  have 
the  thickness  of  26,000  feet,  or  about  three  times  that  of  the  same 
strata  in  North  Wales ;  whilst  my  original  Lower  Silurian  strata  of 
Shropshire  to  the  west  of  the  Longmynd  exhibit  a  width  of  14,000. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  region  between  the  Menai  Straits  and  the 
Berwyn  Mountains,  where  the  bottom  rocks  are  so  much  less  co- 
pious than  in  Shropshire,  the  fossiliferous  Lower  Silurian,  from  the 
base  of  the  Lingula  flags  to  the  top  of  the  Llandeilo  or  Bala  for- 
mation (including  the  stratified  igneous  rocks),  swells  out  to  about 
19,000  feet,  and  the  Caradoc  sandstone,  on  the  borders  of  Radnor 
and  Montgomery,  has  a  thickness  of  from  4,000  to  5,000  feet. 
Taking  the  greatest  dimensions,  we  are,  therefore,  presented  with  the 
prodigious  measurement  of  about  50,000  feet  of  sedimentary  strata, 
in  the  lower  half  of  which  no  fossils  have  been  found,  the  upper  part, 
as  above  described,  bearing  a  group  of  fossils  to  which  allusion  has 
already  been  made,  and  whose  chief  characters  will  be  specially  con- 
sidered in  the  sequel.  Although  of  such  vast  volume  in  parts  of 
the  region  described,  it  must  be  observed  that  the  Lower  Silurian 
rocks  of  other  tracts,  though  precisely  of  the  same  age,  as  proved 


Chap.  VII.]  THICKNESS  OF  BRITISH  SILURIANS. 


175 


by  their  imbedded  organic  remains,  are  often  comparatively  of  very 
small  dimensions. 

Though  more  replete  with  fossils  than  the  inferior  group,  the 
Upper  Silurian  rocks  attain  nowhere*  a  greater  thickness  than  from 
5,000  to  6,000  feet,  the  Ludlow  rocks  being  for  the  most  part  more 
developed  than  the  Wenlock  formation.  In  this  way  the  whole  of 
the  fossiliferous  Silurians  of  England  and  Wales,  measured  from  the 
Lingula  beds  to  the  Ludlow  rocks  inclusive,  have  the  enormous 
maximum  dimensions  of  about  30,000  feet ;  and  if  we  add  the  con- 
formable underlying  sedimentary  masses  of  pretty  similar  mineral 
aspect,  but  in  which  no  fossils  have  been  found,  we  have  before  us 
a  pile  of  subaqueous  deposits  reaching  to  the  stupendous  thickness 
of  56,000  feet,  or  upwards  of  ten  miles  ! 

*  This  observation  applies  to  the  original  Silurian  region  and  Wales.  The 
Upper  Silurians  of  Cumberland  and  the  lake  country  may  be  of  larger  dimensions  ; 
but  I  am  not  aware  that  their  thickness  has  been  estimated. 


176 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  VIII. 


CHAPTER  yill. 

ORGANIC  REMAINS  OF  THE  LOWER  SILURIAN  ROCKS. 

A  FULL  acquaintance  with  the  Silurian  fossils  of  the  British  Isles  can 
only  be  gained  by  a  study  of  the  various  works  in  which  they  have  been 
successively  described.  The  first  of  these  in  order  of  time,  as  also  the 
first  in  which  the  organic  remains  were  classified  and  placed  in  their  true 
geological  position,  is  the  "  Silurian  System  ;"*  the  next  is  a  report  on 
the  Silurian  fossils  of  Tyrone,  by  Colonel  Portlock ;  a  third  is  on 
the  Silurian  fossils  of  Ireland,  by  Professor  M'Coy.  Then  follow 
various  publications  of  the  government  geological  survey,  particularly 
the  volume  on  the  Malvern  and  Abberley  Hills,  by  Professor  Phil- 
lips and  certain  monographs,  descriptive  of  both  Lower  and  Upper 
Silurian  forms,  in  the  Decades  of  the  geological  survey,  by  Pro- 
fessor E.  Forbes  and  Mr.  Salter.  Valuable  notices  of  these  fossils 
have  also  been  published  by  Mr.  Sharpe  and  other  writers  in  the 
•volumes  of  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  the  Geological  Society  of 
London ;  whilst  an  excellent  description  of  the  Upper  Silurian  bra- 
chiopods  by  Mr.  Davidson,  has  appeared  in  the  Bulletin  of  the 
Geological  Society  of  France,  in  which  nearly  all  the  British  species 
of  that  age  are  figured  and  described.  Even  since  the  period  of  this 
last  publication,  and  whilst  these  pages  are  printing,  the  same  author 
has  published,  in  the  volumes  of  the  Palseontographical  Society,  a 
highly  valuable  monograph,  detailing  the  generic  characters  of  all  the 
Silurian  brachiopods.  j 

*  The  shells  of  the  Silurian  System  were  described  by  James  de  C.  Sowerby, 
Mr.  Salter,  then  a  very  young  man,  assisting,  and  drawing  many  of  the  forms. 
The  corals  were  described  by  Mr.  Lonsdale,  and  the  trilobites  by  myself. 


Chap.  VIII.J  LOWER  SILURIAN  ZOOPHYTES.  177 

In  all  these  British  works,  and  in  the  volumes  of  my  contemporaries 
which  relate  to  the  continents  of  Europe  and  America,  the  fossils 
described  have  been  invariably  referred  to  as  Lower  and  Upper 
Silurian.  In  one  work  only,  —  published  last  year  by  Professor 
Sedgwick,  —  on  the  palaeozoic  fossils  of  the  Woodwardian  Museum 
of  the  University  of  Cambridge,  has  this  nomenclature  been 
changed ;  the  term  Lower  Silurian  being  disused  by  him,  and  that 
of  Cambrian  substituted. 

The  reader,  who  will  consult  the  various  works  alluded  to,  will  find, 
that  whilst  a  marked  division  was  at  first  particularly  insisted  on, 
as  existing  between  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian,  subsequent  re- 
searches, extended  over  large  areas,  have  shown  that  the  two  groups 
are  really  much  more  knit  together  in  one  natural  series  than  when 
my  classification  was  proposed ;  it  being  now  well  ascertained,  as  ex- 
plained in  the  preceding  pages,  that  a  very  great  number  of  the  most 
characteristic  fossils  are  common  to  the  inferior  and  superior  mem- 
bers of  the  system.  In  the  course  of  the  observations  which  follow, 
this  generalization  will  be  placed  in  a  clearer  point  of  view. 

Graptolites  have  been  already  alluded  to,  as  being  an  exclusive 
and  highly  characteristic  Silurian  form  of  polypes,  which  inhabited 
a  sea  with  a  muddy  bottom  (p.  46.).  Of  those  species  which  spe- 
cially mark  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  the  double  graptolite,  Diplo- 
grapsus  pristis,  p.  46.,  Foss.  6.  f.  4.,  ranges  from  some  of  the 
inferior  strata  to  the  upper  beds  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone ;  whilst 
the  Graptolites  priodon,  Foss.  6.  f.  3.,  first  named  G.  Ludensis  from 
being  found  in  the  superior  member  of  the  whole  system,  or  the 
Ludlow  rocks,  has  been  also  abundantly  found  in  the  older  strata  of 
Scotland,  and  also  in  those  of  North  Wales. 

But  besides  these  animals  of  ancient  muddy  seas,  which  are,  as 
before  said,  exclusively  Silurian  in  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  other 
forms  of  zoophytes  are  found  in  the  lower  portion  of  these  deposits, 
which  multiply  very  much  as  we  ascend  in  the  series.    Among  these 

N 


178  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

certain  species  of  corals  of  the  genera  Haly sites,  Heliolites  or  Pa- 
laeopora  (Porites,  Sil.  Syst.),  Stenopora,  and  Petraia,  are  the  most 
prevalent. 


1.  Stenopora  fibrosa, 
Goldf.  2.  The  same 
species,  variety  L}-- 
coperdon,  Hall.  3. 
Petraia  subdupli- 
cata,  M'Coy. 


Fossils,  13. 
Lower  Silurian  Zoophytes. 


4.  Halysites  cate- 
nulatus.  Linn,  5. 
Ptilodictya  dicho- 
toma,  Portlock.  6, 
Retepora  Hisingeri. 
M'Coy. 


One  of  the  most  striking  of  these  bodies,  and  one  of  the  most 
widely  spread  in  various  countries,  is  the  Halysites  catenulatus  of 
Linnaeus,  f.  4.,  the  well  known  "  chain  coral"  (Catenipora  escharoides 
of  the  Silurian  System).  Another,  still  more  abundant  in  the 
lower  rocks,  is  the  Stenopora  (Favosites)  fibrosa,  whether  branched, 
f.  1.,  or  hemispherical,  f.  2. ;  a  third,  the  Petraia  subduplicata,  f.  3. 
Others,  less  common,  are  the  Stromatopora  striatella,  chap.  9., 
Foss.  32. ;  Heliolites  (Porites)  interstinctus,  p.  120.  Foss.  11. ;  H.  in- 


1.  Fenestella  sub 
antiqua,  D'Orb. 

2.  Ptilodictya 
acuta,  Hall.  3. 
NiduUtes  favus, 
Salter.  4.  Sarci- 
nula  organum, 
Linn. 


Fossils,  14. 
Lower  Silurian  Zoophytes. 


5.  Heliolites  in- 
ordinatus,Lonsd. 

6.  FavositesGoth- 
landica,Groldfuss. 

7.  Heliolites  me- 
gastoma,  M'Coy. 


Chap.  VIII.]  LOWER  SILURIAN  CORALS.  179 

ordinatus,  Foss.  14.  f.  5. ;  H.  megastoma,  f.  7. ;  Favosites  Gothlandica, 
f.  6.  ;  F.  alveolaris,  p.  119.,  Foss.  10.;  and  the  Sarcinula  organum, 
Linn.,  Foss.  14.  f.  4.,  found  in  the  slates  of  Westmoreland,  and  in  the 
Upper  Silurian  limestone  of  Gothland  in  Sweden. 

The  reader  has  now  before  him  in  these  woodcuts,  some  of  the 
corals  which  most  frequently  occur  in  Lower  Silurian  strata,  but  if 
he  wishes  to  study  many  other  forms  of  these  fossils,  particularly 
those  in  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  where  corals  are  much  more 
abundant,  he  must  consult  the  clear  and  faithful  descriptions  of  them 
given  by  Mr.  Lonsdale  in  the  "  Silurian  System,"  in  which  work  62 
species  are  accurately  figured.  By  reference  to  the  authority  of  that 
valued  friend,  who  assisted  me  so  materially  in  preparing  my  original 
volumes,  and  to  the  works  above  cited,  it  will  be  seen  that,  of  the  ten 
species  here  mentioned  as  frequent  in  the  Lower  Silurian,  five  of  them, 
i,  e.^  the  chain  coral,  the  Favosites  alveolaris  and  F.  Gothlandica,  the 
Heliolites  interstinctus,  and  H.  megastoma,  are  still  more  abundant 
in  the  upper  division  of  the  system  *,  as  is  also  the  case  with  H.  pe- 
talliformis,  ch.  5.  Foss.  11.  f.  2.,  and  H.  tubulatus,  ib.  f.  1. 

Heliolites  favosus,  M'Coy,  and  H.  subtilis,  of  the  same  author,  are 
rare  Lower  Silurian  species  of  the  last  named  genus.  Nebulipora,  a 
new  genus  of  Professor  M*Coy,  contains  two  or  three  species  of 
minute-celled  corals,  resembling  Favosites.  One,  the  Nebulipora 
favulosa  of  Phillips,  is  figured  in  the  woodcut,  p.  86.,  Foss.  7.  f.  13. 
It  is  very  common  in  the  Llandeilo  flags. 

These  are  not,  of  course,  all  the  corals  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks. 
Two  or  three  other  species  of  Petraia  have  also  been  described  from 

*  The  palaeontologist  will  also  naturally  consult  the  writings  of  Milne  Edwards 
and  Jules  Haime,  Archives  de  Museum  d'Histoire  Naturelle,  vol.  v.,  who  have 
shown  that  several  of  the  corals  which  were  supposed  to  be  common  to  the  Silurian 
and  Devonian  rocks  are  not  so.  I  must  also  specially  refer  the  naturalist  to 
Danas'  magnificent  and  profound  work  on  zoophytes,  recently  published  as  part  of 
the  results  of  the  "  United  States  Exploring  Expedition  ; "  and  to  the  descriptions 
and  figures  of  Professor  M'Coy,  in  Professor  Sedgwick's  work  above  quoted. 

N  2 


180  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIIT. 

the  Llandeilo  flags,  and  the  common  P.  bina,  abundant  in  Wenlock 
strata,  is  even  more  common  in  Caradoc  sandstone.  (Chap.  9. 
Foss.  33.  f.  7,  8.) 

Others  of  these  zoophytes,  although  possibly  allied  to  moUusca,  so 
resemble  corals  in  the  eye  of  the  field  geologist  as  to  pass  for  such. 
These  are  certain  forms  of  Bryozoa  or  Ciliobrachiata.  Among 
them  the  Ptilodictya  dichotoma,  p.  176.,  Foss.  13.  f.  5.,  and  the  P. 
acuta,  ib.  Foss.  14.  f.  2.,  with  some  new  species,  are  not  unfrequent 
fossils  of  this  age.  A  coral  of  a  net-like  form,  the  Retepora  Hisin- 
geri,  Foss.  13.  f.  6.,  is  common  in  the  slates  of  Wales.  Glauconome 
disticha,  of  the  Wenlock  limestone,  ch.  9.,  Foss.  35.  f.  5.,  is  often 
found  in  calcareous  bands  of  the  Llandeilo  flags,  as  are  also  the 
Fenestella  Milleri,  ib.  f.  4.  and  Fenestella  subantiqua,  D'Orb.  (F. 
antiqua,  Sil.  Syst.),  Foss.  14.  f.  1.  Of  these  the  three  last  are  also 
common  Upper  Silurian  species. 

Of  Crinoids,  or  the  lily-shaped  tenants  of  the  deep,  most  of  which 
were  attached  by  their  root  or  base  to  submarine  rocks,  the  inferior 
strata  of  the  Silurian  epoch  have  in  general  afforded  fragments  only. 
Referring  the  reader  therefore  to  the  plates  13  to  15.  of  this  work,  as 
containing  the  forms  best  known  in  the  Silurian  rocks  when  my 
work  was  published,  it  is  enough  now  to  state,  that,  for  the  most 

Fossils,  15. 


Glyptocrinus  basalis,  M'Coy. 


A  Lower  Silurian  crinoid. 


part,  broken  portions  of  the  stems  only  of  Encrinites  (pi.  12.  f.  3.) 
have  been  detected  in  the  earlier  portion  of  these  deposits  in  Britain. 
One  brilliant  exception,  however,  is  the  Glyptocrinus  basalis, 


Chap.  VIII.] 


LOWER  SILURIAN  CYSTIDEANS. 


181 


M^Coy,  a  crinoid  found  in  the  Lower  Silurian  slate  rocks  of  North 
Wales ;  fine  specimens  of  it  are  to  be  seen  in  the  cabinets  of  the 
Museum  of  Geology  in  Jermyn  Street,  and  in  the  Woodwardian 
collection  of  Cambridge. 

Next  in  the  natural  ascending  order  come  those  remarkable  animals, 
whose  globular  forms  and  strong  external  plates  have  often  enabled 
them  to  resist  destruction  better  than  the  delicately  constructed  and 
slender  stemmed  Encrinites,  viz.  the  SphaBronites  of  old  authors,  the 
Cystidese  of  Von  Buch.  Abounding  in  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Scan- 
dinavia and  Russia,  they  were  long  ago  described  by  Linnaeus  and 
Gyllenberg,  whilst  they  have  recently  had  much  new  light  thrown 

Fossils,  16. 
.  Lower  Silurian  Cystideans. 


1.  Echino-sphaerites  Balti- 
cus,  Eichw.  2.  E.  punctatus, 
Forbes.  3.  Ovarian  pyramid 
of   E.   granulatus,  M'Coy. 


4.  Caryocystites  munitus, 
Forbes.   5.    C.  granatum, 
Wahl.      6.  Agelacrinites 
3  Buchianus,  Forbes. 


on  their  natural  affinities  by  Von  Buch,  Volborth,  H.  I.  H.  the  Due  de 
Leuchtenberg,  and  Edward  Forbes.  They  constitute,  in  the  primeval 
era,  the  representatives  of  the  sea-urchins  or  Echinidse  of  the  secondary 
and  tertiary  periods  and  of  the  present  day.  They  have  affinity  with 
Crinoids  on  the  one  hand  (some  possessing  very  perfectly  formed 
arms  and  tentacles),  and  with  sea-urchins  on  the  other*,  and  have 
been  divided  into  genera  called  Echino-sphaerites,  Echino-encrinites, 
Sycocystites,  Hemicosmites,  Cryptocrinites,  &c.,  as  here  figured.f 

*  The  views  expressed  in  the  text  are  those  of  Edward  Forbes. 

•j"  Other  forms  of  these  Cystideas  are  given  in  the  work,  "  Russia  and  the  Ural 
Mountains,"  vol.  ii.  See  also  the  monograph  of  the  eminent  Leopold  Von  Buch, 
"iiber  Cystideen,"  Trans.  Berlin.  Acad.,  1845;  Volborth,  "iiber  die  Echino- 
Encrlnen,"  Bull.  Sc.  Acad.  St.  Petersburg,  T.  x.,  and  Bull.  Pliys.  Mat.,  ib.  T.  iii. 
No.  6. ;  Beschr.  Thier.  Silur.  Kalk.  v.  Max.  Herz.  v.  Leuchtenberg.  St.  Petersb. 
1843;  and  E.  Forbes,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  vol.  ii.  pi.  2.  1848. 

N  3 


lo2  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

They  usually  occur  in  clusters,  on  the  shaly  surface  of  beds  of 
limestone,  resembling  bunches  of  enormous  grapes ;  and  in  Sweden 
and  Eussia,  where  thus  developed,  they  are  associated  with  Orthidae 
and  other  shells  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks.  In  Britain  they  had 
not  been  found  when  the  Silurian  classification  was  published ;  but 
by  the  researches  of  the  government  surveyors  they  were  detected, 
and  pretty  plentifully,  in  strata  at  Sholeshook,  Pembrokeshire,  laid 
down  by  me  as  of  Llandeilo  age  (see  p.  68.).  The  usual  forms  in 
our  country  are  species  of  Echino-sphaerites  and  Caryocystites.  The 
Echino-sphserites  aurantium,  the  commonest  species  in  the  north  of 
Europe,  is  rare  in  Britain;  but  E.  Balticus,  Foss.  16.  f.  1.,  and  Caryocys- 
tites granatum,  f.  5.,  both  common  in  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Scandinavia, 
are  found  profusely  in  Pembrokeshire,  as  above,  in  one  of  my  old  fossil- 
bearing  localities ;  and  thus  our  British  strata  are  well  paralleled  with 
their  foreign  analogues.  E.  punctatus,  f.  2.,  and  Caryocystites  mu- 
nitus,  f.  4.,  are  common  species  at  Bala.  One  exceedingly  rare  and 
curious  form,  possessing  arms,  which  are  affixed  like  the  spokes  of  a 
wheel  on  the  upper  surface,  has  been  found  in  North  Wales,  and 
figured  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Geological  Survey :  it  has  received  from 
Professor  E.  Forbes  the  name  of  Agelacrinites  Buchianus,  in  honour 
of  Leopold  V.  Buch,  and  is  represented  above,  f.  6. 

Nor  must  we  omit  two  species  of  star-fish,  first  discovered  by 
Professor  Sedgwick  and  Mr.  Salter  at  Bala.  One  of  these,  described 
by  Professor  Forbes,  belongs  apparently  to  the  modern  genus  Uraster, 


Fossils,  17. 


Uraster  obtusus,  Forbes. 


A  Lower  Silurian  star-fish. 


SO  common  on  our  own  shores :  the  other  was  unfortunately  lost 
when  it  had  been  ascertained  to  belong  to  the  true  Ophiuroid  group. 


Chap.  VIII.]  LOWER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPODS.  183 

and  named  provisionally  O.  Salteri,  by  Professor  Sedgwick.  The 
Uraster  obtusus,  from  the  slates  of  Wales  and  Ireland,  is  re- 
presented in  the  preceding  woodcut. 

Among  the  shells  of  the  Llandeilo  strata,  above  the  lowest  or 
primordial  zone  described  in  the  last  chapter,  Lingula  again  occurs, 
but  of  different  species.  Lingula  attenuata,  pi.  5.  f.  1.,  is  indeed 
one  of  the  most  characteristic  shells  of  the  Llandeilo  forma- 
tion, occurring  plentifully  at  Builth  and  Llandeilo,  in  South 
Wales,  and  at  Shelve,  in  Shropshire.  Other  species  will  be 
mentioned  afterwards. 

But  by  far  the  most  abundant  bivalve  shells  of  these  rocks  belong 
to  the  group  of  brachiopods  represented  more  particularly  by  the  ge- 
nera Orthis,  Leptsena,  and  Strophomena.  With  these  are  associated 
several  forms  of  Terebratula,  or  rather  Rhynconella  of  modern 
authors,  the  species  in  the  old  rocks  being  chiefly  those  which  have  a 
sharp  beak,  with  the  perforation  beneath  it ;  while  in  true  Terebra- 
tulae  the  hole  is  in  the  beak  itself.  The  genus  Atrypa  is  also  com- 
mon, as  well  as  Pentamerus ;  the  various  species  of  the  last  genus 
being  almost  exclusively  Silurian. 

Although  all  the  well  established  forms  of  these  genera  which  were 
known  at  the  period  of  the  publication  of  the  "  Silurian  System"  are 
now  re-produced  from  the  original  etchings  in  the  annexed  plates 
(5  to  8.),  attention  will  here  only  be  specially  directed  to  the  figures  of 
those  which  are  found  in  abundance,  and  are  therefore  useful  indi- 
cators, either  as  characterizing  one  zone  or  band  of  strata,  or  which, 
being  found  to  ascend  through  a  number  of  beds,  have  therefore 
lived  through  a  long  period  of  primeval  time. 

The  genus  Orthis  is  one  of  the  most  prolific  forms  of  brachiopod  of 
this  period.  The  species  have  generally  one  valve  convex,  the 
other  flat,  and  are  of  a  roundish  outline.  Those  which  most  cha- 
racterize the  Lower  Silurian  division  are  arranged,  as  before  said,  in 
plates  5,  6,  and  7.  Some  are  figured  in  the  two  following  woodcuts. 

N  4 


184  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

Out  of  ten  species  originally  published  as  Lower  Silurian  types,  at 
least  six  are  now  well  ascertained  (see  p.  87.),  to  range  from  the  Llan- 
deilo  formation,  as  exhibited  among  the  rocks  of  Snowdon,  to  the 
uppermost  beds  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone  of  Shropshire  inclusive, 
where  these  are  succeeded  by  the  Wenlock  shale.  These  are  Orthis 
elegantula,  pi.  6.  f.  5. ;  0.  testudinaria,  pi.  6.  f.  1,  2. ;  O.  vespertilio, 
pi.  5.  f.  16 — 20. ;  and  the  simple  plaited  species  figured  in  the  fol- 
lowing woodcut  viz.,  0.  flabellulum,  f.  1. ;  O.  Actoniae,  f.  2. ;  and  the 
variable  O.  calligramma  (virgata,  Sil.  Syst.),  f.  3,  4. 

Among  the  other  species  most  frequent  in  the  lower  division,  and,  as 
far  as  I  know,  peculiar  to  it,  are  the  O.  insularis.  Pander ;  O.  alternata, 
pi.  7.  f.  4. ;  O.  confinis,  Salter;  O.crispa,  M*Coy ;  0.  reversa,  Salter,  the 
last  being  very  common  in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  Scotland  and  the 
West  of  Ireland,  and  not  rare  in  England.  0.  protensa  (including  0.  lata 


Fossils,  18. 


of  my  old  work),  pi.  5.  f.  22—24. ;  O.  turgida,  M'Coy ;  0.  sagit- 
tifera,  M^Coy ;  and  0.  Hirnantensis,  M^Coy,  are  other  species  of  the 
Lower  Silurian,  found  in  Wales. 

Wherever  several  of  these  forms  of  Orthis  are  found,  the  geologist 
may  be  pretty  sure  that  he  is  working  in  Lower  Silurian  rocks ; 
though  even  among  these  there  are  species,  such  as  O.  elegantula  and 
O.  calligramma,  which  occur  in  the  Upper  Silurian ;  — -  the  former 
most  abundantly. 

Three  of  tne  above  species,  the  O.  insularis,  O.  testudinaria, 
and  O.  calligramma,  are  found  in  Scandinavia  and  Russia;  while 


Chap.  VIIL]  LOWER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPODS.  185 

another  Lower  Silurian  species,  0.  striatula,  Emmons,  Foss.  19.  f.  3., 
not  published  in  the  "  Silurian  System,"  but  still  a  very  common 
British  species,  is  the  most  abundant  Orthis  of  this  epoch  in  North 
America.  The  Orthis  biforata  or  lynx,  Foss.  19.  f.  4.,  formerly 
called  Spirifer  lynx,  is  common  in  the  Lower  Silurian  of  North 
America,  Russia,  and  Sweden;  and  is  abundant  in  those  British 
localities  originally  called  by  me  Lower  Silurian,  as  well  as  in  North 
Wales  and  Ireland.  It  also  occurs,  though  rarely,  in  the  Wenlock 
limestone  and  well-defined  Upper  Silurian  of  Britain  and  Gothland. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Orthis  biloba  of  Linnaeus  (Spirifer  sinuatus 
Sil.  Syst.),  pi.  20.  f.  14.,  which  is  most  abundant  in  the  Wenlock 
shale,  has  recently  been  detected  in  the  Llandeilo  flags  of  Builth 
( Radnorshire),  in  Pembrokeshire,  and  in  Denbighshire. 


Fossils,  19. 
Lower  Silurian  Brachiopods. 


1.  Lingula  attenuata. 

2.  Strophomena  ex- 
pansa.  3.  Orthis  stria- 
tula,  Emmons.    4.  0. 


The  closely  allied  genus  of  Strophomena,  consisting  chiefly  of 
the  flatter  forms  of  the  so  called  genus  Orthis  of  the  "  Silurian 
System,"  exhibits  some  very  marked  and  frequent  species  which  are 
eminently  typical  of  the  Lower  Silurian.  These  are  the  Stropho- 
mena expansa,  pi.  7.  f.  1.  and  Foss.  19.  f  2.;  Strophomena  tenui- 
striata,  p.  86.  Foss.  7.  f.  8. ;  S.  grandis,  pi.  7.  f.  6,  7.,  which  abound 
in  the  Llandeilo  formation,  and  have  been  formerly  given  in  the  plates 
of  my  work,  as  species  of  Orthis  and  Leptaena  ;  they  not  only  prevail 


186  SILURIA,  [Chap.  VIII 

in  the  Llandeilo  and  Bala  deposits  of  Wales,  but  are  common  in  the 
strata  of  the  same  age  in  Westmoreland,  and  in  the  Caradoc  sandstone 
of  Shropshire.  Strophomena  corrugata,  Portlock,  is  a  highly  orna- 
mental species  of  the  genus,  with  radiating  lines  and  transverse 
undulations  :  it  is  found  in  Wales  and  Ireland.  Another  shell  of 
this  genus  frequent  at  Bala,  the  S.  spiriferoides,  M'Coy,  Foss,  20. 
f.  2.,  is  so  like  Spirifer  radiatus  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  as  to  be 
easily  mistaken  for  it.    It  is  a  common  Caradoc  species. 

The  universally  spread  Leptaena  depressa  (Sil.  Syst.),  now  more 
correctly  referred  to  the  genus  Strophomena,  extends  upwards 
throughout  the  whole  series  from  the  very  oldest  beds  of  Llandeilo, 
to  the  Upper  Ludlow  rock. 

Of  the  two  species  of  Leptaena  which  are  prevalent  in  the  lower 
division,  the  most  frequent  is  L.  sericea,  pi.  6.  f.  13.,  and  Foss.  19. 
f.  6. ;  which,  occurring  in  swarms  among  the  slates  of  Snowdon,  is 
also  frequent  in  the  Caradoc  sandstone  of  Shropshire,  and  of  the 
Malvern  Hills ;  whilst  the  L.  transversalis,  pi.  20.  f.  17.,  published 
originally  as  a  fossil  of  the  Wenlock  shale,  is  now  found  in  the 
Llandeilo  formation  of  Wales  and  Westmoreland.  The  former  of 
the  two  last-mentioned  species  has  indeed  an  universal  range ;  being 
known  in  Russia,  Scandinavia,  Central  Germany,  the  British  Isles, 


Fossils,  20. 
Lower  Silurian  Brachiopods. 


1.  Orthis  biforata, 
Schloth.  (internal 
cast).  2.  Strophomena 
spiriferoides,  M'Coy. 
3.  Leptaena  quinque- 


costata,  M'Coy.  4 . 
Leptsena  tennicincta, 
M'Coy;  and  a  lateral 
view  of  the  same. 


and  America.  Leptaena  tenuicincta,  M'Coy,  Foss.  20.  f.  4.,  and 
L.  quinque-costata  of  the  same  author,  f.  3.,  are  not  unfrequent 
species  of  the  Llandeilo  flags,  both  in  England  and  Ireland. 


Chap.  VIII. J  LOWER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPODS.  187 

The  Orbiculoid  and  Cranioid  groups,  though  not  common  in  the 
lower  division,  yet  afford  some  characteristic  species.  The  remarkable 
Crania  (Pseudocrania)  divaricata  of  M'Coy,  Foss.  21.  f.  2.,  like  its  con- 
gener the  Crania  antiquissima  of  Russia,  is  a  Lower  Silurian  species. 
Orbicula  punctata  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone,  f.  1.,  can  with  difficulty 
be  distinguished  from  the  beautiful  O.  cancellata  of  the  Trenton  lime- 
stone, America;  and  Siphonotreta  micula,  M'Coy,  f.  3.,*  a  small 
species  of  a  genus  abundant  in  the  Lower  Silurian  beds  of  Russia,  is 
found  plentifully  in  the  trilobite  flags  of  Builth. 

Lingula,  on  the  other  hand,  offers  some  prevailing  forms.  Such  is 
L.  attenuata,  the  characteristic  Llandeilo  fossil  before  alluded  to, 
in  p.  183.  Its  associates  are  L.  granulata,  Phil. ;  L.  ovata,  and  L. 
tenuigranulata,  M'Coy,  as  here  figured.      Obolus,  a  genus  closely 


1.  Orbicula  punctata.  2. 
Crania  divaricata,  M'Coy.  3. 
Siphonotreta  micula,  M'Coy ; 
young  and  full  grown,  natu- 


FossiLS,  21. 
Lower  Silurian  Brachiopods. 


ral  size.  4.  Lingula  granu- 
lata, Phill.  5.  L.  tenuigra- 
nulata, M'Coy;  the  largest 
fossil  species  known  in  Britain. 


*  As  an  example  of  the  confusion  which  might  be  introduced  by  substituting 
the  word  Cambrian  for  Lower  Silurian  (see  page  175.),  it  may  be  mentioned, 
that  this  new  species  of  brachiopod,  though  alone  collected  in  the  old  and  well 
known  Lower  Silurian  locality  of  Llandeilo  flags  at  Builth,  has  been  just  published 
as  a  Cambrian  fossil  in  the  last  fasciculus  of  the  palaeozoic  fossils  of  the  Cambridge 
Museum.  The  reader  who  is  unacquainted  with  my  original  work,  must  therefore 
understand,  that  very  many  of  the  fossils  to  which  the  words  Bala  are  prefixed,  in 
the  work  descriptive  of  the  Cambridge  Museum,  published  only  last  year,  have 
been  alone  found  in  my  own  original  Lower  Silurian  localities,  described  by 
me  as  such  between  the  years  1833  and  1839.  Such  are  all  those  fossils  from  the 
Carmarthenshire  localities  of  Llandeilo,  Mandinam,  Goleugoed,  Llangadoc,  Noeth 
Griig,  &c. ;  all  the  Brecknock  and  Radnorshire  localities,  near  Builth  and  Llan- 
drindod;  the  Montgomeryshire  localities,  near  Welshpool  an4  Meifod,  such  as  Allt- 
yr- Anker,  &c. 


188  SILUPwIA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

allied  to  Lingula,  is  common  in  Russia;  and  though  not  found 
in  our  Lower,  is  now  known  to  be  present  in  our  Upper  Silurian. 

Of  the  genus  Atrypa,  which  is  still  retained  by  the  naturalists  of 
the  Government  Survey,  the  most  characteristic  Lower  Silurian  form 
is  perhaps  the  A.  hemisphaerica,  pi.  5.  f.  3.,  figured  in  the  Silurian 
System"  from  the  Caradoc  sandstone;  it  has  since  been  found  in 
the  Lower  Silurian  strata  of  Ireland,  and  of  Ayrshire  in  Scotland, 
and  even  in  Russia  and  North  America. 

Atrypa  marginalis  (Ter.  imbricata,  Sil.  Syst.),  which  was  described 
from  the  Wenlock  shale,  has  since  been  observed  abundantly  in  some 
of  my  old  localities  of  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Carmarthenshire  and 
Montgomeryshire,  and  is  also  very  plentiful  in  Ireland.  (See  pi.  22. 
f.  19.)  Another  and  the  most  typical  species  of  the  genus,  Atrypa 
reticularis  (Anomia  reticularis.  Linn.),  pi.  5.  f.  4,  5.,  and  Foss.  8.  f.  5., 
p.  88.,  which  is  one  of  the  most  abundant  of  the  Silurian  fossils,  is  un- 
fortunately of  little  value  in  fixing  the  precise  age  of  the  rock ;  for  it 
passes  not  only  through  the  whole  system,  but  also  into  the  next 
overlying,  the  Devonian,  provided  its  representative  in  the  later 
period  (which  is  usually  larger)  should  not  prove  to  be  a  separate 
species.  This  fossil  has,  indeed,  an  enormous  geographical  range, 
and  in  such  cases  observation  has  taught  us  that  the  animal  has 
always  had  a  very  prolonged  existence.* 

Spirifer  is  a  very  rare  Lower  Silurian  genus,  one  good  species  only, 
the  S.  radiatus,  Sil.  Syst.,  being  known  in  this  division  (see  pi.  5, 
f.  9.).  Atrypa  crassa  of  the  "  Silurian  System"  (see  pi.  9.  f.  6,  7,  8.), 
may,  however,  possibly  belong  to  this  genus.   It  is  not  very  common. 

The  genus  Terebratula,  properly  so  called,  and  as  represented  by 
the  animal  of  that  name  which  still  lives  in  the  seas  of  all  parts  of 
the  globe,  did  not  exist  in  the  Silurian  epoch.  The  primeval  forms 
allied  to  it  are  now,  as  before  stated  (p.  107.),  referred  to  the  genus 

*  See  D'Archiac  and  De  Verneuil,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  vi.  p.  335.,  and  Prof. 
Edward  Forbes,  Trans.  Brit.  Assoc.  Cork  Meeting,  1842. 


Chap.  VIII.]  LOWER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPODS.  189 

K-hynconella  of  Fischer.  This  genus  is  much  less  frequent  in  the 
lower  than  in  the  upper  division  of  the  system.  Some  rather 
doubtful  forms  were  described  in  the  "  Silurian  System,"  under  the 
names  Terebratula  neglecta,  T.  tripartita,  and  T.  pusilla,  which  may 
probably  belong  to  species  found  in  the  Upper  Silurian.  Several 
species,  however,  are  known  in  the  lower  division.  One,  a  smooth 
form,  the  R.  (Hemithyris*)  angustifrons,  is  plentiful  in  the  Lower 
Silurian  rocks  of  Ayrshire,  and  is  figured  in  the  following  wood- 
cut, f.  4.    R.  furcata,  pi.  5.  f.  12.  is  an  Upper  Caradoc  species. 


Fossils,  22. 
Lower  Silurian  Brachiopods. 


1.  Rhynconella  serrata, 
M'Coy.  2.  R.  nasuta,  ib. 
3.  R.  nucula.   4.  R.  an- 


Khynconella  nasuta,  Foss.  22.  f.  2.,  is  another  fine  Scottish  species, 
and  R.  serrata,  f.  1.  is  found  in  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  North  Wales. 
There  are  some  forms,  indeed,  of  this  genus,  which,  appearing  in 
the  Llandeilo  formation,  have  been  continued  for  a  great  length  of 
time.  Such,  for  example,  are  the  Rhynconella  (Terebratula)  borealis, 
pi.  22.  f.  4.,  and  R.  rotunda,  f.  18.,  originally  described  in  my  work 
from  the  Upper  Silurian  of  Wenlock  only.  R.  Lewisii,  Davidson, 
which  has  been  figured  in  chap.  9.,  Foss.  40.  f  .2.,  is  said  by  Professor 
M'Coy  to  be  found  in  the  lower  division,  as  also  is  R.  depressa, 
pi.  22.  f.  17.  R.  decemplicata,  pi.  5.  f.  15.,  and  R.  nucula,  pi.  22. 
f.  1,  2.,  occur  at  Bala,  but  are  much  more  common  in  the  Caradoc. 
The  latter,  indeed,  is  one  of  the  most  characteristic  and  abundant 

*  Most  of  the  brachiopods  here  termed  Rhynconella  in  compliance  with  the 
views  of  Davidson,  Morris,  and  other  palaeontologists,  are  classed  as  Hemithyris 
by  D'Orbigny  and  M'Coy.  (See  "  British  Lower  Palaeozoic  Fossils.") 


190  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIIL 

shells  of  the  Upper  Ludlow  rocks,  and  is  another  example  of  a  species 
formerly  known  to  me  only  in  the  Upper  Silurian,  which  is  now  found 
in  the  Llandeilo  and  Caradoc  deposits. 

A  common  and  most  characteristic  Silurian  form  of  the  Terebra- 
tuloid  group  is  the  Pentamerus,  Sow.,  some  species  of  which  are 
figured  on  the  woodcut,  Foss.  8. ;  and  of  these  the  species  which 
are  common  in  the  lowest  strata  are  Pent,  lens,  pi.  8.  f.  9,  10. ; 
P.  undatus,  pi.  8.  f.  5,  6.;  and  P.  oblongus,  f.  1—4.,  including 
P.  laevis,  formerly  considered  distinct.  When  the  "  Silurian  System" 
was  published,  the  Pentamerus  oblongus  was  cited  as  specially  cha- 
racteristic of  the  uppermost  member  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone  only, 
and  particularly  of  that  band,  here  and  there  a  limestone,  which  has 
already  been  alluded  to  as  intervening  between  it  and  the  Wenlock 
formation.  This  is  still  the  characteristic  position  of  the  species,  but 
now  the  same  shell  is  detected  not  unfrequently,  both  in  Wales 
and  Scotland,  in  beds  which  are  considered  part  of  the  Llandeilo 
formation.  It  is  thus  shown  to  be  common  to  all  the  Lower  Silurian 
group,  except  the  Lingula  flags.  There  is  a  rarer  species,  the  P. 
globosa  of  the  Llandeilo  flags,  pi.  8.  f.  8.  (Atrypa  globosa  "  Sil. 
Syst."),  to  be  added  to  the  list. 

Pentamerus  liratus,  also  (Atrypa  lirata,  Sil.  Syst.),  is  abundant 
in  the  Caradoc  sandstone  of  May  Hill,  and  this  species  is  also 
found  in  very  similar  strata  in  Pembrokeshire  (p.  67.).  It  must  be 
recollected  that  this  genus,  Pentamerus,  is  eminently  Silurian,  though 
not  exclusively  so ;  distinguishing  by  its  species  the  lower  from  the 
upper  division  perhaps  as  well  as  any  other  genus  of  brachiopods. 

Of  the  next  great  class,  the  Lamellibranchiata,  or  ordinary  bivalve 
shells,  but  few  had  been  discovered  in  the  lower  group  of  strata  when 
my  large  work  was  published.  Yet  they  are  now  ascertained  to 
be  far  from  rare  in  the  sandy  and  argillaceous  parts  of  the  Llandeilo 
flags  in  England ;  and  they  also  occur  in  rocks  of  the  same  age  in 
America.    The  genus  Pterinea  (Avicula,  Sil.  Syst.),  so  common,  as 


Chap.  VIII.]  LOWER  SILURIAN  LAMELLIBRANCHS.  191 

will  hereafter  appear,  in  the  upper  division,  has  some  representatives 
in  the  lower.  P.  Triton,  Foss.  23.  f.  8.,  for  example,  is  found  at 
Llandeilo,  and  the  common  P.  retroflexa  of  Hisinger,  pi.  23.  f.  16., 
ranges  from  the  Caradoc  sandstone  of  Malvern  to  the  tilestones  of 
the  Ludlow  rock.  P.  pleuroptera  Conrad,  and  P.  tenuistriata,  ch.  9., 
Foss.  42.,  are  two  other  species  of  this  formation,  quoted  by  M^Coy 
as  ranging  upwards  to  the  Ludlow  rock.  It  is  probable  that  some 
other  species  of  the  genus  have  an  equal  range. 

Fossils,  23. 
Lamellibranchiata. 


1.  Modiolopsis  postlineata, 
M'Coy.  2.  M.  expansa,  Port- 
lock.  3.  M.  modiolaris, 
Conrad.  4,  Nucula  varicosa, 
Salter.  5.  Lyrodesma  plana, 


Modiolopsis,  Hall,  is  a  still  more  common  genus  of  the  Lower 
Silurian.  M.  orbicularis,  pi.  9.  f.  1.,  one  of  the  few  species  published 
in  my  former  work,  is  at  present  known  only  in  the  Caradoc  sandstone 
of  Shropshire ;  it  was  formerly  described  as  an  Avicula.  M.  modio- 
laris, Foss.  23.  f.  3.,  and  M.  postlineata,  f.  1.,  are  frequent  in  the 
rocks  of  North  Wales.  M.  expansa,  f.  2.,  is  a  flattish  species  found 
in  strata  of  the  same  age  in  Ireland.  M.  inflata,  M*Coy,  and  some 
other  species,  are  also  occasionally  met  with  in  Wales;  and  other 
forms  of  the  genus  are  not  uncommon.  This  genus  is  closely  allied 
to  the  common  Mytilus  or  muscle  of  our  coasts. 

Nuculse  and  shells  of  similar  genera  with  toothed  hinges  are 
not  scarce,  but  few  of  them  have  been  yet  described.  It  is  well, 
however,  to  note  that  an  undescribed  species,  N.  varicosa.  Salt.  Mss. 
Foss.  23.  f.  4.,  and  N.  obliqua,  f.  6.,  are  frequent  in  the  lower 
division.    N.  deltoidea,  rhomboidea,  and  lingualis,  are  three  species 


192  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

described  by  Professor  Phillips  from  the  Caradoc  sandstone  of  Mal- 
vern. Lyrodesma  plana,  Foss.  19.  f.  5.,  is  nearly  allied  to  the  same 
group  of  shells :  it  is  found  in  the  limestone  at  Bala. 

The  Orthonota  (Cypricardia  of  the  Sil.  Syst.)  is  a  genus  more  fre- 
quently found  in  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  but  some  are  Lower  Silurian 
species.  0.  nasuta  occurs  in  the  Caradoc  of  Horderley,  and  is  repre- 
sented in  our  woodcut,  Foss.  12.  f.  7.  In  the  illustration  on  the 
preceding  page  are  figured  a  few  other  forms  of  Lamellibranchiata,  and 
particularly  the  curious  fossil,  Pleurorhynchus  dipterus,  f.  7.,  which, 
though  unknown  in  England  and  Wales,  has  been  found  by  Mr.  J. 
Carrick  Moore  in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  Ayrshire,  in  Scotland, 
and  by  the  government  geologists  at  the  Chair  of  Kildare  in  Ireland. 

The  Gasteropods,  or  univalves  of  the  most  ancient  natural  system 
of  life,  are  now  declared  by  naturalists  to  belong  mainly  to  genera 
which  are  extinct.  Such  are  Murchisonia  of  D'Archiac  and  De 
Verneuil,  formerly  included  in  the  genus  Pleurotomaria ;  Holopea 
and  Scalites  of  my  American  contemporary  Hall ;  Loxonema  of 
Phillips  ;  and  Euomphalus.  A  few  species  of  Turritella,  indeed,  are 
quoted  ;  but  these,  in  all  probability,  belong  to  quite  a  different  genus, 
which  has  been  named  Holopella  by  M-'Coy. 

It  is  important  to  remark,  that  shells  which  abound  in  the  younger 
secondary  and  tertiary  deposits,  and  at  the  present  day,  such  as  true 
species  of  Trochus,  Turbo,  Littorina,  and  Buccinum,  have  not  yet 
been  found  in  these  ancient  rocks.*  The  genus  Patella,  or  an  allied 
form,  however,  does  appear  to  occur  in  them,  and  an  Irish  species, 
the  P.  Saturni,  Goldfuss?  is  here  figured,  Foss.  24.  f.  9. 

*  The  reader  may  be  surprised  to  find  numerous  species  of  the  four  last-men- 
tioned genera  spoken  of  in  the  former  edition  of  the  "  Silurian  System ; "  but  it  is  only 
of  late  years  that  the  distinction  has  been  drawn,  by  which  such  genera  have  been 
excluded  from  the  Silurian  rocks,  and  the  accuracy  of  the  exclusion  is  yet  doubted 
by  some  good  naturalists,  so  much  have  these  shells  the  external  appearance  of  the 
above-mentioned  genei  a.    Euomphalus  is  probably  a  very  near  ally  of  the  modern 


Chap.  VIII.]        LOWER  SILURIAN  UNIVALVE  SHELLS.  193 

Among  these  old  genera,  the  genus  Euomphalus  is  of  very  early 
creation,  four  or  five  species  being  known  in  the  inferior  strata  (one  or 
two  are  given  in  pi.  6.).  Like  other  genera  we  find  that  Euomphalus 
pervades  the  whole  Silurian  system  ;  but  it  is  far  less  characteristic  of 
the  Lower  than  of  the  Upper  Silurian,  and  it  is  not  certain  that  any 
species  extends  upwards  from  the  Llandeilo  flags  into  Wenlock  strata. 


1.  Maclurea  Logani,  Salter  ? ; 
operculum  of  the  genus,  f.  la. 

2.  Scalites  —  sp.  undescribed. 

3.  Murchisonia  obscura,  Portl. 

4.  Turbo  rupestris,  Eichw.  5. 
Holopea  concinna,  M'Coy.  6. 
Murchisonia  gyrogonia,  M'Coy. 

7.  M.    semirotundata,  Portl. 

8.  Helminthochiton  Griffithii, 
Salter.  9.  Patella  Saturni, 
Goldfuss? 

One  of  the  most  emblematic  univalves  of  this  age  is  the  Mur- 
chisonia, more  complete  specimens  of  which  are  now  given,  in  the  an- 
nexed woodcut,  Foss.  24.  f.  6,  7.,  than  any  figured  in  my  former  work, 
where  they  were  called  Pleurotomariae.  In  Portlock's  report  several 
species  of  this  genus  are  described  from  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks 
of  Tyrone:  one  of  these,  M.  turrita,  is  very  elegantly  sculptured; 
another,  M.  semirotundata,  conspicuous  for  its  broad  rough  band,  is 
also  found  there,  and  is  here  given,  Foss.  24.  f.  7.  M.  gyrogonia, 
f.  6.,  and  M.  scalaris,  Salter,  are  common  in  Wales,  and  there 

genus  Delphinula.  These  changes  of  the  names  of  fossils  made  by  palaeontologists, 
although  troublesome,  may,  in  some  instances,  have  an  important  bearing  on  the 
philosophy  of  the  science,  in  enabling  us  to  understand  the  conditions  under  which 
certain  animals  lived  and  died;  whilst  the  field  geologist  has  to  note  carefully  the 
new  forms  discovered ;  his  chief  occupation  being  to  mark  the  extent  to  which 
the  old  and  characteristic  species  are  found  to  extend  their  vertical  range. 

O 


194  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

are  many  other  similar  species.  The  Turritella-like  shells  of 
the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  are  either  smooth  forms  of  the  genus  last 
mentioned,  in  which  case  Mr.  Salter  informs  me  that  they  show  the 
characteristic  band  (M.  obscura,  Foss.  24.  f.  3.),  or  belong  to  the 
newly  proposed  genus  Holopella,  in  which  the  strise  of  growth  run 
straight  across  the  whorls,  and  are  not  bent  into  a  notched  or 
angular  form.  H.  (Turritella)  cancellata  of  my  old  work,  Foss.  8.  f.  8., 
is  an  example  of  this  latter  genus  from  Caradoc  sandstone ;  and  the 
common  Upper  Ludlow  rock  species,  H.  obsoleta  and  H.  gregaria, 
are  both  found  in  the  upper  beds  of  the  same  stratum.  Others  have 
been  described  from  the  Llandeilo  flags,  but  all  are  of  the  same 
general  elongated  and  beaded  shape,  resembling  the  Murchisonia 
obscura,  above  quoted.  Trochus  lenticularis  of  the  "  Sil.  Syst.," 
see  pi.  10.  f.  2.,  and  several  similar  discoid  and  angular  uni- 
valves, are  now  referred  to  the  genus  Scalites,  Hall,  (or  its  section 
Raphistoma).  This  genus  is  exceedingly  common  in  the  Lower 
Silurian  rocks  of  America :  it  also  occurs  in  Scandinavia  and  Russia ; 
and  a  species  of  it  found  at  Llandeilo  is  here  given,  Foss.  24.  f.  2. 

Holopea,  of  Hall,  though  rather  an  obscure  genus  of  smooth, 
rounded  univalves,  must  now  include  many  Lower  Silurian  species. 
One  is  figured  in  pi.  10.  f.  1.  as  H.  striatella  (Littorina,  Sil. 
Syst.) ;  another,  H.  concinna,  is  represented  here,  Foss.  24.  f.  5. 

Other  shells,  still  provisionally  called  Turbo,  e,  g,  T.  rupestris, 
f.  4.,  and  T.  sulcifer,  Eichw.,  T.  crebristria,  M*Coy,  &c.,  may  probably 
be  ascertained  to  belong  to  extinct  genera  allied  to  Holopea.  Turbo 
rupestris  occurs  in  the  Lower  Silurian  limestones  of  Ireland,  and  often 
still  retains  the  coloured  bands  that  decorated  the  shell  when  alive. 

Though  not  yet  detected  in  England  or  Wales,  a  characteristic 
genus  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  North  America,  Maclurea, 
Hall,  has  been  found  in  strata  of  the  same  age  in  Scotland.  The 
shell  (Foss.  24.  f.  1.)  appears  to  be  sinistral  or  reversed,  the  top  flattisb, 
and  the  base  umbilicate.    In  all  probability,  however,  it  should  be 


Chap.  VIII.]       LOWER  SILURIAN  UNIVALVE  SHELLS.  195 

viewed  the  other  way  upwards,  and  so  appear  with  a  sunken  or 
concealed  spire.  Its  mouth  is  closed  by  a  remarkable  operculum, 
of  which  £.  la  shows  the  inner  side.  I  have  myself  collected  this 
genus  in  the  Lower  Silurian  strata  of  Ayrshire,  associated  with 
Orthidse,  trilobites  of  the  genus  Asaphus,  and  other  Lower  Silurian 
fossils.  A  Canadian  species,  approaching  to  M.  magna  of  the 
United  States  of  North  America,  and  named  by  Mr.  Salter,  Mac- 
lurea  Logani,  after  the  able  geologist  who  discovered  it  in  Canada, 
is  the  form  to  which  our  British  fossil  is  most  allied.  The  oper- 
culum is  figured  from  that  species. 

Bellerophon,  a  palaeozoic  form  of  the  moUusks  termed  by  some 
naturalists  Heteropoda,  is  one  of  those  genera  which  specially  link 
together  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  divisions  in  one  system  of  life. 
Thus,  Bell,  trilobatus,  Foss.  8.  f.  9.,  and  B.  dilatatus,  Foss.  25.  f.  8., 
are  common  to  both  divisions,  being  found  in  the  Lower  Silurian  of 
Ireland  and  Scotland,  and  ranging  from  the  Caradoc  sandstone  to 
the  Ludlow  rocks  in  England  and  Wales.  B.  carinatus,  Sil.  Syst., 
appears  also  to  occur  in  both  divisions,  if  f.  7,  which  represents  the 
Caradoc  form  (B.  acutus),  be  really  referable  to  the  same  species. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  several  which  as  yet  are  known  only 
in  the  lower  division,  and  are  very  characteristic  of  it.  B.  bilobatus, 
figured  in  chap.  IV.,  Foss.  7.  f.  10.,  andB.  ornatus,  f.  11.,  are  among 
the  common  fossils  of  the  Llandeilo  flags,  and  the  lower  part  of  the 
Caradoc  sandstone.  Both  these  species  are  equally  characteristic  of 
the  same  formations  in  North  America,  and  the  former  is  also  abun- 
dant in  Bohemia.  B.  perturbatus,  Foss.  25.  f.  6.  (Euomphalus,  Sil. 
Syst.),  is  one  of  the  common  fossils  of  the  black  slates  of  Wales. 
There  are  other  less  known  species,  and  some  are  yet  unpublished. 

Certain  naturalists  regard  the  genus  Bellerophon  as  the  shell  of  a 
cephalopodous  animal,  difiering  from  the  ordinary  forms  of  that  class 
by  the  want  of  septa  or  partitions  in  the  shell.  Although  there  is 
some  ground  for  the  supposition,  these  shells  are  usually  believed  to 

o  2 


196  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

be  Nucleobranchlata  (orHeteropoda),  allied  to  the  floating  Carinaria, 
or  glass  shell,  which  they  much  resemble  both  in  form  and  sculpture. 

Mr.  Salter  suggests  that  the  Irish  Lower  Silurian  fossil,  Eccu- 
liomphalus  Bucklandi,  Foss.  25.  f.  5.,  may  be  compared  with  the 
modern  genus  Atalanta  ;  if  its  thin  shell,  triangular  section,  and  finely 
triated  surface  do  not  betray  affinity  with  the  group  next  mentioned. 

Nor  must  a  notice  be  omitted  of  the  genera  now  clearly  ascertained 
to  be  forms  of  Pteropoda —  one  of  the  inferior  groups  of  moUusca. 
Conularia,  for  example,  a  most  beautifully  ornate  form,  has  two  or 
three  species  in  the  Lower  Silurian.  C.  elongata,  the  one  figured  in 
the  next  woodcut,  Foss.  25.  f.  3.,  is  frequent  in  Ireland ;  and  C. 
Sowerbii,  pi.  25.  f.  10.,  ranges  upwards  from  the  Llandeilo  flags  to  the 
Ludlow  rocks.  M.  Barrande  has  figured  many  curious  forms  of 
Conularia  from  the  Silurian  rocks  of  Bohemia,  one  of  which  is  spirally 
curved.  Then  again  Theca,  a  genus  exceedingly  like  the  modern 
Clio,  has  two  species  at  least  in  the  lower  division;  viz.,  T.  triangularis 
(Orthoceras  of  Portlock),  Foss.  25.  f.  2.,  and  T.  Forbesi,  f.  1.; 
the  latter  apparently  being  distributed  through  the  whole  Silurian 
system. 

Fossils,  25. 
Heteropod  and  Pteropod  Mollusca. 


1.  Theca  Forbesi, 
Sharpe.  2.  T.  trian- 
gularis, Portl.  3. 
Conularia  elongata, 
Portl.  4.  Pterotheca 
transversa,  Portl. 


S.Ecculiomphalus  Buck- 
landi,  Portl.  6.  Belle- 
rophon  perturbatus.  7* 
B.  acutus.  8.  B.  dila- 
tatus. 


Figs.  5.  and  8.  are  species  often  3  inches  wide  —  our  figures  are  much  reduced. 

Pterotheca  is  a  new  genus  proposed  by  Mr.  Salter  (Proc.  Brit. 
Assoc.,  1852)  for  a  wide  shell  like  Cleodora,  —  P.  transversa  is  here 
given,  f.  4, 


Chap.  VIII.] 


LOWER  SILURIAN  CEPHALOPODS. 


197 


It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  these  ancient  specimens  of  their  order 
were  gigantic  in  comparison  with  their  modern  representatives. 

Cephalopodous  or  chambered  shells  of  the  genera  Orthoceras, 
Cyrtoceras,  and  Lituites,  occur  in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks.  In  the 
original  Silurian  region  they  are,  indeed,  less  abundant  in  the  lower 
than  in  the  upper  divisions  of  the  system ;  but  on  the  Continent  of 
Europe,  particularly  in  Scandinavia,  where  they  occur  under  dif- 
ferent conditions,  in  beds  full  of  calcareous  matter,  they  are  more 
frequent  in  the  Lower  than  the  Upper  Silurian.  Among  the 
earlier  developed  British  species  are  to  be  noted  Orthoceras  politum, 
M'Coy,  a  large  smooth  shell  seen  by  myself  in  situ  in  Ayrshire, 
Scotland  (see  Quart.  Journal  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  vii.  pi.  10.) ;  O.  va- 
gans,  Foss.  26.  f.  1.;  O.  bilineatum,  f.  2.;  O.  tenuicinctum,  f.  3.: 


Fossils,  26. 
Cephalopoda. 


1.  Orthoceras  vagans, 
Salter.  2.  O.  bilineatum, 
Hall.  3.  0.  tenuicinctum, 
Portl,  4.  O.  Brongniarti, 
Portl. 


(Some  forms  of  Orthoceras 
most  common  in  the  Lower 
Silurian  rocks.) 


the  two  latter  are  Irish  fossils.  Another  species  characteristic 
of  the  Lower  Silurian  strata,  and  having  a  large  lateral  siphuncle,  is 
O.  Brongniarti  of  Portlock,  f.  4. ;  it  is  supposed  to  be  identical 
with  one  from  North  America,  where  similar  forms  are  common  in  the 
Lower  Silurian  rocks.  The  great  Orthoceratite  of  the  same  strata 
of  Scandinavia  and  Eussia,  O.  vaginatus,  Schlotheim,  is  occasionally 
three  feet  long ;  it  has  been  found  in  Scotland  (see  Quart.  Geol. 
Journ.,  as  above).  The  smooth  Orthoceratites,  on  the  contrary,  with 
slender  central  siphons,  are  not  confined  to  either  the  upper  or  lower 
division. 

o3 


1 98  SILURTA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

It  must  here  be  specially  noted,  that  in  the  progress  of  research 
no  less  than  nine  species  of  Orthoceratites  have  been  found  in  Eng- 
land, Wales,  and  Ireland  to  range  from  strata  of  the  age  of  the 
Llandeilo  flags  to  the  Upper  Silurian  * ;  several  of  them  even  into 
the  Upper  Ludlow  rock  :  e.g,  0.  angulatum,  Wahl.  (0.  virgatum,  Sil. 
Syst.);  O.  ibex,  Sil.  Syst.;  O.  subannulatum,  Munst. ;  O.  annulatum, 
Sil.  Syst.  (O.  undulatum  of  foreign  authors);  0.  filosum,  Sil. 
Syst. ;  O.  subundulatum,  Portl.  (Creseis  Sedgwickii,  Forbes) ;  O.  te- 
nuicinctum,  Portl.;  and  O.  primagvum  (Creseis  primaevus,  Forbes). 
There  are  probably  others  which  have  as  great  a  range  (see 
Plates  26  to  29,  and  Foss.  44.  in  Chap.  IX.). 

The  singular  O.  bisiphonatum  of  the  Sil.  Syst.,  only  found  in  one 
locality,  near  Llandovery  in  South  Wales  (pi.  11,  f.  5.),  appears  to  have 
two siphuncles.  But  this  is  only  in  appearance;  for  the  species  does 
not  really  belong  to  Orthoceras,  and  should  form,  in  the  opinion  of 
Mr.  Salter,  a  new  genus  in  some  respects  like  the  curious  Gonio- 
ceras  of  North  America,  which  occurs  in  rocks  of  the  same  age.  He 
proposes  for  this  fossil  the  name  of  Diploceras,  in  reference  to  its 
apparent  structure. 

In  Lituites  undosus,  pi.  11.  f.  3.,  we  have  another  example  of 
an  extinct  genus,  which  so  much  resembles  the  rare  Nautilus  of 
the  present  day,  that,  when  the  "  Silurian  System  "  was  written,  Mr. 
Sowerby  very  naturally  so  termed  it.  There  are  several  other  Lituites 
in  these  old  strata.  L.  cornu-arietis,  Foss.  27.  f.  2.,  and  L.  Hiber- 
nicus,  f.  3.,  are  good  examples  of  our  British  species.  The  former  is 
also  found  in  Scandinavia.  The  Cyrtoceras,  which  is  distinguished  by 
being  more  slightly  curved  than  Lituites,  includes  several  species  in 
Britain;  one,  C.  inaequiseptum,  from  Ireland,  is  here  represented, 
Foss.  27.  f.  1.;  another,  C.  approximatum,  is  figured  pi.  11.  f.  4. ;  and 

*  See  British  Lower  Palaeozoic  Fossils,  Sedgwick  and  M'Coy,  pp.  313,  &c.  The 
Museum  of  Practical  Geology  in  Jermyn  Street  exhibits  several  examples  of  these 
widely  spread  fossils. 


Chap.  VIII.J  LOWER  SILURIAN  ANNELIDS.  199 

one  of  the  Ayrshire  cephalopods  is  probably  the  Cyrtoceras  multi- 
cameratum.  Hall,  of  the  United  States. 


Fossils,  27. 
Cephalopods. 


1.  Cyrtoceras  inaequisep- 
tum,  Portl.  2.  Lituites  cornu- 
arietis.  3.  L.  (Trocholites) 
hibernicus,  Salter. 


Curved  forms  of  Cepha- 
lopoda, rare  in  British  Lower 
Silurian  strata. 


Annelids,  or  sea-worms,  prevailed  in  some  of  the  earlier  sediments 
in  which  traces  of  organic  remains  are  found.  Specimens  of  these 
were  figured,  as  previously  stated,  from  Llampeter,  in  South  Wales 
where  they  occur  in  strata  which  the  government  surveyors  have 
shown  to  be  equivalents  of  the  Llandeilo  rocks;  e,  g.  Nereites 
Cambrensis,  Foss.  28.  f.  3. ;  N.  Sedgwicki,  f.  2. ;  and  Myrianites 
M^Leayi,  f.  1. 


Fossils,  28. 
Annelids  :  or  iviarine  worm-tracks. 


1.  Myrianites  M'Leayi, 
Sil.  Syst.  2.  Nereites  Sedg- 
wicki, ib.  3.  N.  Cambrensis, 
lb.  4.  Crossopodia  scotica, 
M'Coy. 

Tracks  of  sea-worms  in 
fine  muddy  sediments,  now 
altered  into  slates.  S.  Scot- 
land and  Wales.  (The  spe- 
cies figured  in  the  "  Silurian 
System"  were  drawn  on 
stone,  and  these  figures 
could  not  therefore  be  re- 
peated in  the  plates  at  the 
end  of  the  volume.) 


See  Sil.  Syst.  pp.  363.  699,  &c. 
o  \ 


200  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

Another  form  of  these  creatures,  Crossopodia  Scotica,  f.  4.,  is  given 
from  specimens  collected  by  Professor  Sedgwick,  in  the  Lower 
Silurian  and  Graptolite  schists  near  Moffat,  in  Dumfriesshire,  a  locality 
which  I  have  also  examined,  and  where  I  found  other  species  of  these 
long  sea-worms.  The  length  of  some  of  these  creatures  must  have 
been  prodigious,  probably  many  yards,  judging  from  the  frequent 
parallel  coils  which  are  exhibited  on  the  surface  of  the  schists.  (The 
above  figures  are  very  much  reduced).  It  should,  however,  be  borne 
in  mind,  that  in  many  cases  we  see  only  the  track  of  the  worm  and  not 
the  impression  of  its  soft  body,  which  could  rarely  be  preserved. 

The  Tentaculites  and  Cornulites  of  the  earlier  primeval  strata  must 
also  be  mentioned  as  remains  of  animals  of  this  order.  They  were 
worms  with  shelly  tubes  like  those  of  Serpula,  but  distinguished 
easily  by  their  annulated  form  and  cellular  structure*  (see  pi.  16.  f.  7,  8. 
for  the  form  and  magnified  sections).  Tentaculites  annulatus,  pi.  1. 
f.  1.,  even  when  found  alone,  is  an  excellent  index  of  the  relative 
age  of  the  rock  in  which  it  occurs ;  for  in  Britain  it  is  a  character- 
istic Lower  Silurian  fossil;  (T.  scalaris  of  old  authors,  pi.  1.  f.  2,  is  the 
interior  cast  of  it).  Cornulites  serpularius,  pi.  16.,  is  also  a  cosmopolite 
Silurian  fossil,  ranging  from  Sweden  to  North  America;  but,  unlike 
the  Tentaculite  just  mentioned,  it  ascends  from  a  low  position  in  the 
Llandeilo  formation  to  the  very  summit  of  the  Ludlow  rocks.  It 
is  therefore,  like  the  Graptolite,  a  clear  manifestation  that  the  rock 
in  which  it  occurs  is  Silurian,  and  is  also  an  example  of  how  a  hardy 
species  may  endure  through  variations  of  condition,  and  changes  of 
the  surface,  during  which  more  delicate  organisms  passed  away. 

Crustaceans, — The  most  highly  developed  articulata  which  have 
yet  been  detected  in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  are  those  of  the 

*  These  fossils,  Tentaculites  and  Cornulites,  have  been  assigned  to  various 
groups  of  animals,  the  notion  that  they  were  parts  of  crinoidal  creatures  being  the 
most  generally  accepted.  They  were,  however,  shelly  tubes,  not  jointed  tentacles 
or  stems,  and  could,  by  no  means,  be  parts  of  such  animals.  —  I.  W.  S. 


Chap.  VIII.]  LOWER  SILURIAN  TRILOBITES.  201 

extinct  family  of  entomostracous  crustaceans  called  Trilobites.  The 
Silurian  era  was  evidently  one  in  which  these  animals  flourished  most; 
for  they  became  infinitely  less  abundant  in  the  Devonian,  and  ex- 
pired before  the  close  of  the  carboniferous  era,  during  which,  as  will 
hereafter  be  seen,  very  few  genera  prevailed.  As  already  indicated, 
we  find  some  forms  of  the  Trilobite  in  the  very  earliest  accu- 
mulations in  which  any  animal  remains  occur ;  and  it  is  now  to  be 
remarked,  that  whilst,  on  the  whole,  certain  genera  and  species  of 
these  creatures  are  more  exact  indicators  of  the  successive  strata 
than  the  other  classes  of  animals,  and  that  several  genera  are  ab- 
solutely peculiar  to  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  there  are  some  spe- 
cies that  are  widely  diffused  in  strata  of  this  era  over  the  world, 
which  are  common  to  both  divisions.  Mr.  Salter  reminds  me,  indeed, 
that  there  is  not  one  genus  of  the  upper  division  which  has  not  pre- 
viously existed  in  the  earlier  period. 

Fossils,  29. 

Trilobites  typical  of  the  Lower  Silurian  Rocks. 


5.  Lichas  laxatus. 
M'Coy.  6.  Agnostus 
trinodus,  Salter.  7. 
Beyrichia  complicata, 
Salter;  (the  last  is  not 
a  trilobite,  but  a  bi- 
valved  crustacean). 


The  genera  peculiar  to  the  Lower  Silurian,  not  only  in  this 
country,  but  on  the  Continent  and  in  America,  are :  —  Olenus, 


202  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

Agnostus,  Paradoxldes,  Cybele,  Trinucleus,  Ogygia,  Asaphus,  Kemo- 
pleurides,  and  lUaenus.  On  the  other  hand,  the  genera  Ampyx,  Calymene, 
Lichas,  Proetus,  Homalonotus,  Cheirurus,  Encrinurus,  Bronteus,  and 
that  division  of  lUaenus  which  I  still  believe  to  be  a  true  genus* 
(Bumastus,  Murch.),  are  found  both  in  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian. 

Of  these  there  is  perhaps  no  one  species  which  has  a  greater 
vertical  range,  or  is  more  widely  diffused  in  geographical  space,  than 
the  long-known  Dudley  fossil,  Calymene  Blumenbachii,  Brongn. 
When  this  trilobite  was  described  in  the  "  Silurian  System,"  it  was 
considered  to  be  typical  of  the  upper  rocks  only,  whether  of  Wenlock 
or  of  Ludlow  age ;  but  the  geologists  of  the  Government  Survey  have 
since  found  it  in  abundance  in  the  lower  strata  of  the  Llandeilo 
formation,  even  near  Snowdon ;  and  I  have  myself  procured  it  (at 
least  a  common  variety  of  it)  from  beds  of  Caradoc  sandstone  in 
Shropshire,  Again,  I  have  seen  the  true  species  in  the  Lower 
Silurian  rocks  of  Ayrshire  in  Scotland ;  and  thus,  like  many  examples 
of  the  other  classes  of  marine  animals  which  lived  in  primeval  days,  this 
crustacean  links  together  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  in  one  system 
of  life.  (See  pi.  18.  f.  10.  The  head  is  represented,  Foss.  7.  f  1.) 
It  has  also  been  found  in  Sweden,  Bohemia,  North  America,  and 
Eastern  Australia,  and  always  in  company  with  its  usual  associates. 

Again,  Encrinurus  punctatus,  Foss.  8.  f.  10.,  and  chap.  9.,  Foss. 
46.  f.  5.,  is  another  species  which  has  lived  throughout  the  older 
and  younger  periods;  and  Phacops  (Asaphus,  Sil.  Syst.)  caudatus, 
pi.  18.  f  l.jhas  an  equal  range.  There  are  also  several  others,  such 
as  Acidaspis  Brightii,  pi.  18.  f.  7.;  Phacops  Stokesii,  f.  6.;  Chei- 
rurus bimucronatus,  pi.  19.  f.  11.,  which  occur  in  both  divisions. 
The  Lower  Silurian  trilobite,  pi.  2.  f.  3,  4.,  called  Asaphus  Vulcani 
in  the  "  Silurian  System,"  is  probably  a  species  of  Homalonotus, 
a  genus  formerly  thought  to  be  peculiar  to  the  Upper  Silurian,  but 
of  which  several  examples  are  now  known  in  the  lower  division. 

*  The  pygidium  is  simple,  not  tri-lohed  as  in  most  species  of  Illaenus. 


Chap.  VIIL]  LOWER  SILURIAN  TRILOBITES.  203 

The  principal  forms,  however,  which  have  proved  unerring  indices 
of  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Britain  are  Olenus,  Agnostus,  and  the  true 
species  of  Asaphus,  such  as  A.  Powisii,  Foss.  29.  f.  1. ;  A.  tyrannus, 
pi.  1.  f.  3,  4.,  and  pi.  2,  f.  1.,  with  five  species  of  Trinucleus,  pi.  4., 
all  of  which  were  formerly  published  as  true  Lower  Silurian  types. 

Since  the  period  of  the  original  publication,  various  species  of 
trilobites,  which  were  then  supposed  to  be  peculiar  to  the  Caradoc 
sandstone  or  upper  portion  of  the  lower  division,  have  been  found 
to  range  downwards  all  through  the  lower  division,  excepting  only  the 
'Lingula  slates,'  where  Olenus,  and  perhaps  Paradoxides,  are  the 
only  trilobites  yet  known  in  Britain. 

Thus,  for  example,  Asaphus  Powisii,  pL  2.  f.  2.,  which  was  first 
collected  by  the  Kev.  T.  T.  Lewis  from  the  upper  beds  of  the 
Caradoc  formation,  has  also  been  found  very  low  down  in  the  slate 
rocks  of  Snowdon  and  in  many  other  parts  of  N.  Wales,  and  is, 
indeed,  one  of  the  most  characteristic  trilobites  of  that  slaty  region. 
Again,  Trinucleus  concentricus  (Caractaci,  Sil.  Syst.),  pi.  4.  f.  2 — 5., 
and  Foss.  29.  f.  3.,  has  exactly  as  extensive  a  Lower  Silurian 
range,  both  in  Europe  and  America.    This  species  varies  greatly  in 

Fossils,  30. 

Trinucleus  concentricus,  three  Specimens,  distorted  by  Slaty  Cleavage. 


In  illustration  of  the  various  forms  which  a  single  species  may  assume  under  the  influence  of 
that  crystalline  change  operated  in  the  strata  which  is  called  slaty  cleavage,  (see  p.  35.).  The 
woodcut  represents  a  group  of  forms,  apparently  verj-  dissimilar,  but  all  of  the  same  species, 
here  given  in  their  natural  position  on  a  fragment  of  slate.  (Phillips,  Proc.  Brit.  Assoc.  v. 
xii.  pp.  60,  61.) 

form  and  markings,  and,  being  a  very  common  species,  it  is  met  with 
in  every  variety  of  distortion  and  compression,  so  that  it  might  often 
be  mistaken  for  a  different  species.     T.  fimbriatus,  pi.  4.  f.  7, ; 


204 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  VIII. 


T.  Lloydii,  f.  6. ;  and  T.  seticornis,  Hisinger,  a  species  also  found  in 
Sweden,  are  good  indications  of  the  Llandeiio  flags,  and  occur  in 
them  only. 

Better  specimens  of  some  species  of  trilobites  having  been  found 
than  those  which  were  collected  at  the  time  of  the  publication  of  the 

Silurian  System,"  figures  of  them  are  given  in  the  following  wood- 
cut, Foss.  31.,  viz.  Phacops  conophthalmus,  f.  3. ;  and  Ampyx  (formerly 
Trinucleus)  nudus,  f.  7.  Several  species,  not  there  described,  are 
abided,  viz.  Cybele  verrucosa,  f.  2.  ;  Harpes  Flanagani,  f.  4. 
Eemopleurides  dorsospinifer,  f.  5.;  Acidaspis  bispinosus,  f.  6.;  Cy- 
phoniscus  socialis,  f.  8. ;  Cheirurus  clavifrons,  f.  1.  And  in  the 
former  woodcut  (Foss.  29.)  Lichas  laxatus,  f.  5. ;  Illaenus  Davisii, 
f.  2. ;  Agnostus  trinodus,  f.  6. ;  and  a  minute  bivalved  crustacean  of 
the  phyllopod  tribe,  Beyrichia  complicata,  f.  7.  Of  this  last  genus 
several  other  forms  are  known. 

Fossils,  31. 
Other  Lower  Silurian  Trilobites. 


1.  Cheirurus  clavi- 
frons, Dalm.  2.  Cy- 
bele verrucosa,  Dalm. 
3.  Phacops  conophthal- 
mus, Bceck.  4.  Harpes 
Flanagani,  Portl.  5.  Re- 


mopleurides  dorso-spi- 
nifer,  Portl.  6.  Acidas- 
pis bispinosus,  M'Coy. 
7.  Ampyx  nudus.  8. 
Cyphoniscus  socialis, 
Salter. 


The  comparatively  large  animal  of  the  phyllopod  tribe,  Hymenocaris 
vermicauda,  mentioned  in  chap.  2,  as  occurring  in  the  very  lowest 
fossiliferous  beds,  must  not  be  forgotten  (see  Foss.  3.  p.  42.).  "No 
other  tribes  of  crustaceans  than  the  Trilobites,  and  the  single  phyl- 
lopod just  mentioned,  have  been  found  in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of 
Britain.  In  the  sequel  it  will  be  seen,  that  an  order  of  crustaceans, 
apparently  of  higher  organization,  is  found  in  the  highest  band  of  the 
Upper  Silurian  strata  of  England. 


Chap.  VIII.]  LOWER  SILURIAN  FAUNA.  205 

In  grouping  the  various  habitats  of  the  British  Silurian  trilobites,  I 
would  direct  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  description  of  the 
lower  palaeozoic  fossils  in  the  Cambridge  Woodwardian  Museum,  by- 
Professor  M*Coy,  in  order  that  he  may  see  how  many  species,  even  in 
that  one  rich  collection,  are  common  to  what  have  been  so  long  and 
so  generally  called  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  rocks. 

Again,  he  will  see  that  out  of  fifty-one  species  of  trilobites  there 
enumerated,  although  double  the  list  given  in  the  "  Silurian  System 
when  first  published,  nearly  all  the  new  forms  (at  least  twenty-eight) 
have  been  found,  many  of  them  exclusively,  in  localities  of  Montgomery, 
Radnor,  Brecon,  Caermarthen,  and  Pembroke,  which  were  laid  down 
by  me  as  Lower  Silurian  on  the  map ;  a  pretty  strong  indication  that 
the  original  Silurian  region  still  affords  the  best  fossiliferous  types. 

In  concluding  this  chapter  it  is  important  to  remark,  that  the  im- 
pressions of  footmarks,  in  the  Potsdam  sandstone  or  lowest  Silurian 
rock  of  North  America,  which  had  been  supposed  to  have  been  made  by 
tortoises,  have,  in  consequence  of  the  discovery  of  better  specimens, 
been  referred  by  Professor  Owen  himself  to  crustaceans.*  Hence 
this  last  class  of  animals  may  still  be  considered  the  highest  type  of 
life  of  the  earliest  primeval  division.  It  is,  indeed,  a  remarkable  fact, 
that  the  most  sedulous  research  in  many  parts  of  the  world  has  failed 
to  discover  the  trace  of  any  vertebrated  animal  in  the  lower  division 
of  the  Silurian  system.  All  the  marine  animals,  from  zoophytes  to 
crustaceans,  and  which  probably  amount  to  more  than  1000  species 
already  known,  belong  to  the  invertebrated  classes,  and  no  true 
fish  has  yet  been  observed.    In  the  sequel  it  will  be  seen  that  this 

*  The  zeal  of  that  acute  and  laborious  geologist,  M.  Logan,  in  procuring 
casts  of  a  very  great  number  of  these  large  and  curious  impressions,  cannot  be  too 
much  commended.  In  default  of  these  labours,  very  erroneous  ideas  might  have 
been  propagated  respecting  the  fauna  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks.  (See  Journ. 
Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  Vol.  VIIL  p.  199.) 


206  SILURIA.  [Chap.  VIII. 

observation  applies  also  to  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  their  highest  stratum,  as  formerly  expressed  in  the 
"  Silurian  System." 

Having  thus  referred  to  the  figures  first  published  in  my  original 
work  (and  now  reproduced  at  the  end  of  this  volume  in  plates 
1  to  11),  as  well  as  to  other  types  of  Lower  Silurian  age  which 
have  been  subsequently  discovered,  let  us  now  pass  on  to  consider 
the  nature  of  the  Upper  Silurian  fossils. 


207 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

FOSSILS  OF  THE  UPPER  SILURIAN  ROCKS. 

The  reader  who  has  perused  the  preceding  chapters,  will  have  per- 
ceived that  many  species  of  fossils,  which  were  once  supposed  to  be 
peculiar  to  the  Lower  or  to  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks  respectively, 
are  now  ascertained  to  be  common  to  both. 

This  fact  is  the  result  of  the  researches  of  many  geologists  and 
palaeontologists,  both  in  the  region  which  I  first  explored,  and  in 
tracts  of  far  greater  extent  which  have  been  since  paralleled  with  it. 
Similar  results  have,  in  truth,  invariably  accompanied  the  full  and 
broad  development  of  all  the  natural  geological  groups  of  the  secondary 
and  tertiary  strata,  which  were  described  and  classified  before  the 
older  rocks,  of  which  we  now  treat,  had  been  brought  into  order, 
or  even  into  notice.  Thus,  for  example,  when  the  different  members 
of  the  lias,  or  of  the  superjacent  oolitic  formation,  were  studied 
in  one  tract  only,  as  on  the  eastern  coast  of  Yorkshire,  they  were 
seen  to  be  there  composed  of  a  series  of  zones,  each  of  which  is 
for  the  most  part  sharply  separated  from  contiguous  deposits  by 
fossils  peculiar  to  it ;  but,  in  following  the  same  strata  to  remote  dis- 
tances, the  remains,  which  were  so  typical  of  one  member  only,  are 
seen  to  become  common  to  several  formations,  and  thus  to  combine 
the  whole  in  one  natural  system  —  the  oolitic  or  Jurassic. 

This  is  just  what  has  happened  in  my  own  case,  now  that  the  original 
Siluria,  its  inferior  and  superior  masses,  and  its  chief  formations  and 
their  subdivisions,  have  been  ascertained  to  occupy  nearly  all  North 
and  South  Wales,  large  tracts  of  Cumberland,  Westmoreland,  and 
Lancashire,  a  great  region  in  the  south  of  Scotland,  and  very  exten- 
sive tracts  in  Ireland,  France  and  many  distant  regions.    It  has 


208  SILURIA.  [Chap.  TX. 

therefore  followed,  that  the  two  chief  members,  which  from  a  general 
similarity  of  characters  were  grouped  into  one  system,  are  now 
infinitely  more  knit  together  or  united  than  when  the  original  classi- 
fication was  proposed.  For,  although  at  that  time  I  recognized  a 
general  resemblance  throughout  the  system,  I  was  acquainted  with 
but  few  species  of  fossils  which  were  common  to  its  lower  and  upper 
divisions;  whilst  it  is  now  ascertained  that  not  less  than  a  hundred 
forms  of  creatures^  which  have  lived  on  from  the  earlier  to  the  later 
days  of  the  Silurian  era,  have  been  already  collected  in  the  British 
Isles. 

To  some  of  the  most  striking  of  these  remains  which  pervade  the 
whole  system,  allusion  has  already  been  made  (Chap.  VIII.),  and 
notice  will  now  be  taken  of  some  other  forms,  of  like  duration  in 
time,  which  are  more  abundant  in  the  upper  division.  The  atten- 
tion,  however,  of  the  reader  will  chiefly  be  directed  to  the  types  which 
are  peculiarly  and  exclusively  Upper  Silurian.  (See  Plates  12.  to  35.) 

The  Graptolites,  which,  as  before  stated,  are  so  very  abundant  in 
the  shaly  and  schistose  portions  of  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Wales  and 
Scotland,  become  infinitely  more  scarce  as  to  species  in  the  Upper 
Silurian;  and  though  there  are  many  tracts  where  the  Wenlock 
shale  and  Lower  Ludlow  rocks  are  perfectly  crowded  with  them,  it 
is  only  with  one*  species,  and  that  the  wide-spread  Graptolites 
priodon  (Ludensis),  that  we  are  acquainted  in  these  upper  divisions 
of  the  system.  When  muddy  sediments  abound  in  these  rocks,  the 
Graptolite  is  rarely  absent ;  but  with  the  cessation  of  such  peculiar 
conditions,  this  zoophyte,  which  grew  on  the  fine  mud  at  the  bottom  of 
the  sea,  disappeared,  and  it  is  but  rarely  to  be  detected  in  the  upper 
or  more  sandy  division  of  the  Ludlow  rocks.   Thence  upwards  in  the 

*  One  other  species  has  lately  been  detected  (but  only  in  one  locality,  where  it 
is  plentiful),  in  strata  believed  to  be  of  Wenlock  age.  It  is  Grapt.  Flemingii, 
Salter,  found  in  Kirkcudbright  Bay,  where  it  was  first  collected  by  the  Earl 
of  Selkirk. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  ZOOPHYTES.  209 

whole  series  of  paiasozoic  strata,  no  true  Graptolite,  as  before  ob- 
served, has  ever  been  found ;  and  hence,  I  repeat,  it  is  a  marked 
Silurian  type. 

It  should  be  specially  observed,  that  in  Britain  neither  the  double 
or  foliaceous  Graptolites  (Diplograpsus),  nor  the  twin  Graptolites 
(Didymograpsus)  are  ever  met  with  above  the  horizon  of  the  Caradoc 
sandstone  ;  and  they  are  most  excellent  indices  of  the  lower  division. 
But  in  Bohemia,  the  foliaceous  types  are  mixed  together  with  the 
single-sided  forms  (Graptolites)  in  the  lower  part  of  the  upper  division. 

The  true  corals  (Zoantharia  of  naturalists)  are  far  more  character- 
istic of  the  upper  deposits  than  of  the  lower  members  of  the  Silurian 
rocks,  and  they  are  more  abundant  there,  both  as  to  species  and 
individuals ;  the  nodular  limestone  bands  of  the  Wenlock  and 
Aymestry  rocks  being  frequently  little  else  than  corals,  or  con- 
cretions having  coralline  bodies  as  their  nucleus  or  on  their  surfaces ; 
the  shells  and  encrinites  and  trilobites  play  but  a  subordinate  part 
in  the  formation.  When  Mr.  Lonsdale  undertook  for  me  his  ad- 
mirable description  of  the  corals  of  the  Silurian  region,  and  carefully 
superintended  the  drawing  of  their  forms  as  lithographs,  sixty-two 
species  only,  including  Bryozoa  (not  now  usually  regarded  as  true 
corals),  were  recognizable  in  our  collections.  But  the  number  has 
been  greatly  increased  of  late  years,  chiefly,  as  regards  Britain,  by 
the  researches  of  Professor  Milne  Edwards  and  of  Professor  M^Coy. 
Several  new  genera  have  been  formed  of  those  already  known,  which 
as  they  are  founded  on  peculiarities  of  structure,  growth,  and  re- 
production, are  likely  to  prove  of  permanent  value,  both  in  a  zoo- 
logical and  geological  point  of  view. 

One  of  the  most  important  of  these  discoveries,  resulting  from  the 
labours  of  Professor  Milne  Edwards,  and  his  coadjutor  M.  Jules 
Haime  *,  appears  to  be,  that  the  bulk,  if  not  all  the  corals  of  the 
Silurian  era,  and  probably  of  the  whole  palaeozoic  series,  belong  to 
*  Archives  du  Mus.  d'Hist.  Nat.  vol.  v. 


210  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

great  divisions  of  the  coral  tribe  unknown  in  modern  seas,  which, 
with  rare  exceptions,  became  extinct  at  the  close  of  the  palaeozoic 
epoch.  If  this  be  established,  and  the  large  cup  and  star  corals 
(Zoanth.  rugosa),  and  the  massive  millepores  (Z.  tabulata),  be  quite 
distinct  in  structure  from  the  star  corals  and  madrepores  of  our  own 
coral  reefs,  we  gain  a  new  fact  in  the  history  of  animal  life  upon  the 
globe,  which  is  in  harmony  with  results  obtained  by  the  study  of  the 
Crustacea,  mollusca,  and  fish  of  the  older  epochs. 

We  have  already  enumerated,  chap.  5.,  a  number  of  corals  which 
pass  upwards  from  the  Lower  to  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  and  as 
these  are  generally  the  most  abundant  species  in  the  upper  division, 
we  may  here  give  a  brief  list  of  them. 

Stromatopora  striatella  (concentrica,  Sil.  Syst.),  Foss.  32. ;  Halysites  catenu- 
latus,  Foss.  12.  f.  6. ;  Favosites  gothlandicus,  Foss.  10.  f.  2,  3. ;  Favosites  alveolaris, 
Foss.  10.  f.  4.;  Stenopora  (Favosites)  fibrosa,  f.  7.  8.;  Heliolites  interstinctus 
(Porites  pyriformis,  Sil.  Syst.),  Foss.  11.  f.  4,  5.;  Heliolites  tubulatus,  f.  1.  ; 
Heliolites  megastoma,  f.  3. ;  Heliolites  petalliformis,  f.  2. 


Fossils  32. 


A  section  of  Stromato- 
pora striatella,  D'Orb. 


A  very  common  Wenlock 
limestone  coral. 


In  addition  to  those  just  quoted,  we  have  enumerated  in  Chap.  6., 
p.  119 — 121.,  several  of  the  conspicuous  corals  of  the  Upper  Silurian 
strata."  Of  all  these,  it  may  be  truly  said,  that  they  swarm  in  every 
quarry  of  Wenlock  limestone,  and  may  be  found,  in  diminished  num- 
bers, in  the  Aymestry  rock.  But  they  are  not  so  plentiful  in  the 
less  calcareous  and  muddy  sediments  of  the  Lower  Ludlow  rocks  and 
Wenlock  shale. 

Of  all  the  conspicuous  species,  perhaps  Favosites  alveolaris  and  F. 
Gothlandicus  are  the  most  general,  occurring  in  masses  varying  from 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  CORALS,  211 

the  size  of  a  hazel  nut  to  two  and  three  feet  diameter.  The  former  is 
easily  distinguished  (p.  119.,  Foss.  10.  f.  4.)  on  breaking  the  mass,  by 
the  edges  of  the  tubes  being  toothed,  while  those  of  the  other  (f.  2,  3.) 
are  smooth  regular  prisms,  on  which  the  double  row  of  pores  is  very 
conspicuous.  F.  cristata,  f.  1.,  (polymorpha  of  the  Sil.  Syst.)  appears 
to  range  up  to  the  Devonian  period,  and  these  three  species  are  widely 
distributed  over  the  Northern  hemisphere.  The  various  forms  of 
the  Stenopora  (Favosites)  fibrosa  are  not  less  common ;  but  this  latter 
fossil  does  not  appear  to  be  so  abundant  in  the  Upper  as  the 
Lower  Silurian,  nor  to  assume  so  many  variations  in  form.  It  is 
globular,  lobed  or  branched ;  and  on  the  slabs  of  limestone  at  Dudley 
there  very  commonly  occurs  a  narrow  branched  variety,  with  numer- 
ous small  pores  intermixed  with  larger  ones.  This  form  is  very 
curious,  and  is  figured  in  my  larger  work  (pi.  15.  f.  9.)*  as  a 
variety  of  Favosites  spongites,  Goldf  Professor  Milne  Edwards 
believes  it  to  be  a  different  species,  and  has  proposed  for  it,  in  his 
large  work,  the  name  Chsetetes  Fletcheri,  in  honour  of  a  gentleman  who 
has  long  been  a  judicious  collector  of  the  beautiful  fossils  of  Dudley. 

The  species  we  have  called  Favosites  oculata,  Foss.  10.  f.  6.,  is  very 
abundant  in  the  Wenlock  limestone.  But  it  is  doubtful  if  it  belongs 
to  the  genus,  and  is  named  Alveolites  repens  in  the  work  of  Milne 
Edwards  above  alluded  to. 

Next  in  importance  to  the  large  species  of  Favosites  are  those  of 
the  genus  Heliolites.  Of  these  H.  interstinctus  is  the  most  common, 
occurring  in  globular  and  pear-shaped  masses,  of  a  flat  or  discoid  form, 
or  thin  and  crusting  over  shells  and  other  corals. 

Coenites  juniperinus,Foss.  12.  f.  3.,  may  be  easily  recognized  by  the 
curious  linear  mouths  of  the  cells :  this  species  abounds  in  the  Wool- 

*  For  a  further  acquaintance  with  the  corals  of  the  Wenlock  and  Ludlow 
rocks,  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  the  "  Silurian  System."  The  plates  of  corals  in 
that  work,  being  lithographs,  could  not  be  reproduced  here,  as  the  shells  and 
trilobites,  &c.  have  been.  But  the  woodcuts  above  referred  to  will,  it  is  hoped, 
supply  the  deficiency,  in  reference  to  the  more  characteristic  corals. 


212  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

hope  limestone  of  Presteign,  and  with  C.  intertextus  (Limaria  fruti- 
cosa,  Sil.  Syst.),  and  occasionally  a  fine  large  species,  C.  labrosus, 
Milne  Edwards,  occurs  commonly  at  Dudley. 

There  are  several  kinds  of  tube-corals,  such  as  the  Halysites  or 
chain-coral,  and  certain  species  of  Syringopora,  which  are  abun- 
dant. The  latter  genus  is  no  less  curious  in  its  growth  than  in  its 
structure.  When  quite  young,  says  Mr.  Salter,  its  divaricating, 
trumpet-shaped  tubes,  creep  over  the  surface  of  the  large  corals  and 
shells ;  and  a  form  of  that  age  was  figured  in  my  former  work  as 
Aulopora  serpens  (see  Foss.  12.  f.  2.).  It  next  begins  to  grow  up- 
wards, and  each  open  mouth  of  the  tubes  lengthens  and  becomes  a 
flexuous  stem,  occasionally  throwing  out  a  lateral  buttress  in  concert 
with  its  neighbour.  These  buttresses  or  buds  are  hollow,  and  where 
they  touch  each  other  coalesce,  and  form  a  connecting  tube  ;  and  the 
mass  thus  increases  in  size  upwards,  the  tubes  often  branching,  and 
connecting  with  those  nearest  them,  till  the  coral  attains  its  full 
size  and  becomes  a  Syringopora.  S.  bifurcata,  of  which  Foss.  12.  f.  4. 
is  the  lower  branched  portion,  S.  ramulosa,  f.  5.,  and  S.  fasciculata 


Fossils  33. 
Corals  of  the  Upper  Silurian  Rocks. 


Fig.  1.  Thecia  Swindernana,  Goldf.  (Pontes  expatiata,  Sil.  Syst.)      2.  A  section  magnified. 

3.  Palaeocyclus  porpita,  Linn.,  (Cyclolites  lenticulata,  Sil.  Syst),  and  a  magnified  portion. 

4.  Under  side  of  ditto.  5.  Ptychophyllum  patellatum,  Schloth,  (Strombodes  plicatum, 
Sil.  Syst.)  6.  Arachnophyllum  typus,  M'Coy;  and  a  few  of  its  lamellae  magnified. 
7.  Petraia  bina,  Lonsdale,  the  interior  cast,  and  a  portion  magnified.      8.  End  view  of  do. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  CORALS.  213 

Linn.  (S.  filiformis,  Sil.  Syst.),  are  common  kinds.  Aulopora  serpens, 
A.  tubaeformis,  and  A.  conglomerata  of  the  Sil.  Syst.  are  the  young  or 
basal  portion  of  one  or  other  of  these  species.  There  are  one  or  two 
rarer  forms, — Thecia  Svvindernana,  Foss.  33.  f.  1.,  and  Labechia 
Monticularia)  conferta  (Sil.  Syst.)  —  not  so  obviously  belonging  to 
the  group  we  have  just  noticed. 

Palaeocyclus,  Milne  Edwards,  is  considered  by  that  naturalist  to  be 
allied  to  the  modern  mushroom-corals  or  Fungiae,  and  is  the  only 
Silurian,  or  indeed  Palasozoic  coral  of  that  group.  P.  porpita,  Linn. 
(Cyclolites  lenticulata,  Sil.  Syst.)  is  the  one  figured  Foss.  33.  f.  3,  4., 
and  there  are  other  species,  P.  praeacutus  and  P.  rugosus,  at  Dudley. 

All  the  other  cup-shaped  corals  of  the  palaeozoic  rocks,  of  which 
about  fifty  species  occur  in  Silurian  rocks,  seem  to  belong  to  the 
division  Zoantharia  rugosa ;  distinguished  in  general,  like  the  other 
great  group,  by  the  development  of  the  transverse  plates  or  septa  in 
the  body  of  the  coral  (see  Foss.  34.  f.  5.  for  example),  and  in- 
cluding both  simple  cup-like  forms,  such  as   Omphyma  (Cyatho- 

FossiLS  34. 

Cup  Corals  of  the  Wenlock  Limestone. 


1.  Cyathophyllum  articulatum,  Wahl.  (csespitosum,  Sil.  Syst.)  2  C.  truncatum,  Linn. 
(Cyathophyll.  dianthus,  Sil.  Syst.) ;  and  a  single  cup,  with  its  marginal  disk-buds  attached. 
3.  Strephodes  vermiculoides,  M'Coy.  4.  Omphjona  (Cyathoph.)  turbinata,  Linn.,  and  a 
view  of  the  cup  with  its  four  basal  pits.  5.  A  longitudinal  section.  6.  Acervularia  ananas, 
Linn.,  and  a  cup,  natural  size,  with  four  young  buds.  7.  Cystiphyllum  Siluriense,  Lons- 
dale.        8.  C.  cylindricum,  Lonsdale. 

p  3 


214  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

phyllum)  turbinata,  Foss.  34.  f.  4.,  Cystiphyllum  Siluriense,  f.  7. 
Petraia  bina,  Foss.  33.  f.  7.  and  8.,  branched  or  composite  ones,  Cya- 
thophyllum  articulatum  (csespitosum)  Foss.  34.  f.  Land  C.  truncatum, 
f .  2. ;  and  when  such  compound  corals  have  grown  closely  together,  so 
that  the  separate  corallites  or  cups  press  one  another  into  an  angular 
form,  such  masses  are  produced  as  Acervularia  ananas,  f.  6.,  and 
Arachnophyllum  typus,  Foss.  33.  f.  6.  The  latter  is  now  called 
Strombodes  Labechii  by  Milne  Edwards  and  Haime.  Among  these 
common  species,  two  are  remarkable  for  the  mode  of  propagation  of 
their  buds  or  young  corallites. 

In  Cyathophyllum  truncatum.  Linn.  (C.  dianthus,  SiL  Syst.)just 
quoted,  the  young  buds  take  their  origin  all  round  the  inner  edge  of 
the  parent  polype-cup  (Foss.  34.  f.  2.),  and  the  eight  or  ten  young 
corals  thus  produced  quite  overtop,  and  at  length  cover  over  the 
parent,  till  in  their  turn  they  too  produce  their  young  clusters,  and 
this  process  is  frequently  repeated  in  the  upward  growth  of  the 
coral.    (See  the  large  figure.) 

Another  species,  so  like  the  former  that  in  some  conditions  it  might 
easily  be  mistaken  for  it,  is  Acervularia  ananas,  also  described  by 
Linna3us  from  rocks  in  Gothland  which  are  now  known  to  be  Upper 
Silurian.  We  have  represented  a  single  cup  (Foss.  34.  f.  6.)  which 
has  given  birth  to  four  young  cones ;  but  these  took  their  rise,  not 
from  the  margin,  but  from  the  centre  of  the  old  coral,  and  in  all 
probability  killed  the  parent  at  once.  As  a  number  of  these  buds 
grow  up  together,  they  stunt  each  other's  growth  in  a  lateral  direction, 
and  as  the  process  of  multiplication  is  repeated  again  and  again,  the 
corals  by  mutual  pressure  are  forced  into  an  angular  form  like  the 
cells  of  an  honeycomb ;  their  edges  grow  together,  and  the  result  is  a 
compound  mass  of  stars.  (See  the  right-hand  figure.)  The  growth 
and  reproduction  of  corals  has  of  late  years  been  much  studied,  and 
has  been  beautifully  illustrated  by  Dana,  Milne  Edwards,  and  other 
naturalists. 


Chap.  IX.] 


UPPER  SILURIAN  CORALS. 


215 


There  are  several  other  cup-shaped  corals,  which  are  frequent  in  the 
Upper  division,  and  especially  in  theWenlock  limestone  ;  but  they  are 
not  so  characteristic  as  those  just  mentioned.  Omphyma  (Caninia) 
lata,  M'Coy ;  0.  Murchisoni,  Milne  Edw. ;  Cystiphyllum  cylindricum, 
Lonsdale ;  C.  Grayii,  Milne  Edw. ;  and  C.  brevilamellatum,  M^Coy ; 
Cyathophyllum  angustum,  Sil.  Syst.  pi.  1 6.  f.  9. ;  Strephodes  trochi- 
formis,  M'Coy ;  S.  vermiculoides,  Foss.  34.  f.  3. ;  Arachnophyllum 
(Strombodes)  diffluens,  Milne  Edw. ;  Ptychophyllum  patellatum, 
Foss.  33.  f.  5. ;  Clisiophyllum  vortex,  M'Coy ;  Goniophyllum 
Fletcheri,  M.  Edw. ;  a  four-sided  coral,  very  like  one  found  in  the  Isle 
of  Gothland,  Sweden.  Some  cup-corals  also  are  common  to  Goth- 
land and  Britain,  viz.  Aulacophyllum  mitratum  and  Cyathophyllum 
Loveni,  besides  the  two  species  of  the  latter  genus  before  mentioned*; 
and  there  are  some  which  extend  their  range  to  America. 

The  Ludlow  rocks,  being  for  the  most  part  mudstones,  do  not 
often  contain  many  corals ;  but  in  their  calcareous  portions,  one  or 


1.  Polypora?  crassa,  (Hornera,  Sil.  Syst.).  2.  Fenestella  assimilis  (Gorgornia,  Lonsd.),  a 
common  Wenlock  species.  3.  F.  Lonsdalei,  D'Orb,  (F.  prisca,  Sil.  Syst.)  4.  F.  Milleri,  Lonsd. 
5.  Glauconome  disticha,  Goldf.  6.  Ptilodictya  lanceolata,  Goldf.,  a  reduced  figure  of  a  full 
grown  specimen ;  a  part  is  figured  above  it,  natural  size.  7.  is  the  young  state ;  the  cells  are 
longer  in  proportion. 

*  So  many  of  the  Wenlock  corals  are  found  in  the  limestone  of  Gothland  in 
Sweden,  that  the  stratum  might  have  been  identified  by  them  alone  —  Heliolites 
interstinctus,  Favosites  alveolaris,  F.  Gothlandicus,  andF.  cristatus;  Coenites  juni- 
perinus,  Halysites  catenulatus,  Syringopora  fasciculata,  Favosites  oculata  (Al- 
veolites repens)  Caninia  turbinata,  Ptychophyllum  patellatum,  Acervularia  ananas^ 


Fossils  35. 
Upper  Silurian  Bryozoa. 


&c.  &c. 


216  SILURIA.  [chap.  IX. 

other  of  the  species  above  described  are  sure  to  occur.  Professor 
M^Coy  has  lately  added  Cyathaxonia  Siluriensis  from  Kendal  to  the 
scanty  list.  Stenopora  fibrosa,  indeed,  and  Favosites  alveolaris,  with 
some  few  others,  seem  to  have  been  indifferent  to  the  nature  of  the 
sediment  they  lived  upon,  for  they  are  found  throughout  the  system. 

The  Bryozoa,  which  are  the  highest  type  of  corals,  or,  as  some 
naturalists  think,  distinct  from  them,  are  numerous,  but  not  of  many 
species,  in  the  upper  division.  We  have  already  quoted  the  Ptilo- 
dictya,  or  feather  coral,  in  the  Lower  Silurian.  A  large  species,  P 
lanceolata  Foss.  35.  f.  6.,  is  abundant  in  Wenlock  strata  (f.  7.  is  the 
young  state  of  it)  ;  and  P.  scalpellum  (Eschara,  Sil.  Syst.)  Foss.  36., 
accompanies  it :  the  former  occurs  also  in  the  Ludlow  rocks.  Glau- 
conome  disticha,  f.  5. ;  Fenestella  Milleri,  f.  4. ;  and  F.  subantiqua, 
p.  178.  Foss.  10.  f.  1.,  are  common  Dudley  fossils.  We  have  also 
figured,  Foss.  35.  f.  2.,  another  common  species,  F.  assimilis  (Gorgo- 
nia,  Sil.  Syst.),  and  there  is  a  beautiful  little  cup-shaped  Fenestella 
in  the  Wenlock  limestone,  F.  Lonsdalei,  D'Orb.,  Foss.  35.  f.  3., 
formerly  referred  by  Mr.  Lonsdale  to  F.  prisca  of  Goldfuss.  Poly- 
pora  (Hornera)  crassa,  f.  1.,  is  not  so  often  met  with. 

Fossils  36. 


Ptilodictya  scalpellum, 
Lonsdale,  (Eschara,  Sil. 
Syst.),  natural  size.  Also  a 


portion  magnified.  It  is  a 
common  species  in  the 
Wenlock  limestone. 


Of  CystideaB  the  forms  are  rare,  but  remarkable  and  characteristic : 
the  species  in  the  Upper  Silurian  being  all  furnished  with  what  Pro- 
fessor Forbes  calls  "pectinated  rhombs."  Foss.  37.  f.  1.  has  two  of 
these  curious  markings,  which  are  usually  absent  in  Lower  Silurian 
genera.  The  following  species  have  been  observed  at  Dudley,  and  are 
seen  in  the  rich  collections  of  Mr.  Gray  and  Mr.  Fletcher  of  that  place 
— Pseudocrinites  magnificus,  fig.  1.;  P.  quadrifasciatus,  f.  2. ;  P.  bifas- 


Chap.  IX. J  UPPER  SILURIAN  CRINOIDS.  217 

ciatus,  and  P.  oblongus,  Forbes  * ;  Apiocystites  pentremitoides,  f.  4. ; 
Prunocystites  Fletcheri,  f.  3. ;  Echinoencrinites  baccatus,  f.  5.,  and  E. 
armatus,  f.  6.  Mr.  Salter  has  shown,  under  figure  6.,  the  curious  5- 
valved  ovarian  opening,  and  a  pair  of  pectinated  rhombs  which 
always  occur  opposite  each  other  on  neighbouring  plates.  Ischadites 
Konigii,  PL  12.f.  6.  may  also  possibly  be  an  animal  of  this  group. 

Fossils  37. 
Cystide^  of  the  Wenlock  Limestone. 


1.  Pseudocrinites  magnificus, 
Forbes.  2.  P.  quadrifasciatus, 
Pearce.  3.  Prunocystites  Flet- 
cheri, Forbes.    4.  Apiocystites 


pentremitoides,  Forbes.  5- 
Echino-encrinites  baccatus, 
Forbes.  6,  E.  armatus, 
Forbes. 


The  last-named  genus,  Echino-encrinites,  but  of  course  with  dif- 
ferent species,  is  found  in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  Russia.  In 
North  America,  the  representative  of  the  Wenlock  limestone  (the 
'  Niagara  group '  of  New  York)  contains  some  characteristic  Cysti- 
dese,  Apiocystites,  &c. 

Passing  on  to  the  great  group  of  Crinoid  animals,  which  are 
numerous  but  rarely  perfect  in  our  lower  division,  we  find  the 
Upper  Silurian  very  rich  in  forms  of  this  class.  Many  of  these 
are  yet  undescribed,  and  we  can  only  refer  at  present  to  those  figured 
in  our  Plates  13.  to  15.,  and  to  a  few  other  species  lately  published 
in  the  works  of  Austin  f,  D'Orbigny  X,  &c. 

By  far  the  commonest  fossil  of  this  class  is  the  Periechocrinus  mo- 
niliformis (Actinocrinus,  Sil.  Syst.)  pi.  13.  f.  1,  2.,  whose  long  neck- 
lace-like stem^  cover  the  slabs  of  Dudley  limestone,  and  sometimes 
attain  five  feet  in  length.  This  and  the  following  species  have  the 
arms  composed  of  a  double  row  of  plates  set  side  by  side:  —  Dimero- 

*  Memoirs,  Geol.  Survey,  vol.  ii.  pi.  2.  pp.  496,  et  seq. 

•f-  Austin,  Monograph  of  the  Crinoidea,  1844. 

X  Prodr.  de  Palaeontol.  Universelle,  1849,  p.  45,  &c. 


218  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

crinites  decadactylus,  pi.  13.  f.  5. ;  D.  icosidactylus,  f.  4.,  a  common 
fossil ;  three  species  of  the  singular  genus,  Eucalyptocrinites,  Gold- 
fuss  (Hypanthocrinus  of  the  Sil.  Syst.),  which  are  found  in  the 
Dudley  limestone ;  E.  decorus,  pi.  14.  f.  2. ;  E.  polydactylus,  M'Coy, 
a  very  large  species  ;  and  the  rare  E.  granulosus,  Lewis,  as  yet  de- 
tected only  at  Walsall  in  Staffordshire  ;  also  Marsupiocrinites  caelatus, 
pi.  14.  f.  1.  Of  the  last  a  reduced  copy  of  a  perfect  specimen  is 
given,  Foss.  38.  f.  1. ;  and  at  f.  3,  the  same  species  is  drawn  without  the 
arms,  but  showing  the  long  proboscis  inserted  into  the  shell  of  a 
mollusk  —  Acroculia  haliotis,  better  figured  in  pi.  24.  f.  9. 

From  the  very  frequent  occurrence  of  the  same  shell,  tightly  em- 
braced by  the  arms  of  this  crinoid,  and  from  the  fact,  that  the  mouth 
of  the  shelly  is  always  turned  downwards  over  the  proboscis,  it  is 
inferred,  and  without  much  doubt,  that  it  was  the  habitual  food  of  the 
animal.  This  has  been  long  observed,  by  Mr.  John  Gray  of  Dudley, 
who  has  dissected  many  specimens  from  the  stone  to  illustrate  the 
point.  And  it  has  received  further  confirmation  by  the  naturalists 
of  America,  Mr.  Yandell  and  Dr.  Shumard  having  observed  the  same 
feature  in  several  of  the  beautiful  Silurian  crinoids  of  America. 

Of  those  species  which  have  but  a  single  row  of  joints  in  each  arm, 
Cyathocrinus  tuberculatus  is  the  most  common,  occurring  of  all  sizes, 
from  that  represented,  pi.  14.  f.  6.,  to  much  larger  than  our  f.  5. ;  C. 
tesseracontadactylus,  (Cyath.  simplex,  Sil.  Syst.)  f.  4.,  and  C.  Or- 
bignyi,  M'Coy,  are  rarer  forms ;  the  former  is  found  in  Gothland. 
Icthyocrinus  ?  goniodactylus,  pi.  14.  f.  3. ;  I.  arthriticus,  f.  7.,  and 
I.  capillaris,  pi.  15.  f.  3.,  are  quite  common  Dudley  fossils.  Icthyo- 
crinus pyriformis  often  grows  larger  than  the  form  represented  in 
pi.  14.  f.  8.  ;  and  this  species  extends  its  range  to  North  America. 
Actinocrinus  (?)  retiarius,  pi.  14.  f.  9.,  when  perfect,  has  a  long  stem 
with  many  auxiliary  arms. 

Enallocrlnus  punctatus,  which  occurs  both  in  England  and  Sweden, 
is  frequently  found  on  Wenlock  Edge. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  CRINOIDS.  219 

Glyptocrinus  (?)  expansus  (Actinocrinus,  Sil.  Syst.)  pi.  15.  f.  1., 
is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  stately  species,  conspicuous  for  the  size  to 
which  it  grows  and  the  numerous  plates  of  which  its  cup  is  composed. 

Lastly  may  be  noted  a  very  common  Wenlock  fossil,  Crotalocrinus 
rugosus,  whose  structure  is,  perhaps,  more  remarkable  than  that 
of  any  Silurian  crinoid. 

Fossils  38. 
Crinoidea  of  the  Dudley  Limestone. 


1.  Marsupiocrinites  caelatus.  2.  Magnified  base  of  the  arms.  3.  Proboscis  of  do.  inserted  in  the 
shell  of  Acroculia  Haliotis.  4.  Reduced  figure  of  Crotalocrinus  rugosus ;  the  bag-like  cluster  of 
arms  surmounting  the  small  round  pelvis.  5.  The  latter  of  its  natural  size,  with  the  stomach 
plates  stripped  off,  and  showing  the  base  of  the  many-fingered  arms.  6.  The  flat  stomachal 
surface,  showing  also  the  branching  of  the  arms  from  their  bases.  7.  A  part  of  the  reticulate 
congeries  of  fingers,  each  joint  being  anchylosed  to  its  neighbour  on  either  side.  —  [J.  W.  S.] 

In  most  Encrinites  the  arms  start  immediately  from  the  edge  of  the 
pelvic  cup,  commencing  with  a  single  joint,  and  soon  branching 
into  two,  three,  or  four,  the  subdivision  varying  in  different  species. 

But  in  this  wonderful  encrinite,  the  upper  edge  of  the  pelvis  is 
seen  to  be  surmounted  by  at  least  twenty  or  twenty-five  arm-joints, 
instead  of  the  usual  five ;  and  when  the  specimens  have  lost  all  but 
the  pelvis  and  these  lower  joints,  the  latter  are  seen  (Foss.  38.  f.  5.), 
to  have  each  a  perforation  in  their  middle,  as  in  the  arm-joints  of  all 
other  crinoids.    These  multitudinous  arms  soon  divide,  and  subdivide 


220  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

again  and  again,  the  several  branches  lying  close,  side  by  side,  and 
leaving  scarcely  any  free  space  between  them. 

Mr.  Salter  has  pointed  out  to  me  that  each  joint  gives  off  from 
either  side  a  small  lateral  process,  f.  7.,  which  unites  with  that  of  its 
next  neighbour,  and  this  is  continued  through  the  w^hole  extent ;  so 
that,  instead  of  a  star  of  free  and  waving  arms,  there  is  formed  a  deep, 
wide  funnel,  like  a  wicker  basket ;  or  rather,  as  the  joints  are  all  of 
equal  length,  and  the  lateral  processes  therefore  form  continuous 
transverse  lines,  like  a  piece  of  the  coarsest  woven  serge,  or  canvas, 
f.  4.  a.    This  curious  funnel  of  anchylosed  arm  joints  was  either 
flexible,  or  grew  in  a  lobed  and  puckered  form.    But,  although  the 
numerous  arms  seem  to  start  at  once  from  the  pelvis,  as  said  before, 
their  real  origin  is  on  the  ventral  surface  further  inward,  see  f.  6., 
where  they  commence  with  single  joints  as  in  other  crinoids,  and 
are  clothed  with  short  tentacles  to  their  very  base.    This  surface  is 
but  rarely  visible,  the  usual  appearance  of  the  cup  being  that  seen  in 
f.  5.,  and  in  PI.  13.  f.3.,  which  are  of  the  natural  size.    The  cup  con- 
sists of  15  plates.  The  stem  (f.  4.  b.)  was  long  ago  figured  by  Parkinson 
in  his  Organic  Remains.*    It  Is  made  up  of  close  joints,  each  with  a 
row  of  tubercles,  which  are  perforated,  the  hole  communicating  with 
the  central  canal  of  the  stem.    Near  the  root,  these  tubercles  lengthen 
out  into  cylindrical  tubular  processes,  which  attach  the  animal 
to  shells  and  corals.    The  cabinets  of  my  friends,  Mr.  Fletcher 
and  Mr.  Gray,  furnished  the  materials  to  Mr.  Salter  for  the  illustra- 
tion of  this  remarkable  fossil. 

Asteriadae  ©r  starfish  are  not  absent :  four  species,  which  are  here 
figured,  being  found  in  the  Ludlow  rocks  of  Kendal.  The  most 
common  is  Uraster  primaevus,  Foss.  39.  f.  1.  Uraster  Ruthveni, 
f.  3.,  and  U.  hirudo,  f.  2.,  are  rarer  species.  Protaster  Sedgwickii, 
f.  4.,  is  believed  by  Professor  Forbes  to  be  closely  related  to  certain 
species  of  the  group  of  Euryales  inhabiting  the  northern  seas ;  and 

*  "  Turban,  or  Shropshire  Encrinite,"  vol.  ii.  PI.  15.  f.  5.  p.  193. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  STAKFISH.  221 

not  to  the  Ophiurae,  which  it  much  resembles.  And,  lastly,  there 
is  a  starfish  in  the  Dudley  limestone,  named  Lepidaster  Grayii  *  by 
the  same  author,  more  crinoidal  in  its  aspect  than  any  existing  species. 

Fossils  39. 
Upper  Silurian  Starfish. 


1.  Uraster  primse- 
vus,  Forbes.  2.  U. 
hirudo,  Forbes.  3. 
U.  Ruthveni,  Forbes. 
4.  Protaster  Sedg- 
wicki,  Forbes. 


All  from  the  Upper 
Ludlow  Rocks  in  the 
neighbourhood  of 
Kendal,  First  found 
by  Professor  Sedg- 
wick. 


Through  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Salter,  I  have  dwelt  particularly  in 
this  chapter  on  a  few  of  the  radiate  animals,  because  they  present  us 
with  some  new  or  little  known  characteristics.  The  remaining  groups, 
Mollusca,  Worms,  and  Crustacea,  will  not  require  so  much  detail. 

Brachiopod  shells,  though  not  in  such  great  preponderance  as  in  the 
lower  rocks,  nor  so  numerous  in  species,  are  yet  very  abundant. 
There  are  fewer  Orthides,  and  more  of  the  Terebratulse  and  Spirifers. 
The  Pentameri  are  still  present,  but  mostly  of  distinct  species  ;  and 
the  same  may  be  said  of  Lingula,  of  which  there  are  decidedly  fewer 
kinds. 

Several  characteristic  species  have  been  quoted  as  ranging  upwards 
from  the  lower  rocks,  such  as  Orthis  elegantula,  O.  biforata,  and 
O.  biloba:  the  first  of  these  being  equally  abundant  in  both  divisions. 
Strophomena  depressa,  and  S.  pecten ;  Leptsena  transversalis ;  Atrypa 
marginalis  and  A.  reticularis,  are  far  more  abundant  here  than  in  the 
lower  division  ;  except  in  the  upper  portions  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone, 
where  they  are  very  plentiful.  The  same  may  be  said  of  Spirifer 
plicatellus,  (radiatus,  Sil.  Syst.),  pi.  21.  f.  2.,  Rhynconella  cuneata,  and 
R.  borealis.  These  species  have  a  wide  geographical  range.  In 
chapters  6  and  7.  thirty  other  species  are  enumerated  from  the  various 

*  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  Decade  iii.  PI.  1. 


222  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

strata  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  among  which  Leptaena  trans- 
versalis,  Strophomena  euglypha,  Spirifer  elevatus,  S.  pllcatellus,  and 
Pentamerus  galeatus  are  most  characteristic  of  the  Wenlock  strata ; 
Rhynconella  Wilsoni,  R.  nucula,  and  R.  navicula,  Orthis  lunata,  and 
Chonetes  lata,  chiefly  distinguish  the  Ludlow  rocks. 

All  the  species  above  enumerated  will  be  found  in  the  plates,  —  20 
to  22.  There  are,  however,  several  others  which  must  be  noticed. 
Among  the  rarer  species  may  be  reckoned,  —  Discina  (or  Orbicula) 
Morrisi,  andD  Vemeuilii  of  Davidson,  D.  Forbesii  (Foss.40.  f.  11.), 
and  D.  implicata,  pi.  20.  f.  4.  These  are  Wenlock  species  of  a  ge- 
nus existing  at  the  present  day,  whilst  Discina  rugata,  pi.  20.  f.  1,  2., 
and  D.  striata,  f.  3.,  are  common  Ludlow  forms. 

Siphonotreta  anglica,  Foss.  40.  f.  10.,  is  a  rare  fossil,  and  of  a  genus 
characteristic  of  the  Lowest  Silurian  rocks  in  Russia.* 


Fossil  40. 
Upper  Silurian  Brachiopoda. 


1.  Rhjmconella  nucula.  2.  R.  Lewisii,  Davidson.  3.  R.  Grayii,  Davids.  4.  R.  Capewelli 
Davids.  5.  R.  Bouchardii,  Dav.  6.  R.  Barrandii,  Dav.  7,  8.  R.  Salterii,  Dav.  9.  Var.  of  do. 
(R.  Baylei,  Dav.).  10.  Siphonotreta  anglica,  Morris;  a.  portion  of  the  surface  and  spines 
magnified.    11.  Orbicula  Forbesii,  Dav. 

*  In  addition  to  the  many  proofs  given  in  the  preceding  Chapters,  let  me  offer 
an  additional  example  of  the  community  of  certain  forms  of  life  throughout  the 
Silurian  aera,  which  has  been  obtained  even  whilst  these  pages  are  printing.  In 
Russia,  the  inferior  portion  of  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  is  strikingly  characterized 
by  the  presence  of  a  genus  of  small  horny  brachiopods  —  Obolus ;  and  now,  through 
the  discrimination  of  Mr.  Davidson,  two  shells,  found  in  the  Wenlock  shale,  have 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPODS.  223 

Spirifer  sulcatus,  Hisinger,  is  a  small  species  common  on  Wen- 
lock  slabs;  Athyris  Circe,  Barrande,  a  Bohemian  fossil,  occurs, 
according  to  that  author,  with  the  common  A.  tumida  at  Walsall ; 
Rhynconella  Lewisii,  Foss.  40.,  f.  2.,  R.  Salterii,  f.  7.,  and  its  va- 
rieties, f.  8,  9.,  and  T.  Bouchardii,  f.  5.,  are  common  Wenlock  species ; 
R.  Barrandii,  f.  6.,  R.  Capewellii,  f.  4.,  and  R.  Grayii,  f.  3.  (a  strange 
twisted  species),  are  rare  Dudley  fossils.  R.  nucula,  f.  1.,  is  the 
commonest  of  all  the  Terebratulae  of  the  Upper  Ludlow  rock.  Im- 
perfect specimens  of  it  are  figured  in  pi.  22.  f.  1,  2. 

Three  Pentameri  only  were  formerly  described  from  the  Upper 
division,  viz.  P.  linguifer,  P.  galeatus,'  and  P.  Knightii  (see  pi.  21.). 
To  these  may  now  be  added  P.  liratus,  Foss.  8.  p.  88.,  found  in  the 
Woolhope  limestone ;  and  P.  lens,  ib.  f.  1.,  which  may  be  considered 
as  belonging  to  the  very  lowest  beds  of  this  division,  since  at  May 
Hill,  Gloucestershire,  the  strata  containing  it  alternate  with  bands  of 
limestone,  which  contain  abundance  of  Upper  Silurian  fossils. 

Several  species  of  Orthis  have  been  already  quoted.  Chap.  6.,  as 
very  common  species  in  the  Wenlock  and  Dudley  limestone.  O. 
Bouchardi,  Foss.  41.  f.  1.;  O.  Lewisii,  Davidson*;  O.  equivalvis, 
Davidson,  are  rare  in  the  same  formation ;  and  so  is  O.  calligramma, 
adverted  to  at  p.  184.,  if  the  shell  here  figured,  Foss.  41.  f.  2.,  be  not 
a  distinct  species  (O.  Davidsoni),  as  De  Verneuil  supposes. 

Strophomena  antiquata,  Foss.  41.  f.  8.,  grows  five  or  six  times  the 
size  of  the  figure  in  my  original  work  (see  PI.  20.  f.  18.).  S.  funicu- 
lata,  Foss.  41.  f.  4.,  and  S.  imbrex,  f.  6,  7.,  are  common  Wenlock 

been  referred  to  th^  same  genus,  viz.  O.  transversus  and  O.  Davidsoni,  Salter.  Mr. 
Davidson  shows  the  close  approach  in  structure  of  the  Russian  and  British  species, 
though  the  latter  is  much  larger  ;  and  he  remarks,  with  regard  to  the  Siphonotreta 
anglica  above  mentioned,  "  it  has  also  been  found  in  the  same  beds  (Wenlock 
shale,  Dudley)  with  the  Obolus,  and  is  of  a  form  scarcely  to  be  distinguished  from 
Lower  Silurian  species."  These  constantly  augmenting  data  prove  that  it  is  quite 
impossible  to  divide  the  "Silurian"  into  two  natural  systems. 

*  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  Geol.  de  France,  2nd  series,  t.  5.  p.  309,  1848.  This  memoir 
contains  figures  of  all  the  British  Upper  Silurian  species  then  known. 


224  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

species;  S.  corrugata,  Portlock,  is  a  beautiful  species,  which  has 
been  already  cited  in  the  lower  division,  where  it  is  plentiful.  S.  pec- 
ten,  f.  3.,  though  common  both  in  Upper  and  Lower  Silurian,  escaped 
notice  when  the  "  Silurian  System  "  was  published.  S.  applanata, 
Salter,  is  a  small  species  resembling  the  last,  which  occurs  sparingly 
in  both  divisions. 

Fossils  41. 
Upper  Silurian  Brachiopods. 


1,  Orthis  Bouchardi,  Davidson.  2.  O.  calligramma  (O.  Davidsoni,  De  Vern.).  3,  Stro 
phomena  pecten,  Linn.  4.  S.  funiculata,  M'Coy.  5.  Interior  of  do.  6.  S.  imbrex  (Pander 
and  Davidson.).  7.  Interior  of  dorsal  valve  of  do.  8.  S.  antiquata,  full  grown  (half  natural  size). 

Lingula  Lewisii,  pi.  20.  f.  5.,  is  one  of  the  commonest  middle  Ludlow 
or  Aymestry  species ;  and  L.  cornea,  pL  34.  f.  2.,  abounds  in  the  tile- 
stone  of  the  Upper  Ludlow.  They  are  both  well  marked  species,  and, 
with  the  small  but  characteristic  L.  lata  of  the  Lower  Ludlow  rock, 
are  the  only  species  of  the  genus  yet  described  from  the  Upper 
Silurian  of  Britain. 

The  Lamellibranchiate  bivalves,  though  numerous  in  species,  have 
not  yet  been  fully  described.  They  consist  chiefly,  as  Prof.  Phillips 
has  pointed  out*,  of  one  or  two  families  closely  related,  and  which 
are  represented  by  the  living  forms,  Mytilus,  Area  or  Nucula,  and 
Avicula.  The  genera  PuUastra,  Mya,  Cypricardia,  and  Cardium, 
to  which  several  of  these  were  formerly  referred,  do  not  appear  in 
these  early  geological  times. 

*  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.,  vol.  ii.  pt.  1.  p.  264. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  LAMELLIBRANCHIATA.  225 

Pterinea  (Avicula)  is  a  most  plentiful  genus.  P.  retroflexa, 
pi.  23.  f.  17.,  is  a  species  subject  to  great  variation,  —  it  has  already 
(p.  191.)  been  quoted  from  various  strata.  P.  Sowerbyi,  f.  15.,  (Avic. 
reticulata,  Sil.  Syst.)  is  a  characteristic  Aymestry  species,  whilst  P. 
lineatula  (A.  lineata,  Sil.  Syst.),  f.  16.,  is  very  frequent  near  Ludlow. 
Besides  these  common  species,  Professor  M'Coy  has  enumerated 
several  others,  viz.,  P.  Boydi,  P.  demissa,  P.  pleuroptera,  and  P.  sub- 
falcata,  of  Conrad,  and  P.  tenuistriata,  Foss.  42.  f.  5.  The  three  last 
are,  it  is  believed,  also  found  in  Lower  Silurian  rocks  in  Wales  and 
Westmoreland.  Others  are  Upper  Silurian  forms  only,  such  as  P. 
hians,  M'Coy,  an  Aymestry  rock  fossil,  and  P.  asperula,  f.  4.,  a  fossil 
from  the  Wenlock  shale  at  Builth.  A  common  Wenlock  species, 
doubtfully  referable  to  this  genus,  is  the  P.  planulata,  Conrad,  fig.  6. 


Fossils  42. 
Upper  Silurian  Lamellibranchiata. 


There  are  some  fine  large  species,  which  seem  more  like  Avicula,  or 
Aviculopecten ;  such  as  A.  Danbyi,  Foss.  42.  fig.  2,  3.,  and  A  ampli  - 
ata,  Phillips,  both  occurring  in  the  Upper  Ludlow  rock;  whilst  Avicula 
mira,  Barrande,  a  beautiful,  reticulated  species,  is  common  at  Dudley, 
and  is  identical  with  one  from  the  Upper  Silurian  of  Bohemia. 

Next  in  importance  are  the  mytiloid  shells,  or  Modiolopsis,  as  the 
genus  is  now  called  *,  which  contains  several  species.    Thus  M.  com- 

*  There  does  not  appear,  however,  to  be  any  decided  character  to  separate 
these  shells  from  the  Modiolae  of  our  own  day.  —  J.  W.  S, 

Q 


226  SILUEIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

planata,  pi.  23.  f.  1.,  is  an  Upper  Ludlow  fossil :  M.  Killsoni,  Foss.  43. 
f.  8.,  is  both  a  Wenlock  and  Ludlow  species ;  and  M.  platypliyllus, 
f.  7.,  is  characteristic  of  the  uppermost  Ludlow  beds,  where  it 
occurs  with  some  other  forms,  now  referred  by  Professor  M'Coy  to  his 
new  genus  Anodontopsis.  M.  quadratus  and  M.  ovalis,  Salter,  M. 
angustifrons,  M*Coy,  M.  Ijevis,  pi.  34.  f.  7.,  and  M.  bulla,  Foss.  43. 
f.  5.,  are  species  of  this  kind.  Mytilus  exasperatus,  Phillips,  and 
M.  antiquus,  pi.  23.  f.  14.,  are  Wenlock  shale  fossils,  the  latter 
being  common.  Mytilus  mytilimeris,  Foss.  43.  f.  6.,  is  also  plentiful 
in  TTenlock  shale.  Goniophora  cymbaeformis,  pi.  23.  f.  2.,  seems 
nearly  allied  to  Mytilus,  and  is  one  of  the  most  abundant  Upper 
Ludlow  shells.    Certain  forms,  less  eyidently  related  to  this  family. 


Fossils  43. 
Upper  Sllukiax  Lamellibba^xhiata. 


have  been  termed  Orthonota  by  some  authors,  and  Sanguinolites  by 
others.  They  are  thin  shells,  without  hinge  teeth,  and  outwardly 
much  resemble  Mya,  Panopoea,  &:c.,  to  which  they  are  not  at  all 
allied  in  reality.  Orthonota  semisulcata  (Modiola,  Sil.  Syst.)  is  one 
example  from  the  Ludlow  rocks,  not  here  figured ;  and  a  new  species, 
(Foss.  43,  f.  4.)  is  one  of  the  most  frequent  fossils  in  the  tile- 
stones  of  Westmoreland.    Other  species  referred  to  this  genus  in 


Chap.  IX.]       UPPER  SILURIAN  LAMELLIBRANCHIATA.  227 

the  publications  of  the  "  Geological  Survey "  *  differ  still  more 
widely  in  outward  appearance  from  the  Modiola,  to  which  they 
are  nevertheless  related.  They  are  abundant  in  the  Ludlow  rocks, 
especially  0.  amygdalina,  pi.  23.  f.  6.,  and  its  variety,  —  retusa,  f.  7. 
This  species  covers  the  surfaces  of  the  uppermost  stratum  of  the 
Upper  Ludlow  rock,  wherever  it  is  exposed,  and  with  it,  more 
rarely,  occur  0.  impressa,  f.  4.,  and  O.  undata,  f.  3.  Orthonota 
rotundata  (My a,  Sil.  Syst.)  f.  5.,  is  characteristic  of  the  Aymestry 
rock ;  but  0.  solenoides,  f.  9.,  and  0.  rigida,  f.  8.,  are  more  common 
in  the  Lower  Ludlow.  O.  angulifera,  M'Coy,  Foss.  43.  f.  3.,  is  an 
ornamented  species,  rare  in  the  Ludlow  rocks  of  Westmoreland. 

Grammy sia,  De  Verneuil,  is  a  genus  very  like  the  shells  last 
mentioned,  but  easily  recognized  by  its  deep  furrows  on  the  valves. 
G.  triangulata,  Foss.  43.  f.  2.,  is  a  typical  tilestone  fossil,  and  G.  ex- 
trasulcata,  Salter,  and  G.  cingulata,  Foss.  43.  f.  1.,  are  found  with  it, 
both  in  S.  Wales  and  Westmoreland.  The  latter  fossil  is  equally 
common  in  other  Upper  Silurian  strata  (Wenlock),  at  Dudley,  Usk, 
and  near  Llandeilo,  and  is  also  found  in  Gothland,  Sweden,  and  Nor- 
way. It  appears  to  have  flourished  best  on  sandy  ground ;  a  condition 
apparently  most  favourable  to  the  Lamellibranchiata  in  general. 

Cardiola  interrupta,  pi.  23.  f.  12.,  is  perhaps  the  most  abundant 
bivalve  in  the  Wenlock  and  Ludlow  shales.  On  the  continent  it 
is  also  found  in  Upper  Silurian  strata,  and  does  not  extend  its  range 
upward  into  the  Devonian  rocks.  Cardiola  fibrosa,  fig.  11.,  is  a 
Lower  Ludlow  fossil,  and  C.  striata  (Cardium  striatum,  Sil.  Syst.) 
f.  13.,  is  also  to  be  referred  to  the  same  genus  (see  p.  129.), 
The  shells  of  the  families  Nucula  and  Area,  in  which  the  hinge 
line  is  beset  with  numerous  teeth,  are  very  numerous  in  individuals, 
though  of  few  species,  in  the  Upper  Silurian.  Nucula  Anglica,  pi.  23. 
f.  10.,  N.  (Area)  primitiva,  Phillips,  N.  Edmondiiformis,  M'Coy,  and 


*  Vol.  ii.  pt.  1.  p.  360. 


228  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

K  (or  Ctenodonta*)  subaequalis,  pi.  9.  f.  5.,  are  Upper  Ludlow  shells; 
most  of  these,  indeed,  had  their  origin  much  earlier.  Nucula  sulcata, 
Hisinger  (Mem.  G.  Surv.  vol.  ii.),  ranges  throughout  the  Upper  Silu- 
rian. The  genus  CucuUella,  distinguished  by  a  strong  internal  ridge, 
contains  several  Ludlow  species.  C.  antiqua,  pi.  34.  f.  16.,  C.  Caw- 
dori,  f.  3.,  and  especially  C.  ovata,  f.  17.,  are  common  shells  in  the 
tilestone.  C.  coarctata,  Phillips,  is  found  in  great  plenty  in  the  Lud- 
low rocks  of  Pembrokeshire,  and  occurs  also  in  the  Wenlock  shale. 

The.genus  Cleidophorus,  which  has  no  teeth  in  the  hinge,  is  other- 
wise much  like  Cuculiella.  C.  planulatus,  Conrad,  is  found  in  Wen- 
lock  shale.  Lyrodesma  (Actinodonta)  cuneata,  PhilL,  connects  these 
Area-like  shells  with  the  Mytiloid  or  muscle-shaped  forms :  it  is 
found  in  Wenlock  shale,  and  is  figured  in  the  "  Memoirs  of  the  Geol. 
Survey,"  vol.  ii. 

Lastly,  as  a  representative  of  the  Cardiaceae,  we  have  one  small 
species  of  Pleurorhynchus ;  a  genus  which,  as  we  have  before  seen, 
p.  192,  commenced  existence  in  the  lower  division.  P.  sequicostatus, 
Foss.  42.  f.  1.,  is  a  miniature  example  of  it,  found  at  Wenlock  and 
W oolhope.  In  America,  much  larger  species  of  this  genus  occur  in 
Upper  Silurian  rocks. 

Lamellibranchiate  shells  are  by  far  more  frequently  met  with  in 
the  Upper  Silurian  strata  than  in  the  Lower ;  a  fact  indicated  long 
ago  in  the  plates  of  organic  remains  given  in  my  former  work,  and 
which  has  been  confirmed  by  subsequent  observations.  Out  of 
forty-five  species  quoted  in  Professor  Phillips'  memoir  but  five  or 
six  are  found  in  Caradoc  sandstone  or  Llandeilo  flags.  Professor 
M*Coy,  in  his  catalogue  of  the  Woodwardian  Museum,  enumerates 
eleven  species  from  the  Lower  Silurian,  a  formation  in  which  that 
collection  is  peculiarly  rich ;  and  of  the  fifty  Upper  Silurian  species 

*  Proposed  by  Mr.  Salter,  1851,  for  the  palseozoic  Nuculae,  or  those  of  them  at 
least  which  have  the  ligament  external,  and  no  spoon-shaped  internal  process  to 
contain  it. 

t  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  vol.  2.  pt.  2.  1848. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  UNIVALVE  SHELLS.  229 

described  by  him,  as  many  as  twelve  are  also  found  in  the  lower  division. 
Col.  Portloek  has  also  described  many  Lower  Silurian  forms  of  this 
group  in  Ireland.  But  an  inspection  of  the  museum  of  the  Geological 
Survey,  and  of  numerous  private  collections,  will  convince  any  one 
that  the  larger  proportion  in  species  is  still  on  the  side  of  the  Upper 
Silurian  rocks,  whilst  the  individuals  in  them  are  unquestionably 
more  numerous. 

We  ought  here  to  notice  Professor  Phillips's  suggestive  remark, 
that  the  families  to  which  the  Silurian  (and  generally  Palaeozoic) 
Lamellibranchiata  belong,  are  just  those  which  occur  at  the  junction, 
so  to  s^Dcak,  of  the  Monomyarian  and  Dimyarian  groups.  Mytiloid, 
Nuculoid,  and  Aviculoid  shells,  with  few  additions,  were,  therefore, 
the  representatives  of  this  order  in  the  Silurian  seas. 

Gasteropod  mollusca,  or  univalve  shells,  are  spread  thinly  through- 
out the  Upper  Silurian,  seldom  forming  a  conspicuous  feature.  The 
"Wenlock  limestone,  however,  is  neither  poor  in  species  nor  indivi- 
duals, though  several  are  yet  unpublished.  Among  them  Euom- 
phalus  occupies  a  marked  place ;  three  species  especially  swarming  in 
certain  localities,  viz.,  E.  discors,  pi.  24.  f.  12.  ;  E.  rugosus,  f.  13. ; 
and  E.  funatus,  pi.  25.  f.  3.  A  species  also  very  like  E.  centrifugus, 
Wahlenberg,  not  unfrequently  occurs  with  them*  Euomphalus  sculp- 
tus,  f.  2.,  which  appears  to  be  only  a  variety  of  E.  funatus,  is  found 
as  frequently  in  the  Upper  Caradoc  as  in  Wenlock  rocks.  E.  alatus, 
f.  4.,  is  a  Wenlock  shale  species.  E.  carinatus,  pi.  24.  f.  11.,  is  more 
characteristic  of  the  Middle  Ludlow  or  Aymestry  rock.  Of  all  these 
species,  E.  funatus  is  by  far  the  most  common,  and  has  the  greatest 
vertical  range.  Its  operculum,  a  concentric  one,  is  now  often  met 
with,  and  helps  to  show  the  near  relation  of  the  genus  to  Delphinula, 
as  above  stated  (p.  192.  note). 

Of  the  genus  Turbo,  T.  cirrhosus,  pi.  24.  f.  10.,  often  occurs  in  the 
Wenlock  shale,  and  the  T.  Williamsi,  pi.  34.  f.  14.,  together  with 
two  other  species  of  the  genus  mentioned  in  p.  136.,  are  frequent  in 


230  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

the  Upper  Ludlow,  especially  in  the  tilestones.  This  last  rock  is  also 
crowded  with  the  Trochus?  helicites,  pi.  34.  f.  12, 13.,  a  shell  which 
is  referred  to  that  genus  with  great  doubt,  and  looks  more  like 
a  land-snail  in  outward  form.  It  is  probably  quite  a  distinct  genus, 
in  no  way  allied  to  the  group  in  which  it  now  stands.  T.  caelatulus, 
M'Coy,  is  a  rare  species  from  the  Woolhope  limestone ;  and  T. 
(Litorina)  undifer,  M^Coy,  is  a  small  Aymestry  rock  species. 

The  Turritellae,  Sil.  Syst.,  of  the  uppermost  Ludlow  rocks  have 
been  already  referred  to  the  genus  Holopella,  p.  192.;  H,  obsoleta, 
pi.  34.  f.  11.,  H.  gregaria,  and  H.  conica,  f.  10.,  being  very  frequent 
fossils  in  this  stratum  in  Westmoreland,  Shropshire,  and  S.  Wales. 
Professor  M'Coy  has  distinguished  another  small  species,  H.  gracilior, 
from  the  Wenlock  shale  of  Llangollen.  Loxonema  sinuosa,  pi.  24. 
f.  3.,  and  L.  elegans,  M'Coy,  are  Ludlow  rock  species.  The  latter 
is  a  fine  shell,  two  inches  long,  and  is  frequent  both  in  the  Wenlock 
and  Ludlow  shales. 

Spiral  shells  with  notched  apertures,  Pleurotomaria  and  Mur- 
chisonia,  are  common.  Murchisonia  corallii,  pi.  24.  f.  7.  ;  M.  articu- 
lata,  f.  2.  and  M.  torquata,  M'Coy,  are  slender  turreted  forms  in  the 
Ludlow  rocks.  M.  cingulata,  Hisinger,  three  inches  long,  is  an  Ay- 
mestry shell  found  also  in  Gothland.  M.  Lloydii,  pi.  24.  f.  5.,  abounds 
in  the  middle  and  lower  Ludlow,  and  is  frequent  in  Wenlock  lime- 
stone. Pleurotomaria  balteata,  Phillips  (Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  vol.  ii.  pt.  i. 
pi.  15.),  is  another  interesting  Wenlock  form  ;  and  Pleur.  undata,  pL 
24.  f.  6.,  is  from  the  Lower  Ludlow,  where  some  other  large  species, 
yet  unpublished,  are  also  found.  Acroculia  (Nerita)  Haliotis,  pi.  24. 
f.  9.  and  A.  prototypa,  f.  8.,  are  exceedingly  abundant,  the  first 
especially,  in  Wenlock  limestone,  and  also  in  the  Upper  Silurian  of 
Bohemia.  These  mollusks  seem  to  have  formed  the  chief  diet  of 
the  numerous  Encrinites  of  the  period,  both  in  England  and  Ame- 
rica. Natica  parva,  pi. 25.  f.  1.;  Cyrtolites  laevis,  f.  9.,  and  a  few 
others,  complete  the  list  of  published  species,  but  many  others,  I  am 
assured  by  Mr.  Salter,  remain  to  be  described. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  CEPHALOPODS.  231 

One  or  two  Pteropods  only  have  yet  been  detected,  nor  do  they 
seem  to  be  so  plentiful  as  in  the  lower  rocks.  Theca  Forbesii,  Foss. 
21.  in  chap.  8.,  and  T.  anceps,  Salter,  are  Wenlock  shale  species. 
Besides  these,  Conularia  seems  to  be  the  only  British  Upper  Silurian 
pteropod.  •  The  beautiful  and  variable  C  Sowerbyi  (C.  quadrisulcata 
var.  of  my  former  work),  pi.  25.  f.  10.,  is  often  found  in  Wenlock 
limestone,  and  occurs  with  a  rarer  species,  C.  subtilis,  Salter,  in  the 
Ludlow  rocks  of  Westmoreland. 

Bellerophons  are  frequent.  B.  dilatatus,  pi.  25.  f.  6.,  is  one  of  the 
largest  univalves  in  the  Ludlow  and  Wenlock  rocks.  The  broad  ex- 
panded mouth  is  often  three  inches  wide,  and  is  sometimes  furnished 
with  radiating  ribs  (see  the  figure),  —  at  other  times  smooth,  Foss.  21. 
in  Chap.  8.  B.  Wenlockensis,  pi.  25.  f.  7.,  is  very  characteristic  of 
the  strata  implied  in  its  name.  B.  expansus,  f.  8.,  is  equally  so  of  the 
Upper  Ludlow  rock.  The  latter,  and  B.  Murchisonae  ?  pi.  34.  f.  1 9. 
B.  carinatus,  f.  8.,  and  B.  trilobatus,  f.  9.,  generally  of  small  size, 
are  most  abundant  everywhere  in  the  upper  beds  of  the  Ludlow  rock. 

Of  the  Cephalopods  which  chiefly  typify  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks 
much  might  be  said ;  though  the  species  which  most  abound  have  al- 
ready been  enumerated  (see  pp.  112. 121,  122.  129.).  It  may,  however, 
be  noted,  that  some  of  these  forms  are  specially  characteristic  of  parti- 
cular strata.    Thus,  the  thin-shelled  species  of  Orthoceras, — O.  sub- 


FossiLS  44, 
Upper  Silurian  Cephalopods. 


1.  Orthoceras  filosum.  2.  0.  Ludense.  These  two  species  are  figured  from  specimens  two 
feet  in  length,  3.  0.  subundulatum,  Portlock  (Creseis  Sedgwicki,  Forbes).  4.  O.  pri- 
msevum,  Forbes.    The  two  latter  are  usually  8  or  9  inches  long. 


232  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

undulatum,  and  O.  primaevum,  here  figured,  are  the  most  frequent 
shells  of  the  Wenlock  shale ;  O.  annulatum,  pi.  26.  f.  1.,  and  its 
variety,  fimbriatum,  f.  2.,  is  a  well-known  Wenlock  limestone  species ; 
O.  filosum,  pi.  27.  f.  1.,  here  figured  (Foss.  44.  f.  1.),  O.  perelegans, 
pi.  29.  f.  5,  6.;  and  O.  dimidiatura,  pk  28.  f.  5.,  are  common  Lower  Lud- 
low fossils ;  O.  Mocktreense,  pL  29.  f.  2.,  is  a  Middle  Ludlow  or 
Aymestry  species;  while  O.  Ludense;  Foss.  44.  f.  2.,  and  pi.  28. 
f.  1.  ;  O.angulatum,  f.  4. ;  O.  Ibex,  pi.  29.  f.  3.,  and  especially  0.  bul- 
latum,  f.  1.,  are  frequent  Upper  Ludlow  forms. 

Orthoceras  nummularius,  pi.  26.  f.  5. ;  O.  excentricum,  pi.  27.  f.  3. ; 
O.  canaliculatum,  pi.  28.  f.  3.,  are  rarer  Wenlock  species  ;  whilst  O. 
distans,  pi.  26.  f.  4. ;  O.  subgregarium,  pL  27.  f.  2. ;  and  O.  im- 
bricatum,  pL  29.  f.  7.,  are  not  abundant  Ludlow  fossils. 

The  same  distribution  is  observa])le  in  the  other  genera ;  for 
Phragmoceras  is  principally  grouped  in  the  Lower  Ludlow  while  Litu- 
ites  ranges  throughout.  Phragmoceras  ventricosum,  pi.  32.,  which  has 
been  already  mentioned,  is  frequent  at  Leintwardine,  Shropshire,  where 
also  the  P.  (Orthoceras)  pyriforme,  pi.  30.  abounds.  P.  arcuatum, 
pi.  31.  f.  3.,  and  P.  intermedium,  pi.  30,  f.  4.,  are  also  from  this 
stratum.  P.  nautileum,  pi.  31.  f.  1,  2.,  and  P.  compressum,  f.  4.,  are 
found  in  Wenlock  shale,  as  also  are  Lituites  articulatus,  f.  6.,  and  L. 
Biddulphii,  f.  5.  Lituites  giganteus,  pi.  33.  f.  1,  2,  3.,  is  one  of  the 
finest  fossils  from  Leintwardine,  and  L.  tortuosus,  of  which  a  frag- 
ment is  figured,  f.  4.,  is  found  in  the  black  nodules  of  the  Wenlock 
shale  near  Welshpool,  and  also  at  Dudley. 

Orthoceras  tracheale,  pi.  34.  f.  6.,  and  O.  (Diploceras  ?)  semi- 
partitum,  f.  5.,  are  very  characteristic  of  the  uppermost  Ludlow  or 
tilestones,  and  O.  bullatum,  pi.  29.  f.  1.,  which  occurs  in  the  greatest 
abundance  with  them,  must  also  again  be  noticed. 

To  complete  the  catalogue  of  the  Upper  Silurian  fauna,  a  brief  sketch 
must  be  given  of  the  annulose  animals,  such  as  worms  and  Crustacea, 
and  of  the  very  few  remains  of  placoid  fish  which  have  been  dis- 
covered. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  ANNELIDS  —  TRILOBITES.  233 

Cornulites  serpularius,  see  pi.  16.  f.  3 — 9.  is  still,  as  in  the 
Lower  Silurian,  the  principal  annelid ;  and  though  more  frequent 
in  the  Wenlock  limestone,  it  is  not  rare  in  the  Ludlow  rocks.  Ten- 
taculites  ornatus,  f.  11.,  abounds  in  the  Dudley  limestone;  whilst 
a  small  species,  T.  tenuis,  pi.  16.  f.  12.,  occurs  in  the  Upper 
Ludlow  rock.  The  place  of  the  latter  is  sometimes  taken  by  a  form 
so  like  T.  annulatus  of  the  lower  division,  that  it  may  be  a  variety 
only ;  in  which  case  we  lose  another  characteristic  fossil  for  distin- 
guishing the  two  groups.  This  Tentaculite  is  plentiful,  for  example, 
in  Pembrokeshire,  in  the  sandy  Ludlow  rocks  of  Marloes  Bay  and 
Freshwater.  Other  annelids  (Serpulites,  Sil.  Syst.)  are  very  common 
in  the  Ludlow^  rock.  They  are  flattened  tubes,  thick  at  each  pro- 
jecting edge,  sometimes  shelly,  and  at  other  times  corneous,  or  almost 
membranous  on  the  sides.  Serpulites  longissimus,  pi.  16.  f.  1.,  of  the 
Upper  Ludlow  rock,  which  is  characteristic  of  this  formation  wherever 
found,  grows  to  a  length  of  twenty  inches,  measured  round  its 
long  spiral  curve.  S.  dispar,  Salter,  from  Kendal,  the  tube  of  which 
has  remarkably  thin  sides,  is  figured  in  the  late  work  descriptive  of 
the  Woodwardian  Museum.  Trachyderma  coriacea  and  T.  squamosa 
of  Phillips  *  are  wrinkled  tubes  of  these  creatures,  frequent  in  the  Lud- 
low rocks  of  the  original  Silurian  region.  Serpulites  curtus,  Salter, 
and  a  few  other  species,  are  found  in  the  Wenlock  strata. 

The  Crustacea,  with  rare  exceptions,  are  trilobites.  They  are 
exceedingly  abundant,  forming  in  some  strata,  such  as  the  Wenlock 
limestone,  the  most  conspicuous  and  characteristic  fossils.  Many 
forms  have  been  already  quoted  in  the  preceding  chapters,  and 
two  woodcuts  are  here  given,  to  represent  either  the  principal  forms 
not  illustrated  in  the  original  work,  or  those  now  more  perfectly 
known.  Among  the  latter  we  may  reckon  the  elegant  and  highly 
ornamented  Dudley  fossils,  Encrinurus  punctatus,  Foss.  46.  f.  5. 
and  E.   variolaris,  f.  6.     These,  which  are  known  by  the  name 

Strawberry-headed"  by  collectors,  are  found  on  every  slab  of  Wen- 
*  Mem.  G.  Surv,  1.  c.  PI.  4. 


234 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  IX. 


lock  limestone,  but  seldom  perfect  except  at  Dudley,  where  numerous 
specimens  ornament  the  cabinets  of  Mr.  Gray  and  Mr.  Fletcher  of 


1.  Lichas  Anglicus,  Beyrich, 
and  its  hypostome  or  labrum. 

2.  CaljTuene  tuberculosa, 
Salter,  also  with  its  labrum. 

3.  Lichas  Barrandii,  Fletcher. 


Fossils  45. 
Upper  Silurian  Crustacea. 


4.  Beyrichia  tuberculata,  Klo- 
den,  natural  size  and  magni- 
fied. The  other  figures  are 
reduced  to  about  half  size. 


that  place.  Cheirurus  bimucronatus,  Foss.  46.  f.  4.,  figured  from 
fragments  only  in  my  old  work,  is  found  perfect  in  the  same 
collections,  and  also  in  the  cabinet  of  the  Kev.  T.  T.  Lewis. 
Acidaspis  Brightii,  f.  8.,  is  now  better  understood  than  when  for- 
merly described,  and  no  less  than  five  other  species  of  this  genus 
are  known  in  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  of  which  we  figure  the  head 
of  one,  f.  9.,  called  A.  Barrandii  by  Mr.  Fletcher.  The  common 
Calymene  Blumenbachii,  PI.  18.  f.  10.,  is  the  most  prolific  of  all  the 
Upper  Silurian  trilobites,  and  is,  as  before  stated,  known  in  the  lower 
division  of  the  system ;  and  C.  tuberculosa,  which  was  formerly  given 
as  a  variety  of  it,  is  a  very  plentiful  species  in  the  Wenlock  shale, 
PI.  18.  f.  11.,  and  Foss.  45.  f.  2. 

Some  forms  are  here  figured  which  were  not  published  before. 
Sphaerexochus  mirus,  Foss.  46.  f.  1.,  is  singularly  formed;  the  head 
being  so  inflated  as  to  resemble  a  ball.  This  Wenlock  fossil  has  a  very 
general  range,  being  found  both  in  America  and  Bohemia  in  Upper 
Silurian  rocks.  It  appears  to  have  existed  earlier  in  Britain  than  in 
those  distant  parts,  for  it  is  found  in  the  equivalents  of  the  Llandeilo 
flags  in  Ireland.  Four  or  five  species  of  Lichas  (a  genus  already  figured 
in  chap.  8.)  are  now  known  in  Wenlock  limestone.  L.  Grayii, 
L.  Salteri,  L.  Barrandii,  L.  hirsutus,  are  all  species  lately  figured 
from  the  rich  collection  of  Mr.  Fletcher  (Quart.  Geol.  Journ.  vol.  vi. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  TRILOBITES.  235 

p.  235.)  With  them  is  also  represented  a  small  common  species, 
the  L.  (Arges)  Anglicus  of  Beyrich,  Foss.  45.  f.  1.,  of  which  a  very 
imperfect  illustration  was  formerly  given  in  Brongniart's  work. 
The  genus  is  remarkable  for  the  shape  of  the  head  and  its  lobes. 
Phacops  Downingise,  Foss.  46.  f.  3.  and  pi.  18.  f.  2 — 5.,  P.  caudatus, 
pi.  18.  f.  1.,  with  its  variety,  P.  longicaudatus,  pi.  17.  f.  3  —  6., 
have  been  already  quoted  (p.  122.)  as  very  common  forms. 

Fossils  46. 
Wenlock  Limestone  Trilobites. 


1.  SphEerexochus 
mirus,  Beyrich,  with 
a  coiled-up  specimen. 
2.  Cyphaspis  mega- 
lops,  M'Coy.  3.  Pha- 
cops Downingige, 
both  extended  and 
coiled-up.  4.  Cheiru- 
rus  bimucronatus, 
and  its  hypostome. 


5.  Encrinurus  punc- 
tatus,  and  its  hypos- 
tome, from  a  Dudley 
specimen.  6.  E.  va- 
riolaris.  7.  Proetus 
latifrons,  M'Coy.  8. 
Acidaspis  Brightii, 
in  part  restored.  9.  A. 
Barrandii,  Fletcher 
and  Salter,  MSS. 


Proetus  Stokesii,  pi.  17.  f.  7.,  and  P.  latifrons,  Foss.  46.  f.  7.,  are  also 
far  from  rare  in  Wenlock  strata.  The  Bumastus  Barriensis  (lUaenus 
auct.),  Foss.  9.  and  pi.  17.  f.  9 — 11.,  ranges,  as  before  said,  from  the 
lowest  Wenlock  beds  to  near  the  top  of  the  Upper  Silurian.  Two 
species  of  Homalonotus  also  have  been  already  quoted,  pp.  108,  136. 

Cyphaspis  megalops,  Foss.  46.  f.  2.,  and  a  small  species,  C.  pyg- 
masus,  Salter,  are  the  only  species  of  that  genus  known  in  Eng- 
land. The  former  began  life  in  the  Lower  Silurian  epoch.  Deiphon 
Forbesii,  Barrande,  is  a  rare,  globular-headed  trilobite,  common  to 
the  Dudley  limestone,  and  its  equivalent  rock  in  Bohemia.  And 
lastly,  there  is  a  species  of  Bronteus,  B.  laticauda,  Wahlenberg,  found 
by  my  deceased  friend.  Dr.  Lloyd,  in  the  Wenlock  limestone.  It  is 
figured  by  Professor  Phillips  under  the  name  of  B.  signatus  (Pal. 
Foss.  f.  254.). 

A  goodly  list  of  British  trilobites  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks 


^36  SILUEIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

has  thus  been  given,  though  many  other  interesting  forms  will  pro- 
bably reward  research.  The  small  bivalve  crustaceans  Cytheropsis 
and  Beyrichia  remain  to  be  noticed.  Of  the  latter  genus,  the 
Upper  Silurian  species  is  B.  tuberculata,  Foss.  45.  f.  4.  It  is  very 
abundant  from  the  base  of  the  Wenlock  shale  to  the  highest 
Ludlow  stratum,  and  is  a  good  index  of  Upper  Silurian  rocks, 
though  found  sometimes  in  the  upper  division  of  the  Caradoc;  (the 
Lower  Silurian  form,  it  will  be  recollected,  is  B.  complicata,  Ch.  viii. 
p.  201.). 

These  bivalve  Crustacea,  which  are  of  much  larger  size  in  the 
Upper  Silurian  limestones  of  Sweden,  are,  in  the  opinion  of  good 
naturalists,  probably  of  the  phyllopod  tribe,  and  much  more  nearly 
allied  to  living  forms  than  the  trilobites  that  accompany  them.  So 
also  are  some  larger,  shrimp-like  forms,  described  by  Prof  M*Coy 
from  the  Upper  Ludlow  rock  of  Kendal.  One  of  these,  the  Ceratio- 
caris  inornatus,  is  three  or  four  inches  long.  The  carapace,  or  front 
part  only  of  the  body  of  this  species  has  yet  been  described ;  but  in 
all  probability,  says  Mr.  Salter,  the  entire  creature  was  very  like  the 
fossil  figured  in  Ch.  ii.  Foss.  3.  The  same  Ceratiocaris,  or  a  closely 
allied  species,  occurs  at  Dudley,  and  portions  of  the  jointed  body  have 
been  found  there  also. 

Such  were  also,  according  to  M.  de  Barrande's  discoveries,  those 
curious  striated  spines,  which  are  re})resented  in  pi.  19.  f.  1,  2.,  and 
which  have  been  of  late  distinguished,  by  Prof.  M'Coy,  from  fish 
defences,  with  which  they  were  formerly  confounded.  (See  Chap.  vi. 
p.  137.)  That  naturalist,  indeed,  supposed  them  to  be  the  slender 
pincers  of  some  large  crustacean,  and  has  called  them  Leptocheles 
from  this  circumstance :  —  L.  leptodactylus  and  L.  Murchisoni,  pi. 
19.  f.  1.,  from  the  Lower  Ludlow  rock.  But  M.  Barrande  having 
found  perfect  specimens  in  Bohemia,  has  indicated,  that  these  long 
pointed  spines  are  the  trifid  tail  of  a  crustacean,  something  like  that  of 
the  genus  Dithyrocaris  of  the  carboniferous  rocks. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPER  SILURIAN  CRUSTACEANS.  237 

The  largest,  if  not  the  most  highly  organised  crustacean  in  the 
Silurian  list,  is  one  allied  to  the  living  king-crab  or  Limulus  of 
the  Indian  seas.  It  is  Pterygotus  pro})lematicus,  before  mentioned. 
The  fragments  of  the  carapace,  which  alone  are  represented,  Plate  19. 
f.  4,  5.,  were  formerly  considered  by  Agassiz  to  be  fish  scales*; 
but  that  author  soon  afterwards  f  corrected  this  statement,  and 
assigned  the  animal  to  its  true  place  among  the  Crustacea.  A 
gigantic  species  of  the  genus  will  hereafter  be  spoken  of  as  occurring 
in  the  Old  Red  sandstone  of  Scotland.  The  dimensions  which  P. 
problematicus  attained  are  unknown  ;  but  from  fragments  of  the 
pincers  lately  described  by  Strickland  and  Salter  J,  it  was  probably  less 
than  that  of  the  great  fossil,  the  "  Seraphim  "  of  the  Scottish  quarry- 
men,  which  must  have  been  four  feet  in  length.  §  Prof.  M*Coy  has 
very  satisfactorily  referred  these  monsters  of  their  order  to  the  group 
above  mentioned,  the  Xiphosura,  of  which  the  large  king-crab  is  the 
modern  type.  There  are  two  other  Ludlow  rock  species  of  smaller 
dimensions  probably  to  be  referred  to  the  same  group,  which,  as 
we  know,  existed,  and  apparently  under  forms  very  like  the  living 
Limuli  II,  in  the  carboniferous  epoch  (see  Ch.  xii.). 

Lastly,  in  the  ascending  order  of  animal  life,  and  in  speaking  of 
fishes,  we  find  that  even  in  the  "  bone-bed"  of  the  upper  Ludlow  rock, 
their  remains  are  very  scanty,  some  of  those  few  which  were  for- 
merly referred  to  the  class,  having  been  recently  removed,  as  stated 
above,  p.  137.,  to  crustaceans.    Still  there  are,  in  this  stratum  IF, 

*  Sil.  Syst.  p.  606.  t  Poissons  du  Vieux  Gres  Rouge,  pi.  1. 

I  Quart.  Geol.  Journ.  v.  viii.  p.  386.  pi.  21. 

§  Mr.  Strickland  recently  found  this  fossil  in  the  Upper  Caradoc  of  Malvern. 

II  Prestwich,  Geol.  Trans.,  2d  series,  vol.  v.  pi.  41 . 

^  In  a  recent  survey  of  the  May  Hill  district,  in  Gloucestershire,  made  whilst 
these  pages  were  passing  through  the  press,  Mr.  H.  E.  Strickland  and  myself,  re- 
examining the  cutting  of  the  Gloucester  and  Ross  railroad,  near  Flaxley  which 
my  friend  had  already  described  (Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  ix.  p.  8.),  discovered 
two  thin  bone-beds,  each  little  more  than  an  inch  thick,  and  separated  by  about 
fifteen  feet  of  fossiliferous  Upper  Ludlow  rock.    On  the  same  occasion  we 


238  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

true  remains  of  fish,  such  as  defences  of  the  fins  of  sharklike  species, 
with  shagreen  or  skin,  jaws  and  teeth,  and  other  minute  fragments 
less  easily  determinable. 

Onchus  tenuistriatus,  PI.  35.,  f.  15 — 17.,  and  O.  Murchisoni,  f.  13. 
14.,  are  true  bony  fin  defences,  such  as  were  possessed  by  many  placoid 
fish  of  the  old  rocks.  Sphagodus,  f.  2.,  is  the  prickly  skin  of  some  such 
animal,  and  may  have  belonged  (as  suggested  by  M'Coy)  to  one  of 
these  species.  The  small  cushion-like  bodies,  f.  18.,  called  formerly 
Thelodus  parvidens  by  Agassiz,  and  which  occur  by  myriads  in  the 
stratum^  often  forming  large  portions  of  its  thin  layers,  are  certainly 
the  granules  of  the  skin,  or  shagreen,  of  one  or  other  of  these  two 
common  species.  The  remarkable  jaws  and  teeth,  f.  3.  to  8.,  first 
figured  in  my  former  work,  and  named  by  Agassiz,  Plectrodus  mirabilis 
and  P.  (Sclerodus)  pustuliferus  (f.  9.)  must  be  regarded  still  as  the  jaws 
and  anchylosed  teeth  of  some  of  these  small  but  predaceous  fish.  Prof. 
M*Coy,  however,  is  inclined  to  refer  these  bodies  to  the  order  of  crusta- 
ceans, an  opinion  in  which  Messrs.  Sowerby  and  Salter  do  not  concur. 
Their  texture,  say  they,  is  solid,  bony,  and  retains  in  the  fossils  the 
jet-like  lustre  which  the  other  bony  fragments  exhibit.  Then,  as 
additional  evidence  of  the  predaceous  habits  of  these  fish,  there  are  the 
coprolitic  bodies  (f.21. — 28.),  which,  by  Dr.  Prout's  analysis,  contain 
the  due  admixture  *  of  phosphate  and  carbonate  of  lime,  with  other 
matters,  and  retain  imbedded  in  them  the  various  small  mollusca  and 
crinoids  which  inhabited  the  sea  bottom  in  company  with  the  fish.  It 
thus  appears,  that  Bellerophon,  Holopella,  Lingula,  Orbicula,  and 
Orthis,  were  all  preyed  upon  by  these  minute  but  dominant  creatures ; 

observed,  that  the  only  remains  of  small  land  plants,  one  of  which  seemed  to  be  a 
stem,  as  well  as  the  numerous  seeds  ("  spore-cases  of  Lycopodiacese,"  Dr.  Hooker), 
occurred  in  beds  above  the  uppermost  fish-layer,  and  therefore  at  tJie  very  top  of 
the  Ludlow  formation^  just  beneath  the  lowest  beds  of  the  Old  Red^  in  which  we 
found  a  Cephalaspis  ;  the  two  deposits  being  there  conformably  juxta-posed.  See 
Ch.  X. 

*  Sil.  Syst.  pp.  199.  607. 


Chap.  IX.]  UPPERMOST  SILURIAN  FISHES.  239 

and  the  half-digested  shells  remain  here,  as  in  the  coprolites  of  fish  of 
many  later  formations,  to  attest  the  character  of  their  food,  and  the 
extent  of  their  depredations. 

Fourteen  years  have  now  elapsed  since  I  proclaimed  that  these  fishes 
of  the  Upper  Ludlow  rock  appeared  before  geologists  for  the  first 
time  as  the  most  ancient  beings  of  their  class  *  ;  and  all  the  subsequent 
researches  in  the  various  parts  of  the  world  over  which  Silurian 
rocks  have  been  found  to  extend,  have  failed  to  add  to  or  modify 
this  generalization.  In  other  countries,  indeed,  besides  our  own,  as 
in  America  and  Bohemia,  one  or  two  ichthyolites  have  been  dis- 
covered within  the  pale  of  the  Silurian  rocks ;  but  there,  as  with 
us,  they  are  merely  found  on  the  outer  threshold  of  the  system,  and 
very  sparingly.  We  may,  therefore,  fairly  regard  the  Silurian 
system,  on  the  whole,  as  representing  a  long,  early  period,  in  which 
no  vertebrated  animals  had  been  called  into  existence. 

But  here  we  must  recollect  that,  when  first  created,  the  Onchus  of 
the  uppermost  Silurian  rock  was  a  fish  of  the  highest  and  most 
composite  order ;  and  that  it  exhibits  no  symptom  whatever  of  transi- 
tion from  a  lower  to  a  higher  grade  of  the  family,  any  more  than  the 
crustaceans,  cephalopods,  and  other  shells  of  the  lowest  fossiliferous 
rocks ;  all  of  which  offer  the  same  proofs  of  elaborate  organization. 
In  short,  the  first  created  fish,  like  the  first  forms  of  those  other 
orders,  was  just  as  marvellously  constructed  as  the  last  which  made 
its  appearance,  or  is  now  living  in  our  seas. 

In  closing,  then,  this  sketch  of  the  first  great  or  Lower  Pa- 
laeozoic system  of  life,  as  exhibited  in  the  most  typical  region  of 
Britain,  it  may  truly  be  said,  that  the  geologist  who  stands  on  the 
summit  of  the  Silurian  rocks  of  Shropshire  and  Herefordshire,  and 
casts  his  eye  westward  over  the  mountains  of  Wales,  sees  nothing 
but  ancient  masses  in  which,  though  replete  with  copious  animal 
remains  of  pre-existing  shores  and  deep  sea  bottoms,  no  traces  of 

*  Sil.  Syst.  c.  xlv.  p.  606. 


240  SILURIA.  [Chap.  IX. 

vertebrata  have  ever  been  detected.  In  looking  eastward,  on  the 
contrary,  he  has  before  him  hills  of  red  sandstone,  the  lower  strata 
of  which  immediately  overlap  the  fish  beds  of  the  Ludlow  rocks,  and 
in  those  he  finds  that  fishes  are,  on  the  contrary,  the  characteristic 
fossils. 

Examining  upwards  from  that  first  great  piscina  of  antiquity,  the 
Old  Ked  Sandstone  or  Devonian,  which  will  be  considered  in  the  next 
chapter,  the  geologist  has  ascertained,  that  all  the  other  superjacent 
and  younger  strata,  whether  of  primary,  secondary,  or  tertiary  age, 
are  more  or  less  characterized  by  containing  ichthyolites.  In  other 
words,  the  one  or  two  small  fishes  which  we  have  just  been  consider- 
ing, may  be  viewed  as  the  heralds  which  announced  the  close  of  the 
Silurian  aera,  and  the  introduction  of  the  numerous  other  families 
of  this  class,  which  thenceforward  are  found  in  sediments  of  every 
succeeding  age.  The  name  Silurian  marks,  therefore,  the  first  series 
of  fossiliferous  deposits,  throughout  the  great  mass  in  which  no  verte- 
brated  animals  have  anywhere  been  discovered. 


Chap.  X.J 


DEVONIAN  ROCKS  OF  BRITAIN. 


241 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  DEVONIAN   ROCKS,  OR  OLD  RED  SANDSTONE,  AS  EXHIBITED  IN  THE 

BRITISH  ISLES. 

Having  explored  at  some  length  the  lowest  known  burial-places  of 
former  beings,  a  shorter  consideration  only  can  be  devoted  to  the 
younger  races  which  successively  occupied  the  higher  tiers  in  the 
vast  Necropolis  of  primeval  life. 

During  the  accumulation  of  nearly  all  the  Silurian  deposits,  as 
characterized  by  a  certain  fauna,  the  bottom  of  the  sea  was,  to  a  very 
wide  extent,  successively  occupied  by  deposits  of  dark  grey-coloured 
mud.  At  the  close  of  that  period  a  great  change  occurred  in  the 
nature  and  colour  of  the  sediment,  over  large  areas  of  those  ancient 
seas.  In  and  around  the  Silurian  region  of  Britain,  for  example, 
the  grey  mud  was  succeeded  by  red  deposits,  for  the  most  part 
sandy ;  their  colour  being  caused  by  the  diffusion  of  iron  oxides  in 
their  waters.*  These  physical  changes  were  accompanied  by  the 
disappearance  of  those  tenants  of  the  deep,  whose  records  we  have 
been  tracing,  and  by  the  creation  of  other  animals  suited  to  the 
altered  conditions. 

The  passage  upwards  from  the  highest  strata  of  the  Silurian  rocks 
into  such  red  deposits  of  England  and  South  Wales,  has  already 
been  alluded  to  f,  and  illustrated  by  several  diagrams. 

In  the  lower  junction  beds,  as  seen  within  the  Silurian  region, 

*  See  some  excellent  observations  on  the  influence  of  iron  oxides  on  marine 
life,  by  Sir  H.  De  la  Beche,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 
vol.  i.  p.  51. 

t  Pp.  49.  73.  75.  126.  140.  &c. 

B 


242  SILURIA.  [Chap.  X. 

it  is  only  by  the  detection  of  Upper  Ludlow  fossils  in  thin  beds  or 
tilestones,  which  are  often  of  reddish  colours,  that  the  limit  can  be 
defined,  so  gradual  is  the  mineral  transition  from  the  strata  of 
the  one  era  into  those  of  the  other.  Still,  the  change  is  on 
the  whole  well  marked ;  and  nothing  can  be  more  in  contrast,  in 
that  region,  than  the  overlying  yellow  and  red  masses,  and  the 
underlying  grey  Silurian  rocks. 

Good  evidences  of  this  succession  are  to  be  seen  near  Ludlow 
and  between  that  town  and  the  Clee  Hills,  and  thence  all  along  the 
eastern  edge  of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks  in  Radnor  and  Brecon,  as 
well  as  on  the  west  flank  of  the  Malvern  and  May  Hills,  and 
around  the  valley  of  Woolhope.  But  the  grandest  exhibitions  of 
the  Old  Red  Sandstone  in  England  and  Wales  appear  in  the  escarp- 
ments of  the  Black  Mountain  of  Herefordshire,  and  in  those  of  the 
loftiest  mountains  of  South  Wales,  the  Fans  of  Brecon  and  Caermar- 
then ;  the  one  2860,  the  other  2590,  feet  above  the  sea.  (See  Map.) 

In  no  other  tract  of  the  world  which  I  have  visited,  is  there  seen 
such  a  mass  of  red  rocks  (estimated  at  a  thickness  of  not  less  than 
8000  to  10,000  feet)  so  clearly  intercalated  between  the  Silurian 
and  the  carboniferous  strata.  For,  whilst  in  the  fore  and  middle 
grounds  all  the  rocks  are  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian,  as  before 
described  (pp.  75,  76.),  the  distant  mountains  are  entirely  composed 
of  Old  Red  Sandstone  (as  represented  in  the  highest  of  the  opposite 
diagrams),  the  observer  has  only  to  repair  to  their  southern  slopes, 
beyond  the  line  of  vision  in  the  sketch,  and  he  will  there  see  the 
uppermost  beds  of  the  red  rocks  conformably  overlaid  by  the  car- 
boniferous limestone  of  the  Great  South  Welsh  coal  basin.  (See 
lower  diagram.) 

Whilst  then,  the  opposite  pictorial  sketch  represents  the  whole  re- 
gion from  the  Lower  Silurian  slates  to  the  summit  of  the  Old  Red,  the 
other  diagram,  taken  from  one  of  the  coloured  sections  of  the  Silurian 
System,  indicates  the  copious  succession  of  red  strata,  which  are 


244  SILUKIA.  [Chap.  X. 

exposed  between  the  Upper  Silurian,  g,  of  the  Treweme  Hills,  and 
the  carboniferous  rocks,  g,  h,  i,  of  the  Great  South  Welsh  coal  field 
near  Abergavenny. 

Consisting  of  red  and  green  shale  and  flagstone,  h,  with  some  whitish 
sandstone  (c)  in  its  lower  parts,  the  central  and  largest  portion  of  the 
deposit  is  composed  of  spotted  green  and  red  clays  and  marls,  d,  which 
afford  on  decomposition  the  soil  of  the  richest  tracts  of  Brecknock, 
Monmouth,  Hereford,  a  large  portion  of  Salop,  and  small  parts  of 
Gloucester  and  Worcester.  These  argillaceous  beds  alternate,  indeed, 
with  sandstones,  occasionally  of  great  thickness.  They  also  contain 
many  irregular  courses  of  mottled  red  and  green,  earthy  limestones, 
termed  "  Cornstone,"  and  which,  usually  consisting  only  of  small 
concretionary  lumps,  expand  here  and  there  into  large  subcrystal- 
line  masses,  as  on  the  western  face  of  the  Brown  Clee  Hills,  Salop. 
The  highest  member  of  the  series  is  composed  of  red  and  chocolate- 
coloured,  fine-grained,  micaceous  sandstones  and  flagstones,  which, 
after  alternations  with  other  mottled  marls  and  cornstones,  pass  up- 
wards into  pebbly  beds  and  conglomerates,  and  in  that  state  form  the 
encircling  underlying  edge  (y)  of  the  Great  South  Welsh  coal  basin. 
These  last-mentioned  rocks  are  as  well  exposed  in  the  lofty  escarp- 
ments of  the  Fans  of  Caermarthen  and  Brecon  above  alluded  to, 
as  in  the  range  of  hills  near  Abergavenny  on  the  south  bank  of  the 
river  Usk.  Similar  hard  sandstones  and  conglomerates  form  in  like 
manner  a  symmetrical  girdle  to  the  coal  basin  of  the  Forest  of 
Dean,  Gloucestershire  (see  Map),  where,  and  in  the  gorges  of  the 
Wye,  as  well  as  in  the  adjacent  and  much  larger  basin  of  South 
Wales,  they  are  everywhere  conformably  overlaid  by  the  shale  and 
limestone  which  form  the  base  of  the  carboniferous  rocks.  In  short, 
the  above  generalized  section  gives  an  idea  of  the  prevalent  dis- 
tribution of  the  strata  in  and  around  the  original  Siluria. 

Xow,  whilst  in  all  that  region,  the  only  organic  remains  which 
have  been  found  in  this  great  red  and  green  series  are  fragments  ot 


Chap.  X.]     OLD  RED  SANDSTONE — ENGLAND  AND  WALES.  245 

fossil  fishes,  we  shall  presently  see,  that  under  mineral  conditions  to  a 
great  extent  similar,  the  widely  spread  Old  Red  Sandstone  of  Scot- 
land, which  is  of  like  age,  has  also  yielded  scarcely  any  other  class 
of  animals.  This  fact  is  in  striking  contrast  to  all  that  has  been  said 
of  the  contiguous  and  inferior  Silurian  rocks ;  in  which  no  trace  of  a 
vertebrated  creature  has  been  found,  except  in  those  highest  beds 
which  usher  into  the  natural  group  under  consideration,  —  or  the 
earliest  known  period  of  vertebrate  life. 

In  Herefordshire  and  Brecknockshire,  as  well  as  in  Shropshire, 
remains  of  ichthyolites  were  formerly  described  as  occurring  chiefly 
in  those  strata  where  calcareous  matter  is  most  diffused ;  fragments 
and  scales  being  often  found  in  the  cornstones,  though  the  best 
specimens  have  been  procured  in  the  finely  laminated  flagstones 
and  marls  which  are  in  the  vicinity  of  such  limestone.  These  fishes, 
none  of  which  were  known  to  geologists,  in  this  region,  before  the 
publication  of  my  larger  work,  consist  of  the  genera  named  by 
Agassiz,  Cephalaspis,  Onchus,  Ptychacanthus,  and  Holoptychius ; 
figures  of  which,  as  taken  from  the  "  Silurian  System,"  are  given  in 
plates  36,  37.  Others  will  presently  be  noticed  in  treating  of  the 
Scottish  rocks  of  similar  age. 

The  lowest  strata  of  the  Old  Red,  in  which  I  have  personally 
observed  the  remains  of  the  peculiar  fish  Cephalaspis,  is  at  the  western 
slope  of  the  Silurian  ridge  of  May  Hill.*  In  recently  examining  the 
cuttings  of  the  Ross  railroad,  near  Flaxley,  Mr.  H.  E.  Strickland  t  and 
myself  detected  a  fragment  of  that  ichthyolite  in  the  very  lowest  beds 
of  the  Old  Red,  which,  containing  also  certain  land  plants,  there  lie 

*  See  Sil.  Sjst.  PL  36.  f.  13. 

■\  The  passage  of  this  sheet  through  the  press  having  been  delayed  until  I  re- 
turned from  a  tour  in  Germany,  I  learn  with  profound  grief,  upon  my  arrival,  of 
the  lamentable  catastrophe  by  which,  in  examining  another  railroad  cutting,  my 
distinguished  friend,  Mr.  H.  E.  Strickland,  has  been  taken  away  from  those  sciences 
of  which  he  was  so  ardent  a  promoter  and  so  great  an  ornament.  The  correction 
of  these  pages  by  his  hand,  during  my  absence,  was  one  of  the  last  memorials  of  a 
friendship  which  T  truly  cherished.   Sept.  22,  1853.— R.  I.  M. 


246  SILURIA.  [Chap.  X. 

in  apparent  conformity  upon  the  uppermost  Ludlow  rocks.  This 
close  superposition  of  the  lowest  member  of  the  Old  Ked  Sandstone 
to  the  fish  beds  of  the  Upper  Ludlow,  each  stratum  containing 
distinct  ichthyolites,  is  a  fact  confirmatory  of  the  view  of  Agassiz. 
that  those  animals  are  very  exact  indicators  of  the  age  of  rocks. 

When  we  follow  this  series  of  red  beds  from  Caermarthen  into 
Pembrokeshire,  considerable  litholoo^cal  changes  are  seen  to  occur. 
Though  the  prevailing  colour  is  still  red  (the  "  red  rab"  of  this 
county),  some  portions  of  the  rocks  consist  of  dull  green  and 
yellow  flags  or  sandstones,  and  others  of  hard  grey  grits,  which  even 
resemble  certain  inferior  Silurian  deposits;  ^vhilst  no  true  corn- 
stone  or  limestone  occurs,  nor  have  traces  of  fossil  fishes  been  there 
detected.  Yet,  the  strata  in  question  occupy  precisely  the  same 
geological  horizon  as  in  the  tracts  of  England  and  TTales  previously 
mentioned,  and  lie  just  as  clearly  between  the  Silurian  and  carboni- 
ferous rocks,  as  in  the  section  before  given.  In  fact,  no  better 
sections  of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone  of  Britain,  in  relation  to  the  rocks 
beneath  and  above  it,  can  be  offered  than  are  exposed  around  the 
magnificent  land-locked  bay  of  Milford  Haven.  (See  Map.) 

We  shall  presently  show  the  order  of  succession  in  vast  masses  of 
strata  of  the  same  age  under  a  different  and  more  slaty  aspect  on  the 
south  side  of  the  Bristol  Channel  in  Devonshire,  and  indicate  that, 
with  a  great  increase  in  calcareous  matter,  they  contain  a  much 
larger  number  of  imbedded  animal  remains. 

Let  us  previously  glance  at  that  country,  where,  preserviog 
much  of  the  same  mineral  character  as  in  the  parts  of  England 
just  mentioned,  the  group  is  more  grandly  displayed  as  a  red  sand- 
stone than  in  any  other  part  of  northern  Europe. 

Old  Red  Sandstone  of  Scotland. — Dwindling  away  from  its  copious 
development  in  Brecon,  Hereford,  and  Salop,  the  Old  Red  Sandstone 
becomes  in  the  north  of  England,  as  before  stated,  little  more  than  a 
smgle  band  of  coarse  conglomerate,  which  lies  unconformably,  as  a 
small  skirting  mass  between  the  Silurian  and  carboniferous  deposits 


Chap.  X.]  OLD  RED  SANDSTONE  OF  SCOTLAND.  247 

of  the  lake  region  of  Cumberland.  This  mere  fragment  of  a  series 
so  copious  elsewhere,  there  reposes  on  the  truncated  edges  of  many 
of  the  older  strata. 

In  the  South  of  Scotland  where  the  lower  Silurian  strata  are  so 
fully  developed  and  the  uppermost  Silurian  (Ludlow  rocks)  have  not 
been  recognized,  the  great  hiatus  between  the  lower  rocks  and  the  coal 
fields  is  also  occasionally  occupied  by  old  red  conglomerates  only, 
which  range  transgressively  across  the  tops  of  the  inclined  layers  of 
the  older  Silurian  rocks.  Now,  although  in  that  southernmost  por- 
tion of  the  Scottish  region,  it  may  ever  be  impossible  systematically 
to  connect  the  Silurian  series  with  the  next  superior  formation,  on 
account  of  the  absence  of  a  large  portion  of  its  upper  members,  more 
close  and  accurate  researches  have  already  been  made,  which,  by 
marking  the  range  of  fossils,  still  more  clearly  define  the  upper  limits 
of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone,  and  thus  exhibit  an  ascending  order  into 
strata  of  sandstone,  limestone,  and  coal,  charged  with  true  carboni- 
ferous fossils.  This  has  been  shown  in  Fifeshire,  by  the  Rev.  Dr. 
Fleming*,  and  partially,  indeed,  on  the  east  coast  of  the  Lothians. 
Hereafter  the  same  upward  succession  will  doubtless  be  also 
ascertained  on  the  opposite  or  Ayrshire  coast,  whence  specimens 
of  fishes  of  the  species  of  Holoptychius,  which  occur  in  the  Old 
Red,  have  been  sent  to  me.f  It  is,  however,  in  the  North  of  Scot- 
land that  the  Old  Red  Sandstone  attains  its  full  development.  Yet 
even  there  it  wants  the  conformable  fossiliferous  Upper  Silurian 
base  which  has  been  described  in  Wales  and  England. 

I  have,  however,  alluded  to  indications  of  the  upper  member 
of  the  Silurian  rocks  that  seem  to  exist  in  Forfarshire,  and  par- 
ticularly on  the  flanks  of  the  Sidlaw  Hills,  where  the  grey,  Arbroath 
paving-stones  repose  upon  clay  slate,  and  contain  forms  of  the  lobster- 
like crustacean  Pterygotus,  which  approach  very  nearly  to,  if  they 

*  See  Edin.  Journ.  Nat.  Science,  vol.  3. 

t  By  Mr.  Alexander  McCallum,  of  Girvan,  who  found  them  near  the  Point  of  Ayr. 

R  4 


248  SILURIA.  [Chap.  X. 

are  not  identical  with  a  fossil  of  the  uppermost  Ludlow  rock.*  The 
general  section  over  a  part  of  that  region,  given  by  Sir  C.  Lyell  in 
the  last  edition  of  his  Manual  of  Geology,  seems  to  me  so  indicative 
of  the  clay  slate  which  underlies  the  Old  Red  being  also  an  equiva- 
lent of  some  Silurian  rock,  that  it  is  here  repeated. 

S.W.       TThiteness.  Sidlaw  Hills.  Stratlimore.  N.E. 


g        c        b        a  a  abed  c      b  a 

Section  across  the  Old  Red  of  Forfarshire 
a.  Clay  slate,   b.  Grey  paving  stone  and  tile  stone,  with  green  and  reddish  shale,  containing 
Pterygotus  and  fruit -like  bodies.     c.  Eed  conglomerate,    d.  Red  sandstone,    g.  Red  sliale 
or  marl,  unconformable  to  the  lower  rocks. 

I  have  further  suggested  theoretically,  that  Lower  Silurian  rocks, 
like  those  of  the  South  of  Scotland,  may,  in  large  portions  of  the 
Highlands,  have  been  converted  into  the  chloritic  and  micaceous 
schists.f    (See  p.  163.  ante.) 

Thus,  we  know  that  the  granitic  nuclei  of  the  Grampians  and 
their  western  prolongations,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Xorth  Highlands, 
are  often  enveloped  by  such  apparently  metamorphosed,  crystalline 
schists,  and  that  around  their  flanks,  flagstones  and  coarse  conglome- 
rates are  arranged.  In  general,  the  latter  form  the  base  of  the  great 
Scottish  system  of  Old  Eed  Sandstone,  which  in  some  parts  is  di- 
visible into  separate,  thick  bands,  and  is  seen  to  graduate  upwards, 
particularly  in  Fifeshire,  as  above  stated,  into  the  lowermost  beds  of 
the  carboniferous  system. 

Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself  first  pointed  out  the  true  {  general 
features  of  this  vast  deposit  in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  and 
showed  that  the  flagstones  of  Caithness,  with  their  numerous  ichthyo- 
lites  (Dipteri  and  Diplopteri),  formed  a  part  of  it.    To  Mr.  Hugh 

*  Quart.  Joiirn.  Geol.  See.  Lend.  toI.  vii.  p.  169. 
t  Ibid.  vol.  vii.  p.  168.;  vol.  viii.  p.  386. 

X  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  X.  S.,  vol.  3.  p.  125.  with  map  and  sections.  Dr. 
M'CuUoch  had  described  these  rocks  as  primary  san<lstones. 


Chap.  X.]  OLD  RED  SANDSTONE  OF  SCOTLAND.  249 

Miller,  however,  science  is  indebted,  for  expounding  the  wonderful 
organization  of  many  of  the  fossil  fishes  of  these  deposits,  and  for 
throwing  the  clear  lights  of  zoology  upon  what  was  formerly  a  very 
obscure  page  in  geological  history.* 

The  Old  Red  of  the  north  of  Scotland  is  justly  termed  by  Miller 
"  the  frame  "  in  which  the  crystalline  rocks  are  set.  In  other  words, 
it  is  the  rough  mantle  which  has  been  thrown  over  their  shoulders 
and  sides.  That  this  deposit  was  of  enormous  thickness  and  occupied 
a  very  long  period  in  its  formation,  is  manifest  to  every  one  who 
surveys  either  the  east  or  west  coasts  of  the  Highlands.  In  the  latter 
the  deposit  is  chiefly  known  as  a  coarse  conglomerate  or  a  hard  red 
sandstone,  which  rests  in  layers,  more  or  less  horizontal,  on  low  and 
gnarled  bosses  of  crystalline  gneiss  ;  out  of  which  and  other  ancient 
rocks  the  conglomerate  has  been  formed. 

This  view,  sketched  by  the  graphic  pencil  of  the  late  Duchess 
Countess  of  Sutherland,  exhibits  the  three  insulated  mountains  of 
Suil-vein,  Coul-beg,  and  Coul-more. 

Suil-vein.  Coul-beg.  Coul-more. 


Mountains  of  the  West  Coast  of  the  Highlands 
(as  sketched  from  the  sea  by  the  Duchess  Countess  of  Sutherland). 


*  The  British  reader  is,  or  ought  to  be,  familiar  with  the  "Old  Red  Sandstone" 
Miller ;  but  as  my  volume  may  fall  into  the  hands  of  foreigners,  perchance 
lacquainted  with  that  work,  let  me  urge  them  to  refer  to  it,  not  only  as  an 


250 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  X. 


I  have  gazed  in  wonder  at  these  mountains  from  a  boat  off  the 
western  shore,  not  only  as  'proofs  of  the  long  period  during  which 
the  boulders,  pebbles,  and  sand  were  gathered  together  in  former 
seas,  but  still  more  as  evidences  of  the  enormous  subsequent  fur- 
rowing out  or  excavation  of  the  strata  which  at  one  period  filled  up 
such  deep  intervening  depressions  to  the  depth  of  upwards  of  two 
thousand  feet,  and  united  the  more  widely  separated  masses.*  These 
mountains,  which  extend  their  rugged  range  from  Ross  into  Suther- 
land, may  be  taken  as  samples  of  many  similar  rocks  that  occur  in 
other  parts,  of  the  Highlands ;  as  the  Ord  of  Caithness,  parts  of 
Easter  Ross  flanking  Ben  Wyvis,  the  slopes  of  Mealfourveny, 
Invernesshire,  and  the  sides  of  the  great  valley  extending  from 
S.W.  to  N.E.,  which  is  occupied  by  the  Caledonian  Canal. 

Such  conglomerates  and  sandstones,  having  often  derived  their 
red  colour  from  pre-existing  granitic  rocks  in  which  hematitic  iron  is 
much  diffused,  are  overlaid  (and  particularly  in  Caithness)  by  dark 
grey  micaceous  flagstones  and  schists,  in  which  fossil  fishes  abound ; 
and  these  again  by  other  sandstones,  usually  of  a  lighter  red  colour 
than  those  beneath,  in  which  ichthyolites  also  occur.  This  succession 
of  flagstone  and  red  sandstone  is  copiously  developed  in  the  Orkney 

eloquent  and  original  treatise,  but  also  as  singularly  instructive  and  well  calcu- 
lated to  incite  the  general  reader  to  the  study  of  geological  science.  (See  address 
of  Lord  John  Russell  to  the  Mechanics  of  Leeds.    Public  Journals  of  1853.) 

*  In  an  able  memoir  on  the  former  glacial  condition  of  the  surface  of  the  High- 
lands, by  Mr.  Robert  Chambers,  (Edin.  Phil.  Journ.  April,  1853)  this  enormous 
denudation,  first  described  by  Dr.  Macculloch  in  his  Western  Islands,  vol.  ii.  p.  93., 
is  hypothetically  referred  to  the  furrowing  action  of  ice  and  glaciers.  In  this 
volume  it  is  impossible  to  go  into  the  discussion  of  that  very  recent  geological 
cause — ice-action,  of  the  effects  of  which  there  are  no  signs  whatever  in  the 
primary  or  secondary  or  even  in  the  older  tertiary  rocks.  Admiring  the  ability 
and  research  displayed  in  the  memoir  of  Mr.  R.  Chambers,  I  cannot,  however,  ad- 
mit that  this  vast  denudation  of  the  Western  Highlands  can  have  been  due  to 
any  operation  of  glaciers  or  icebergs  ;  though  very  powerful  debacles,  due  in  great 
measure  to  the  melting  of  ice  masses,  may  have  somewhat  contributed  to  the 
final  result. 


Chap.  X.]  PISHES  OF  OLD  RED  SANDSTONE.  25} 

Islands,  and  is  partially  seen  in  Rosshire*  and  Invernesshire,  coun- 
ties in  which  the  lower  conglomerates  are  most  abundant.  It  was  in 
one  of  the  most  dislocated  and  therefore  most  obscure  of  those  tracts, 
the  coast  of  Cromarty,  that  Mr.  Hugh  Miller  detected  his  remark- 
able nondescript  fishes,  and,  from  a  few  fragments,  so  admirably  as- 
signed to  them  their  peculiar  attributes  and  their  proper  place  in  the 
animal  kingdom. 

On  the  south  side  of  the  Murray  Frith,  the  mineral  succession 
is  somewhat  varied  by  the  interpolation  of  large  masses  of  concre- 
tionary, greenish  and  reddish  limestone  or  cornstone,  in  which,  as 
well  as  in  the  conglomerates  below, — and  in  the  shale,  flagstones  and 
sandstones  above  them,  —  ichthyolites  have  been  found,  and  in  some 
places  very  largely.f 

Now,  among  the  fishes  which  most  abound  in  the  lower  group, 
whether  composed  of  conglomerate,  sandstone,  flagstone,  schist,  or 
clay,  with  calcareous  nodules,  or  cornstone,  one  of  the  most  remark- 
able is  the  Pterlchthys,  that  singular  winged  fish  J,  of  which  a  wood- 
cut is  here  given. 

Fossils,  47. 
Old  Red  Sandstone  Fish. 


Underside  of  Pterichthys  cornutus,  Agassiz,  from  Morayshire. 


♦  See  Trans.  Geol.  See.  2d  series,  vol.  iii.  p.  125.  with  map  of  the  High- 
lands. 

f  The  late  Lady  Gordon  Gumming,  of  Altyre,  was  the  discoverer  of  many  of  these 
ichthyolites,  and  the  exquisite  manner  in  which  that  lady  and  her  eldest  daughter 
sketched  and  coloured  them,  is  duly  recorded  in  the  pages  of  Agassiz's  classic 
work.    (See  Poissons  du  Vieux  Gres  Eouge,  passim.) 

J  See  the  striking  description  of  this  ichthyolite  by  its  discoverer,  Hugh 
Miller,  "  Old  Red  Sandstone,"  p.  46. 


252  SILURIA.  [Chap.  X. 

Another  is  the  Cephalaspis,  Ag.,  which,  occurring,  as  before  stated, 
in  the  Eng^lish  Old  Red,  abounds  also  in  the  Scottish  rocks  of  the  same 
age  (see  PI.  37.).  This  fish,  with  its  large  buckler-shaped  head  and 
its  thin  body,  jointed  somewhat  like  a  lobster,  is  perhaps  the  most 
remarkable  example  of  a  fish  of  apparently  so  intermediate  a  cha- 
racter, that  the  detached  portions  of  its  head  when  first  found  were 
supposed  to  belong  to  crustaceans.* 

Then,  there  is  the  very  singularly  shaped  creature  the  Coccos- 
teus,  Ag.     One   sgeciesis   represented  in  the  present  woodcut, 


Fossils,  48. 
Old  Eed  Fish. 


Coccosteus  decipiens,  Agassiz,  somewhat  restored.f 

which  also  through  the  ingenuity  of  Hugh  Miller  was  first  put 
together  from  small  detached  pieces.  That  author  has  well  said 
it  required  all  the  skill  of  Agassiz  to  determine  that  the  un- 
couth Coccosteus  and  the  equally  uncouth  Pterichthys,  with  their 
long  articulated  tails  and  tortoise-like  plates,  were  bond  fide  fishes. 

At  the  same  time,  no  one  could  observe  even  fragments  of  many 
other  fossils,  such  as  those  which  were  first  published  by  myself  from 
the  flagstones  of  Caithness,  and  not  recognize  that  they  are  parts 
of  fishes.     Such,  for  instance,  are  the  Dipterus  and  Diplopteriis 

*  ]Mr.  Miller  has  requested  his  readers  to  compare  the  head  of  the  Asa- 
phus  (now  Phacops)  caudatus,  a  well-known  Silurian  trilobite,  with  that  of 
Cephalaspis  Lyellii,  to  illustrate  how  the  two  orders  of  crustaceans  and  fishes 
aeem  here  to  meet, — in  the  view  of  persons  who  have  not  mastered  the  subject. — 
"  Old  Red  Sandstone,"  p.  54. 

j  A  perfectly  restored  head  of  this  fish  is  given  in  ]\Ir.  Miller's  eloquent 
work,  the  "Footprints  of  the  Creator,"  p-  50.    Edinburgh,  1850. 


Chap.  X.]  FISHES  OF  OLD  RED  SANDSTONE.  253 

described  by  Cuvier, — such  are  the  subsequently  discovered 
genera,  Osteolepis,  Glyptolepis,  Cheirolepis,  Diplacanthus  *,  and 
Cheiracanthus,  Agassiz,  most  of  which  have  several  species.!  A 
drawing  of  one  of  the  Caithness  fishes  is  here  given. 

Fossils,  49. 
Old  Ked  Ganoid  Fish. 


Dipterus  macrolepidotus,  Ag.  —  from  the  black  schists  of  Caithness. 

The  upper  division  of  the  Scottish  Old  Red,  whether  consisting  of 
red  and  mottled  marls,  and  sandstone  beneath,  or  of  overlying  yellow 
and  whitish  sandstone,  which,  as  before  said,  immediately  supports 
the  coal  fields  of  Fifeshire,  is  chiefly  characterized  by  fishes  of 
the  genus  Holoptychius  —  the  finest  specimen  of  which  ever  seen 
is  the  H.  Nobilissimus,  first  represented  in  PI.  2.  bis.  of  the  ^  Silurian 
System, '  now  in  the  British  Museum,  and  named  by  Agassiz  at  my 
request  after  the  discoverer,  Mr.  Noble. 

In  short,  the  Scottish  Old  Eed  Sandstone,  as  a  whole,  has  afforded 
not  less  than  sixty-five  genera  and  species  of  fishes.  Yet  with  this 
abundance  of  one  class,  we  have  in  Scotland  no  traces  of  those 
marine  mollusca  and  zoophytes  which  occur  elsewhere,  and  which,  in 

*  The  vigilant  eye  of  Hugh  Miller  detected  a  land  plant,  probably  the 
oldest  Conifer  ever  yet  seen,  in  the  lower  Old  Red  at  Cromarty,  associated  with 
scales  of  the  Diplacanthus.  "Footprints  of  the  Creator,"  pp.  197.  199.  The  sup- 
posed fern  (ib.,  p.  194.)  is  from  Orkney  (see  ih.^  p.  254.). 

t  These  Caithness  fishes  were  first  noticed  in  my  memoir  on  the  Brora  coal. 
Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  N.  S.  voL  ii.  p.  314.  They  were  afterwards  partially  de- 
scribed by  Cuvier,  and  placed  in  their  proper  geological  position  by  Professor  Sedg- 
wick and  myself.  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  iii.  2d  Ser.  p.  142,  Plates  15, 16, 17. 


254  SILURIA.  [Chap.  X. 

some  countries,  as  will  hereafter  be  shown,  are  commingled  with 
fishes  like  those  of  Scotland,  in  deposits  of  the  same  age. 

Shells,  though  very  scarce,  have,  however,  been  found,  and  were 
indeed  alluded  to  many  years  ago  by  Hugh  Miller,  as  certain  unde- 
scribed  mollusks.  The  occurrence  of  better  specimens  and  a  mi- 
nuter attention  to  them  has  led  to  the  opinion  that  they  had  a  fresh- 
water origin,  and  may  possibly  be  considered  species  of  Cyclas. 
Again,  the  researches  of  the  last  two  years  have  brought  to  light 
a  still  more  remarkable  and  truer  denizen  of  former  lands  in  the 
small  air-breathing  reptile,  Telerpeton  Elginense,  Mantell,  of  which 
a  figure  is  here  given. 


Fossils,  50. 
Reptile  of  the  Upper  Old  Eed. 


Telerpeton  Elginense,  Mant.    {Somewhat  less  than  natural  size.) 


Now,  this  the  oldest  known  reptile,  was  found*  in  the  light- 
coloured  sandstones  of  Elgin,  on  the  south  side  of  the  Murray  Firth 
—  strata  which  were  classed  by  Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself  as  the 
upper  division  of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone,  and  as  being  superior  to  the 
central  flags  with  many  ichthyolites.  The  same  rock  occupies  a 
similar  position  in  Ross,  Caithness,  and  the  Orkney  Islands  f,  and  the 

*  See  Mantell's  description  of  this  animal,  as  found  by  Mr.  P.  Duff,  of  Elgin, 
and  brought  into  notice  in  reference  to  the  strata  and  to  certain  tracks  of  an  animal 
in  this  sandstone,  by  Capt.  Brickenden,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  viii.  p.  97. 

t  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  iii.  2d  Ser.  p.  130.  1828. 


Chap.  X.] 


PLANTS  OF  OLD  RED  SANDSTONE. 


255 


same  order  of  sequence,  as  in  the  mainland,  has  even  been  observed  in 
the  Shetland  Isles.  Hence  it  is  inferred,  that  certain  land  plants  * 
recently  brought  from  the  sandstone  of  Lerwick  in  Shetland,  and 
which  Dr.  Hooker  has  referred  to  Calamites  of  species  differing  from 
those  of  the  carboniferous  rocks,  belong  to  the  same  formation  as 
the  small  reptile  of  Elgin  and  the  freshwater  shells  alluded  to. 
Again,  in  the  uppermost  old  red  or  Devonian  of  Ireland,  the  govern- 
ment surveyors  have  recently  found  at  Knocktopher,  in  the  county 
of  Kilkenny,  large  freshwater  bivalves,  and  certain  species  of  tree 
ferns  differing  from  any  known  to  botanists  in  the  overlying  coal 
formation.  In  this  Irish  case  there  is  no  more  ambiguity  than  in 
certain  Devonian  plant-bearing  beds,  which  will  be  described,  in 
Devonshire  and  other  countries.  In  fact,  the  Irish  strata  in  question 
rise  out  from  beneath  the  very  lowest  strata  referred  to  the  carboni- 
ferous system,  and  besides  the  plants  contain  fossil  fishes  (Coccos- 
teus),  which  unquestionably  pertain  to  the  Old  Red  in  Scotland. 
One  of  these  plants,  the  Cyclopteris  Hibernicus,  E.  Forbes,  is 
here  figured,  as  belonging  to  one  of  the  oldest  of  the  clearly  defined 
tree  ferns  which  have  been  discovered  in  the  crust  of  the  globe. 


Fossils,  51. 
Old  Red  Sandstone  Plant. 


Cyclopteris  Hibernicus, 
Forbes.  Proc.  Brit.  Assoc. 
1852. 


*  The  plants  in  question  were  brought  from  Lerwick  by  the  Eight  Hon.  H. 
TufFnell,  and  when  presented  by  him  to  the  Geological  Society,  I  confirmed  my 
own  views  of  their  position,  not  only  by  reference  to  the  work  of  Dr.  Hibbert,  but 
by  consulting  Dr.  Traill  and  the  Rev.  Dr.  A.  Fleming,  both  of  whom  have  visited 
Shetland,  and  are  well  acquainted  with  its  rocks.  The  latter  had  observed  plants 
many  years  ago  in  the  sandstones  of  the  Shetland  Isles.  (See  Quart.  Journ.  Geol. 
Soc.  Lond.  vol.  ix.  p.  49.,  and  H.  Miller,  on  Plants,  ante,  p.  253.) 


256 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  X. 


•UI.V\i3l[a3J 


A*  i  o  i  .5 

11.1 -s? 

^      a  B 

C    *-!   e  « 

1  I  .3  ^ 
1<5  8  *  I 

«     <»     2  m 

^  S  H  ^  S 

^  -3  2  2  a 
"S  S  s  a> 
r2  *^  .2  ^-=3 

^  S  E?  a,  f 


m  »  " 

c«  .2  o  ^  >> 

O  H   «  5 
OS 


I  ^  w  1 2  ^ 

s  o  fl  *^  <n 


■5  ^  *  0  °  js 

te:  S    C  "3    «  " 

^  -2  «^ 

§  g  2  "  ^  ^ 

Q>  eS  .SO) 


o  <» 


f3  « 


«3  S  'I'  t; 


2  g  o 

•2  g  g 

S  2  tn 

C3  <»  (-" 

o 


«  s  «  -S 


.s 

"S 


S     '3  '^3 

3    5    m     Sa,  +J 


^  2  S 


0_^o&i<:S^jS-^2'-'n?"-' 

22  ^  2      5.:^  "  >>5     ^  § 

^  ^  -2  J  i  i  I  22  i  ^  I  §  I 

il  §  &  o  §  ill  o 

f  .a  ^Jl  ^.gg 

I  ^      5  ^  -S  1  «  1  3  ^ 


o  *» 


a 

O  cS 


O  o 


O 


o    <D  ^ 


05  ^ 


o  a> 


a  ^ 


>■  «  o  fl  o  -2  ^ 


2  I' 

S  -3 


2'S:a  akS 


2  « 


O 


«  w  a 


^  ^    ^  a 


•5  .r^ 


1  ^  ?  ^ 

a  ill 

O)  .S 


^  eS  ^  '-S  ,fl 

S)2.2  -9  I- I 


C    S    «  X 


c4 

5^  i 


5  G 


oj    «    CS  cs  o  o 

o  ^  pq  ^  « 

-v.  «  2  9  <» 

o  ^  -S  J 


2"  w  ^      S  .2  '3 


c2  ^ 


"  s  »  ^  a  ^ 

cr  to  es  X3  CO  ^ 


Chap.  X.]  DEVONIAN  OP  DEVON  AND  CORNWALL.  257 

Devonian  Rocks  {the  equivalents  of  the  Old  Red)  in  Devon  and 
Cornwall.  —  The  crystalline  and  slaty  condition  of  most  of  the 
stratified  deposits  in  Devon  and  Cornwall,  and  their  association  with 
granitic  and  eruptive  rocks  and  much  metalliferous  matter,  might 
well  induce  the  earlier  geologists  to  class  them  as  among  the  very 
oldest  deposits  of  the  British  Isles.  In  truth,  the  south-western 
extremity  of  England  presented  apparently  no  regular  sedimentary 
succession,  by  which  its  grey,  slaty  schists,  marble  limestones,  and 
silicious  sandstones  could  be  connected  with  any  one  of  the  British 
deposits  the  age  of  which  was  well  ascertained.  The  establishment 
of  the  Silurian  System,  and  the  proofs  it  afforded  of  the  entire 
separation  of  its  fossils  from  those  of  the  Carboniferous  era,  was 
the  first  step  which  led  to  a  right  understanding  of  the  age  of 
these  deposits.  The  next  was  the  proof  obtained  by  Professor 
Sedgwick  and  myself,  that  the  "  culm  measures"  of  Devon  were 
truly  of  the  age  of  the  carboniferous  limestone,  and  that  they 
graduated  downwards  into  some  of  the  slaty  rocks  of  this  region. 
Hence,  in  the  sequel  it  became  manifest,  that  the  rocks  now 
under  consideration,  were  the  immediate  and  natiiral  precursors 
of  the  coal  era,  and  stood  therefore  in  the  place  of  the  Old  Red 
Sandstone  of  other  regions.  The  highly  important  deduction,  how- 
ever, of  Mr.  Lonsdale,  that  the  fossils  of  the  South  Devon  lime- 
stones, as  collected  by  Mr.  Austen  and  others,  really  exhibited  a 
character  intermediate  between  those  of  the  Silurian  system  and  of 
the  carboniferous  limestone,  was  the  most  cogent  reason  which 
induced  Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself  (after  identifying  North 
and  South  Devon)  to  propose  the  term  Devonian.*  The  inference 
that  the  stratified  rocks  of  Devonshire  and  Cornwall,  though  of  such 
varied  composition,  are  really  the  equivalents  of  the  Old  Eed 

*  See  Reports  of  Brit.  Assoc.  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  1836.  Bristol 
Meeting.  Sedgwick  and  Murchison,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  v.  p.  633.,  and 
Phil.  Mag.  vol.  xi.  p.  311.    Lonsdale,  supra. 

S 


258 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  X. 


Sandstone  in  the  regions  alluded  to,  has  since,  indeed,  been  amply 
supported  and  extended  by  the  researches  of  Sir  Henry  De  la 
Beche,  Professor  Phillips,  and  many  other  good  geologists.* 

The  most  instructive  of  the  sections  published  by  my  colleague 
and  myself  to  illustrate  the  general  structure  of  Devonshire,  is  that 
of  v^hich  the  diagram  in  p.  256.  is  a  compiled  reduction,  f  It  is  a 
section  across  North  Devon  from  the  Foreland  on  the  Bristol  Chan- 
nel, to  the  granitic  ridge  of  Dartmoor  on  the  south,  and  exhibits  a 
copious  succession  of  the  Devonian  rocks  between  Linton  and  II- 
fracombe  on  the  north,  and  Barnstaple  on  the  south ;  the  whole 
dipping  under  strata  of  the  carboniferous  age  J,  on  the  opposite  side 
of  a  wide  trough  of  which,  or  on  the  north  flank  of  Dartmoor,  the 
Upper  Devonian  strata  again  rise  to  the  surface. 

North  Devon  has  thus  been  selected  as  affording,  on  the  whole,  the 
best  type  of  succession  of  the  rocks  to  which  the  name  Devonian  was 
applied ;  because  it  offers  a  clear  ascending  section  through  several 
thousand  feet  of  varied  strata,  until  we  reach  other  overlying  rocks, 
which  are  undeniably  the  bottom  beds  of  the  true  carboniferous 
group. 

For,  whether  we  advance  to  the  south  of  Barnstaple  from  the 
north,  or  to  the  north  of  Petherwin  from  the  edge  of  Dartmoor  on  the 
south  (section,  p.  256.),  we  find  ourselves  in  a  wide  §,  overlying  trough 
of  much  softer  nature,  and  in  which  the  slaty  character  does  not 

*  See  Report  on  the  Geology  of  Cornwall,  Devon,  and  W.  Somerset,  by  De  la 
Beche,  1839,  and  the  Palaeozoic  fossils  of  the  same  region,by  Professor  Phillips,  1841. 

t  See  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  2nd  Ser.  vol.  v.  pi.  L.  figs.  1.  and  2. 

J  The  coal-field  which  is  bituminous  in  Monmouth,  Glamorgan,  and  Carmarthen, 
becomes  anthracitic  in  Pembroke.  There  the  stone  coal,  much  fractured  by  dis- 
locations, differs  from  that  of  Devon  only  in  being  more  productive  in  broken 
culm  or  stone-coal. 

§  The  thickness  of  these  lower  carboniferous  strata  must  not  be  estimated  by  the 
breadth  which  they  occupy  on  a  geological  map :  for,  owing  to  countless  convolu- 
tions, the  very  same  beds  are  repeated  over  and  over.  The  bottom  beds  only  of 
these  undulations  or  small  portions  of  each  side  of  the  culm  trough  (g)  are  repre- 
sented in  the  section. 


Chap.  X.]  DEVONIAN  OF  SOUTH  DEVON.  259 

exist.  And,  although  this  overlying  series  is  in  mineral  aspect 
as  much  unlike  the  carboniferous  series  of  most  other  parts  of  Bri- 
tain, as  the  rocks  of  North  Devon  are  unlike  the  ordinary  Old  Eed 
Sandstone  of  Central  and  North  Britain,  we  have  clear  proofs,  besides 
the  analogy  with  Pembrokeshire  before  spoken  of,  that  the  Posi- 
donomya  black  limestone,  or  the  calcareous  band  (in  ^  of  the  previous 
section),  does  represent,  on  a  miniature  scale,  the  mountain  or  car- 
boniferous limestone;  that  the  next  series  of  white  grit  and  sand- 
stone stands  in  the  place  of  the  millstone  grit ;  and  that  the  over- 
lying courses  of  stone  coal  or  culm,  with  many  remains  of  plants, 
are  consequently  the  equivalents  of  some  of  the  coal-bearing  strata 
of  other  tracts  described  in  the  next  chapter. 

The  objections,  therefore,  (which  have,  however,  been  only  very 
partially  made)  to  the  view  taken  by  Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself, 
that  the  Devonian  rocks  of  the  above  section  are  the  true  representa- 
tives in  time  of  the  vast  deposits  of  Old  Red  Sandstone  of  Scotland 
and  England,  seem  to  me  to  be  quite  untenable.  In  truth,  the  long 
period  which  was  occupied  in  developing  those  enormously  thick 
deposits  must  have  produced  elsewhere  equivalent  accumulations ;  and 
the  vast  series  of  North  Devon  thus  occupies  precisely  the  position  of 
a  succession  of  strata  synchronous  to  that  of  the  Old  Ked  Sandstone. 
And,  as  every  geologist  knows,  that  the  crystalline  feature  of  slaty 
cleavage  has  been  impressed  upon  these  Devonian  rocks  long  after 
their  formation,  so  must  he  also  admit,  that  the  change  from  the  red 
sand  and  mud  of  Hereford,  Brecknock^  and  Caermarthen  to  the  red 
and  grey  mud  of  Devon,  is  by  no  means  abrupt,  but  resembles  the 
gradual  change  shown  in  Pembroke.  Nor,  is  there  any  difficulty  in 
supposing,  how  by  a  less  diffusion  of  iron,  and  under  dissimilar  sub- 
marine conditions,  the  southern  portion  of  the  area  of  the  very  same 
sea  should  have  less  of  the  red  and  sandy  character  than  the  northern. 

The  great  eruption  of  the  granite  of  Dartmoor,  which  affected  both 
the  Devonian  and  carboniferous  strata  in  contact  with  it,  has  so 


260 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  X. 


usurped  the  place  of  the  regular  deposits  in  South  Devon,  that  in 
vain  do  we  look,  either  in  that  district  or  in  Cornwall,  for  the  same 
clear  order  as  in  North  Devon.  In  fact,  the  derangement  in  the 
western  part  of  South  Devon  and  the  adjacent  parts  of  Cornwall  is 
so  great,  that  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  are  seen,  as  already  stated, 
to  overlie  true  Devonian  rocks!*  The  metamorphism  and  mine- 
ralization of  some  of  the  schists  has  indeed  been  carried  to  such  an 
extent,  that  they  often  resemble  the  oldest  primary  rocks. 

Still,  there  are  adequate  means  of  bringing  the  disjointed  and 
occasionally  inverted  masses  of  South  Devon  into  comparison  with 
the  clear  order  of  North  Devon. 

This  is  in  great  measure  accomplished  through  the  fossils f  of  its 
extensive  lower  limestones,  being  much  more  numerous  and  better 
preserved  than  those  of  like  age  in  North  Devon.  The  lowest  lime- 
stones, for  example,  which  are  on  the  parallel  of  those  of  Combe 
Martin  and  llfracombe  (c  of  the  long  section),  and  rise  in  great 
masses  near  Plymouth  and  Ogwell,  ranging  at  intervals  to  Newton 
Bushell  and  Torquay  J,  are  laden  with  corals  and  shells,  many  species 

*  See  p.  145.  and  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  viii.  p.  13. 

f  The  differences  between  the  mineral  succession  in  North  and  South  Devon, 
on  the  opposite  sides  of  the  great  granitic  axis  of  Dartmoor,  are  explained  by 
Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself,  Geol.  Trans,  vol.  v.  p.  3.  p.  635. 

I  One  of  the  finest  collections  of  the  S.  Devon  fossils  was  made  by  Mr.  R.  A.  C. 
Austen,  whose  researches  in  the  field,  and  whose  study  of  the  organic  remains, 
have  materially  contributed  to  a  correct  acquaintance  with  the  stratified  rocks 
of  Devonshire.    See  Lonsdale,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  v.  p.  721. 

In  a  recent  Memoir  on  the  Palaeozoic  rocks  of  the  Boulonnais  (Quart.  Journ. 
Geol.  Soc.  vol.  ix.  p.  244)  ;  Mr.  Austen  classes  the  Petherwin  and  Pilton  beds, 
like  myself,  with  the  Devonian  rocks,  whilst  he  separates  the  S.  Devon  limestones 
of  Newton  and  Ogwell  from  those  of  Ashburton,  Bickerton,  and  Chudleigh.  If 
in  this  popular  work  I  retain  the  older  view,  and  group  together  the  S.  Devon 
limestones,  I  would  in  no  respect  detract  from  the  value  of  such  a  subdivision. 
My  present  belief  is,  indeed,  that  the  lower  sandstones,  conglomerates,  and 
slates  (or  the  a  &  of  the  previous  section),  are  truly  the  equivalents  of  the 
Lower  Rhenish  or  Coblentzian,  shelly,  greywacke  sandstone ;  thus  completing 
the  parallel  between  the  British  and  Rhenish  Devonian  rocks,  and  giving  to  each 
a  similar  base.    In  respect  to  the  Upper  Devonian  division,  all  foreign  geologists 


Chap.  X.]  DEVONIAN  OF  SOUTH  DEVON.  261 

of  which  occur  in  rocks  of  the  same  age  in  various  parts  of  the  con- 
tinent of  Europe,  and  notably  in  the  limestones  of  the  Eifel,  the 
Rhenish  provinces,  and  Belgium.  Now,  many  of  these  fossils  are 
quite  peculiar :  for  whilst  they  exhibit  an  intermediary  character, 
approaching  in  the  lower  beds  of  this  series  to  those  of  the  Silu- 
rian System,  and  in  the  upper  strata  to  those  of  the  Carboniferous  era, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  on  the  whole  they  constitute  an  inde- 
pendent group.  Among  the  most  typical  of  these  peculiar  fossils, 
and  which,  wherever  they  may  be  found,  mark  the  strata  in  which 
they  occur  as  being  of  Devonian  age,  are  the  large  moUusks 
Stringocephalus  giganteus,  Foss.  52.  f.  4.,  the  Megalodon  cucul- 
latus,  f.  2.,  and  Calceola  sandalina,  f.  1.,  represented  in  this  woodcut, 
together  with  Pleurodictyum  problematicum,  Cyathophyllum  caespi- 
tosum,  and  Murchisonia  bilineata,  f.  3. 

Fossils,  52. 

Shells  of  thk  Lower  Devonian  Limestones. 


1.  Calceola  sandalina,  Linn.    2.  Megalodon  cucuUatus,  Sow.    3.  Murchisonia  bilineata,  Goldf. 
4  Stringocephalus  giganteus,  Sow.    5.  Atrypa  desquamata,  Sow. 

who  classify  by  organic  remains,  have  placed  the  Clymenia  and  Cypridina  limestone 
in  the  Devonian  system,  and  I  must  therefore  entirely  dissent  from  a  recent  proposal 
of  Mr.  D.  Sharpe,  to  remove  it  to  the  base  of  the  carboniferous  rocks.  But,  if  an 
intermediate  band  like  this  may  in  one  region  present  more  of  a  carboniferous 
type  than  in  another,  and  therefore  admit  of  much  liberty  in  drawing  the  line 

s  3 


262 


SILURIA. 


LChap.  X. 


All  the  species  of  Trllobites,  known  in  the  Silurian  system,  have 
disappeared,  and  their  places  are  taken  by  others,  of  which  Brontes 
flabellifer,  Goldfuss,  and  Phacops  latifrons,  Bronn,  are  striking 
types.  In  short,  Trilobites,  which  swarmed  in  the  Silurian  era, 
are  comparatively  very  scarce  in  the  Devonian ;  two  or  three  only 
of  the  very  numerous  genera  of  the  former  era  being  known  in  it. 

Among  the  mollusca,  nearly  all  the  species  of  Atrypa,  Orthis,  and 
Spirifer,  differ  from  those  of  the  Silurian  era.  One  or  two  exceptions 
only  occur.  Great  changes  in  the  proportional  number  of  species  in 
such  genera  also  take  place,  and  certain  genera  which  were  common  in 
the  older  period  are  no  longer  traceable.  Thus,  the  genus  Orthis 
becomes  infinitely  less  abundant,  whilst  the  Spirifer,  comparatively 
rare  in  the  older  rocks,  augments  much  in  number  of  species,  and 
especially  in  the  size  of  the  shell — the  large  broad  winged  species 
being  singularly  characteristic  of  rocks  of  this  age,  and  particularly 
in  the  Lower  Devonian  of  several  foreign  countries.  But  no  form 
in  Britain,  is  more  typical  than  Atrypa  desquamata,  Foss.  52.  f.  5. 

One  shell,  however,  the  Atrypa  reticularis,  must  here  be  mentioned 
as  an  exception  to  the  prevalent  rule  of  each  great  group  being  cha- 
racterized by  distinct  forms ;  for  this  hardy  species,  with  which  the 
reader  became  so  familiar  in  the  Silurian  rocks  (see  p.  188),  lived 
on  to  the  Devonian  era,  and  is  equally  common  with  the  last  in  the 
limestones  and  shale  of  Devonshire. 

To  return  to  the  section,  p.  256.  The  highest  rock  which  is  there 
classed  as  Devonian,  and  is,  on  the  whole,  a  mere  upward  con- 
tinuation of  the  slaty  series  with  subordinate  inferior  sandstone, 

of  separation,  I  can  still  less  admit  the  comparison  sought  to  be  established  by 
the  same  author,  between  a  few  unfossiliferous  beds  of  red  sandstone,  shale,  and 
conglomerate,  which  at  Pepinster,  in  Belgium,  form  a  very  small  portion  indeed  of 
the  series  of  Devonian  rocks,  and  the  enormous  deposit  of  the  Old  Red  Sand- 
stone of  the  British  Isles,  which,  without  any  break,  occupies  the  vast  interval 
between  the  Silurian  and  Carboniferous  Rocks.  This  point  will  be  further  ex- 
plained in  describing  the  Rhenish  Devonian  Rocks.  See  Sharpe,  Quart.  Journ. 
Geol.  Soc.  vol.  ix.  p.  23. 


Chap.  X.]  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE  DEVONIAN.  263 

is  occasionally  also  calcareous,  presenting  thin  courses  of  limestone, 
in  which  many  fossils  occur.  This  is  the  band  of  Pilton  and  Barn- 
staple. Now,  whilst  the  lower  sandy  strata  of  this  division,  as  at 
Marwood  and  Baggy  Point,  contain  Dolabra  (CucuUsea)  Har- 
dingii,  Foss.  53.  f.  2.,  and  D.  trapezium,  Sow. ;  Bellerophon  subglo- 
batus,  M*Coy,  with  casts  of  Stigmaria  and  other  land  plants,  —  the 
upper  or  calcareous  part  is  charged  with  small,  true,  Devonian 
Trilobites,  such  as  Phacops  latifrons,  Bronn ;  together  with  Orthis, 
Pleurotomaria,  Spirifer,  Terebratula,  and  Productus,  few  of  which 
occur  in  the  Carboniferous  Kocks.  Here  again,  though  with  con- 
siderable mineral  variations,  we  see  the  same  upward  succession  as 
in  Scotland  and  Ireland,  and  in  approaching  the  summit  of  what  has 
been  classed  as  Devonian  or  Old  Red,  we  are  gradually  introduced  to 
the  land  vegetation  of  the  Carboniferous  era. 

This  uppermost  course  of  impure  Devonian  limestone  is  repre- 
sented on  the  south  side  of  the  great  trough  of  culm  or  coal  mea- 
sures, as  expressed  in  the  previous  section,  by  the  band  of 
Petherwin,  /,  in  which  a  great  number  of  fossils  have  been  found, 
and  these  clearly  identify  it  with  the  Upper  Devonian  of  many 
parts  of  the  continent  of  Europe.  Such  are  the  Phacops  granulatus, 
Foss.  53.  f.  5.;  Clymenia  linearis,  f.  1.;  C.  laevigata,  Miinster; 
Spirifer  Verneuili  (disjuncta.  Sow.),  f.  4.  &c. 


Fossils,  63. 

Shells  of  the  Upper  Devonian  Limestone. 


..  Clymenia  linearis,  Miinst.     2.  Dolabra  Hardingii.  Sow.    3.  Strophalosia  caperata,  Sow. 
4.  Spirifer  Verneuili,  Murch.    6.  Phacops  granulatus,  Munster. 
s  4 


264  SILURIA.  [Chap.  X. 

This  Upper  Devonian  of  South  Britain,  which  occupies,  in 
my  opinion,  the  same  place  in  the  geological  series  as  the  uppermost 
red  sandstones  flanking  the  Silurian  region,  —  the  yellow  sand- 
stone of  Fifeshire  with  shells  and  plants, —  and  the  sandstones  with 
the  Telerpeton  in  the  N.  of  Scotland  —  is,  I  repeat,  well  exposed  in 
the  beds  of  Petherwin,  Pilton,  and  Marwood,  N.  Devon  (/of  the  sec- 
tion). In  addition  to  Phacops  granulatus,  Clymeniae,  and  other 
fossils,  above  mentioned,  this  band  is  also  marked  by  the  presence  of 
a  minute  crustacean,  Cypridina  serratostriata,  Sandb.,  of  which  I 
shall  have  to  speak  in  treating  of  the  Devonian  rocks  of  Germany. 
The  discovery  in  Britain  of  this  small  crustacean  was  not  made  until 
after  the  distinguished  palaeontologists,  the  brothers  Sandberger,  had 
found  it  in  myriads  occupying  the  upper  schistose  and  calcareous 
rocks  of  the  Rhine,  which  Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself  had  long 
ago  shown  to  pass  immediately  under  the  lowest  carboniferous  de- 
posits, and  to  be  the  true  equivalents  of  our  rocks  of  Devonshire. 
The  observation  of  M.  F.  Sandberger  (for  it  was  he  who  first  detected 
this  Cypridina  in  British  rock  specimens  sent  to  him)  has  therefore 
been  peculiarly  valuable,  as,  through  the  presence  of  this  minute  but 
very  characteristic  crustacean,  we  now  learn  more  conclusively,  that 
the  limits  of  the  Devonian  rocks  in  S.  Britain  have  been  cor- 
rectly defined ;  their  equivalents  in  Germany  being  similarly  so 
distinguished. 

In  subsequent  chapters  we  shall  see  that  analogous  divisions  of  the 
Devonian  Rocks  are  also  developed  in  different  parts  of  Europe, 
and  that  in  the  Rhenish  provinces  especially,  a  triple  division 
may  even  be  preferred.  It  will  further  appear,  how,  in  other  tracts, 
but  more  particularly  in  Russia,  the  ichthyolites  of  the  Old  Red  Sand- 
stone of  Scotland  and  the  marine  mollusca  of  Devonshire  are  found 
united  in  the  same  strata :  thus  demonstrating  the  simultaneous 
accumulation  of  deposits,  which,  although  they  differ  considerably  in 
mineral  aspect,  occupy  precisely  the  same  place  in  the  series  of 
deposits. 


Chap.  X.]       TERRESTRIAL  PLANTS  OF  THE  DEVONIAN.  265 

In  having  previously  alluded  to  a  shell  found  in  a  given  tract  of 
the  Old  Red  of  Scotland,  and  to  others  in  the  S.  of  Ireland,  as  being 
of  fresh-water  origin,  we  must,  however,  only  consider  them  as  ex- 
ceptions to  the  general  character  of  deposits  which  are  essentially 
marine  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  It  is,  in  fact,  chiefly  the  upper 
member  of  the  series,  which  affords  evidence  of  the  spoils  of  the 
adjacent  land  having  been  swept  into  estuaries  and  seas. 

In  quitting  this  brief  consideration  of  the  highly  diversified  and 
important  group  of  the  Devonian  or  Old  Red  rocks  of  the  British 
Isles,  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  whilst  some  of  its  lowest  members 
have  rarely  afforded  traces  of  land  plants,  its  uppermost  members  in 
Ireland,  as  in  Devonshire  and  Shetland,  contain  a  greater  number, 
including  tree  ferns  and  calamites.  We  must  equally  remember, 
that  the  latter  plants  are  associated,  in  Scotland  and  Ireland,  with 
ichthyolites  of  the  Devonian  epoch,  and  occur  in  strata  which  rise 
out  from  beneath  the  lowest  beds  of  the  carboniferous  rocks.  Nay, 
more,  it  is  in  strata  of  this  age  that  we  also  first  meet  with  that 
assemblage  of  natural  products  which  might  be  expected ;  for  the 
most  ancient  fresh-water  shells  and  the  oldest  air-breathing  reptile 
which  have  been  discovered,  are  the  legitimate  associates  of  this  early 
land  vegetation. 

Certain  terrestrial  plants  of  this  period  will  be  afterwards  adverted 
to  as  occurring  in  Germany.  In  fact,  the  uppermost  member  of 
the  Devonian  and  the  lowest  division  of  the  Carboniferous  are 
sometimes  so  linked  together,  that  where  the  carboniferous  lime- 
stone is  wanting,  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  draw  any  positive  line  of 
separation  between  these  groups.  Such  results  must,  indeed,  have 
invariably  followed  from  the  ordinary  operation  of  natural  causes, 
wherever  great  subaqueous  deposits  were  quietly  and  successively 
accumulated. 

In  terminating  this  chapter  the  reader  must  be  reminded,  that 
although  there  is  no  Upper  Silurian  in  the  south-western  extremity 


266  SILURIA.  [Chap.  X. 

of  England,  Lower  Silurian  strata  have  been  adverted  to,  as  ranging 
along  a  few  of  the  southern  headlands  of  Cornwall,  and  as  being  at 
once  flanked  by  Devonian  strata  (p.  144.).  In  subsequent  chapters  it 
will  be  shown,  how  Lower  Silurian  rocks  are  similarly  followed  by 
Devonian  formations  over  very  large  portions  of  the  continent  of 
Europe,  to  the  almost  entire  exclusion  of  the  Upper  Silurian. 


My  friend,  the  Rev.  John  Fleming,  D.D.,  to  one  of  whose  original  papers 
on  the  organic  remains  of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone  I  have  already  referred,  has 
recently  assured  me,  that  the  fruit-like  body  found  in  Fifeshire  and  in  the  Arbroath 
paving-stones  of  Forfarshire,  (see  p.  247.)  is  unquestionably  a  vegetable,  and 
cannot  be  classed  as  the  egg  of  a  mollusk,  as  suggested  by  Lyell,  or  as  the  egg  of  a 
batrachian,  as  more  recently  proposed  by  Mantell.  The  figure  which  Dr.  Fleming 
gave  in  the  year  1831,  Edin.  Journal  of  Nat.  Science,  vol.  3,  pi.  2.  fig.  5.,  is  in 
itself  pretty  good  evidence  in  favour  of  his  opinion,  that  it  is  an  aggregate  fruit. 
Since  then  he  has  examined  both  the  upper  and  under  surfaces,  and  has  quite 
satisfied  himself  that  it  is  a  receptacle,  and  that  the  round  bodies  covering  it  are 
carpels  or  fruits.  In  the  above-mentioned  Memoir,  Dr.  Fleming  first  pointed  out 
certain  terrestrial  and  freshwater  conditions  of  the  Upper  Old  Red  Sandstone  of 
Scotland. 


Chap.  XI.] 


FIRST  COnOUS  LAND  VEGETATION. 


267 


CHAPTER  XL 

CARBONIFEPwOUS  ROCKS. 

GREAT  PRIMEVAL  FLORA  THE  SOURCE  OP  THE  OLD  COAL  DEPOSITS.  —  GENERAL 
VIEW  OF  THESE  DEPOSITS  AND  THEIR  ORGANIC  REMAINS  IN  THE  BRITISH  ISLES. 

Ascending  in  the  scale  of  deposits,  we  have  now  reached  another 
grand  accumulation  of  strata,  which  is  not  only  replete  with  many 
types  of  animal  life  peculiar  to  it  and  unknown  in  antecedent  pe- 
riods, but  specially  characterized  by  the  earliest  abundant  remains 
of  a  terrestrial  vegetation.  For,  the  reader  will  remember,  that 
there  are  no  traces  of  land  plants  in  the  great  mass  of  the  Silurian 
rocks ;  and  that  it  is  only  where  their  uppermost  strata  unite  with 
the  Devonian,  that  certain  traces  of  land  plants  have  been  sparingly 
detected.  Even  in  the  Devonian  rocks  such  plants,  as  before  stated, 
are  rare,  and  only  begin  to  prevail  as  we  pass  upwards  and  are  sur- 
rounded by  the  spoils  of  this  first  great  woody  era. 

Now,  as  these  primeval  plants  were  the  substances  out  of  which 
the  great  mass  of  the  mineral  termed  coal  has  been  formed  (all  natu- 
ralists and  chemists  admitting  the  fact) ;  so,  for  the  first  time  in  mount- 
ing up  from  the  basement  rocks,  do  we  meet  with  those  copious  accu- 
mulations of  that  mineral  in  conjunction  with  the  impressions  and 
casts  in  stone  of  the  numerous  plants  out  of  which  it  has  been  formed. 
Some  idea  of  the  characters  of  the  rank,  luxuriant  vegetation  which 
must  in  this  age,  have  overspread  very  wide  areas  of  land,  from 
polar  to  nearly  equatorial  latitudes,  may  be  formed  by  inspecting  the 
annexed  woodcut,  in  which  an  ideal  representation  is  given  of  a  por- 
tion of  the  earth's  surface,  as  clothed  with  plants,  the  fragments  of 


268  SILUEIA.  [Chap.  XI. 

which  bespeak  the  presence  of  rich,  vascular  cryptogamia,  whose 
fossilized  stems  and  leaves  are  frequently  to  be  detected  even  in  the 


IdexVl  View  of  the  Vegetation  of  the  Carboniferous  Era. 


coal  itself.  In  the  standard  work  of  Bronn,  von  Meyer,  and  Gop- 
pert,  which  gives  the  most  complete,  general  tabular  view  of  ancient 
nature  hitherto  published*,  Professor  Goppert  estimates  the  total 
number  of  known  species  of  fossil  plants  of  what  is  here  considered 
the  carboniferous  aera  as  934,  which  are  thus  distributed :  — 

"  Cellulares,  including  the  Fungi,  Algae,  &c.,  19. 
Vasculares,  915;  of  which  772  are  cryptogamous 
Plants  934.  -{     plants,  or  Ferns,  Calamites,  Asterophyllites,  &c. ; 

and  94  are  dicotyledonous  plants,  such  as  Cycads, 
Conifers,  and  Club-mosses. 

The  result,  arrived  at  by  this  fossil  botanist,  agrees  generally  with 
that  of  his  precursor  in  this  line  of  inquiry,  M.  Adolphe  Brongniart, 
who  first  gave  to  the  world  a  general  and  philosophical  view  of  the 
distribution  of  former  vegetation.    On  his  part  M.  Goppert  has  not 


*  Bronn s  Geschichte  der  Natur,  vol.  iii.  part  2.  The  so  called  "Transition" 
plants  of  Goppert  are  included  in  this  list ;  because  it  has  been  ascertained,  that 
nearly  all  of  them  occur  in  strata  which,  formerly  viewed  as  ancient  grauwacke^'"' 
are  now  known  to  be  of  no  higher  antiquity  than  the  lower  division  of  the  carboni- 
ferous rocks. 


Chap.  XI.]  GENERAL  CARBONIFEROUS  ORDER.  269 

only  added  considerably  to  the  number  of  species,  but  also  to  the 
number  of  dicotyledonous  or  forest  trees. 

Both,  however,  of  these  eminent  men,  as  well  as  many  other 
botanists  are  agreed  in  the  opinion,  that  as  the  great  mass  of  the 
plants  belong  to  the  vascular,  cryptogamic  class,  the  conditions  of 
climate  under  which  such  vegetables  grew  in  very  various  latitudes, 
is  a  phenomenon  "per  se,  and  especially  characteristic  of  that  period 
which  geologists  call  "  Carboniferous."  These  plants,  marking,  as 
above  stated,  the  earliest  great  vegetable  period,  are,  in  fact,  as 
decisive  of  the  Carboniferous  as  the  great  abundance  of  Trilobites 
and  Graptolites  is  of  the  Silurian  era.  But,  whilst  the  earlier  sys- 
tem is  marked  only  by  its  submarine  contents,  the  carboniferous 
deposits  owe  their  chief  features  to  the  actual  presence  or  contiguity 
of  lands  covered  with  a  peculiar  vegetation,  which,  disappearing  with 
the  younger  primeval  strata,  was  never  afterwards  reproduced  upon 
the  earth.  For,  no  one  of  the  floras  of  subsequent  geological  periods 
possessed  those  characteristic  features  of  rank,  gigantic  cryptogamia, 
indicative  of  an  inter-tropicnl  climate,  which  so  prominently  marked 
the  vegetation  of  the  epoch  which  geologists  term  the  Carboniferous. 

In  most  of  their  lithological  characters  the  successive  strata  of  the 
Carboniferous  rocks  do  not  differ  essentially  from  many  which  have 
preceded  them.  Like  the  Silurian  and  Devonian,  they  contain  beds 
of  shale,  sandstone,  pebbles  or  conglomerate,  and  limestone,  though 
they  seldom  exhibit  a  true  slaty  cleavage.*  But,  when  examined 
more  closely,  they  vary  considerably  in  their  nature  and  contents  in 
different  parts  of  the  world.  In  subsequent  chapters  a  few  allusions 
will  be  made  to  these  variations  in  other  countries ;  but  for  the  pre- 
sent we  will  only  take  a  cursory  view  of  some  of  their  features  in 
Britain. 

In  the  region  represented  in  the  map  annexed  to  this  work  the  Car- 

*  In  parts  of  France  the  carboniferous  rocks  are  very  crystalline  and  slaty,  as  I 
have  shown  in  a  memoir  on  the  environs  of  Vichy.  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc. 
Lond.,  vol.  vii.  p.  14. 


270  SILUEIA.  [Chap.  XI. 

boniferous  rocks  are  most  fully  developed  in  the  great  South  Welsh 
basin  of  Glamorgan,  Caermarthen  and  Monmouth,  where  an  ascend- 
ing order  from  the  summit  of  the  Old  Eed  Sandstone,  through 
limestone,  shale,  sandstone  and  grits,  upwards  into  an  enormously 
thick  coal  field,  is  cleai'ly  exhibited  in  lofty  escarpments,  particularly 
around  the  northern,  eastern,  and  western  edges  of  that  grand 
basin.  (See  lower  section,  p.  243.)  The  same  succession,  though 
on  a  smaller  scale,  is  seen  around  the  smaller  basin  of  the  Forest 
of  Dean,  and  again,  with  certain  mineral  variations,  in  the  county  of 
Pembroke. 

Towards  the  north,  however,  the  calcareous  and  lower  members  of 
the  series  are  more  developed,  than  in  South  Wales,  as  observed  in  the 
Oswestry  coal  field,  and  in  Shropshire  and  Flintshire.  This  expan- 
sion of  the  inferior  strata  of  the  system  towards  the  north,  becomes 
still  more  striking  in  Derbyshire,  Yorkshire,  and  Xorthumberland. 

In  some  of  the  coal  tracts  within  or  adjacent  to  the  Silurian  region, 
as  at  Dudley  and  Wolverhampton,  the  true  base  of  the  group,  or  the 
carboniferous  limestone,  is  wanting ;  the  productive  fields  being  there 
seen  to  repose  at  once  on  Silurian  rocks  (see  woodcut,  p.  465.).  In 
those  districts,  however,  and  along  the  banks  of  the  Severn,  good 
evidences  are  obtained  of  the  relations  of  the  coal  strata  to  the  over- 
lying red  deposits  now  termed  Permian,  and  of  which  hereafter. 

When  viewed,  therefore,  as  a  whole,  and  in  the  region  of  the 
coloured  map,  the  Carboniferous  group  {h  to  g)  may  be  stated  to  lie 
between  the  Old  Red  a,  and  the  Permian  rocks  A,  thus :  — 


Ge>t:ral  Relations  of  the  Cakboxiferofs  Kocks  et  the  Ce>-tfvAl  axd  Southern 

Parts  of  Exglaxd. 


a  b  c  d  e  *  g 

a.  Upper  beds  of  the  Old  Eed  Sandstone  (Devonian),  b.  Limestone  shale.  c.  Carboniferous 
limestone,  d.  Millstone  grit.  e.  Coal  and  ironstone.  /  Main  coal  fields,  p.  Upper  coal 
with  a  peculiar  limestoue.     h.  Eed  sandstone  (base  of  Permian  rocks). 


Chap.  XL]  CARBONIFEROUS  LIMESTONE.  271 

As  on  this  occasion  it  is  impracticable  to  attempt  to  treat  in 
detail  of  the  various  aspects  of  these  carboniferous  deposits,  strictly 
so  called,  in  different  British  districts,  a  very  slight  sketch  only  of 
some  of  their  striking  peculiarities  can  be  attempted. 

Separated  from  the  upper  band  of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone  by 
beds  of  dark  and  party-coloured  shale  {h  of  the  section),  the  lime- 
stone (known  as  the  mountain  limestone  of  geologists  c,)  is  the 
dominant  rock  of  the  lower  division.  The  massive  nature  of  these 
calcareous  rocks  and  their  vast  development  in  Derbyshire,  Yorkshire, 
and  Northumberland,  are  well  known  to  geologists.  Even  within  the 
region  of  my  original  Silurian  map,  this  limestone  when  traced  along 
the  rim  of  the  great  South  Wales  coal  field,  or  from  Caermarthen  into 
Pembrokeshire,  is  seen  to  be  there  exhibited  continuously,  in  bold 
coast  cliffs,  particularly  in  the  promontory  of  Stackpole,  where  it  is 
much  contorted,  as  in  these  two  sketches.  The  first  of  them 
represents  the  contortions  of  the  rocks,  with  their  numerous  clefts 


Stackpole  Cliffs  of  Carboniferous  Limestone. 
Sketched  by  Lady  Murchison.    From  SU.  Syst.  p.  382. 


and  caverns,  as  seen  from  Bull  Slaughter  Bay.  The  next  is  a  view 
of  one  of  the  detached  folds  of  the  same  limestone,  known  as  Stack- 
pole  Rock.    Though  these  cliffs  seldom  exceed  150  feet  in  height. 


272  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XI. 

yet,  being  precipitous  and  abrupt,  they  present  a  very  rugged,  wild, 
and  picturesque  barrier  to  the  sea. 


Stackpole  Rock.* 
Sketched  by  Lady  Murchison.    From  Sil.  Syst.  p.  370. 


Whilst  the  carboniferous  limestone  is  separated,  as  before  stated, 
from  the  Devonian,  or  Old  Red,  by  shales  (which  in  Pembrokeshire 
are  in  parts  both  sandy  and  calcareous),  it  is  there,  as  in  most  other 
districts  of  England,  surmounted  by  light-coloured  sandstones  of  con- 
siderable thickness,  which  are  knowm  under  the  name  of  millstone 
grit.  The  following  section  of  the  general  succession  of  the  strata  in 
Pembrokeshire  exhibits,  at  one  view,  the  whole  order  from  the  Silu- 
rian rocks  up  to  the  productive  coal  above  the  millstone  grit. 


General  Order  in  Pe^ibrokeshire. 


e  d  c  0  a 

Coal  or   Millstone   Carb.  Old  Eed  Sandstone.  Silurian, 

culm.       grit.  limest. 


*  These  striking  cliffs  are  the  property  of  my  esteemed  friend  the  Earl  of 
Cawdor,  whose  chief  residence,  Stackpole  Court,  is  situated  on  the  carboniferous 
limestone,  and  whose  other  residence,  in  Wales,  Golden  Grove,  is  on  the  Llandeilo 
formation  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  (see  distant  edifice,  sketch,  p.  69.). 


Chap.  XI.]  CARBONIFEKOUS  ROCKS  OF  ENGLAND.  273 

To  pass,  however,  from  a,  diagram  of  the  general  order  to  a  natural 
section,  the  English  student  may  examine  with  ease  and  in  a  small 
compass  the  Carboniferous  series  from  its  base  upwards  to  the  produc- 
tive coal  inclusive,  on  the  south-east  slope  of  the  Titterstone  Clee  Hill 
in  Shropshire.*  Ascending  from  a  depression  in  the  Old  Red  Sandstone 
near  Cleobury  to  the  eastern  summit  of  that  hill,  he  will  pass  suc- 
cessively over  the  three  divisions  of  limestone  and  shale,  millstone 
grit,  and  productive  coal ;  the  whole  being  capped  by  basalt,  which 
is  seen  to  have  been  erupted  through  the  entire  series,  and  to  have 
overflowed  on  the  top  of  the  hill. 

Section  across  the  Cornbrook  Coal  Basin  op  the  Clee  Hills. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  113.  pi.  30.  f.  6.) 


d  *  b  a 

a.  Upper  beds  of  Old  Red  or  Devonian.^  b.  Carboniferous  limestone  and  shale,  c.  Millstone  grit. 
d.  Coal  measures.    *  Eruptive  basalt,  which  has  risen  through  and  overflowed  the  coal. 

The  lower  Carboniferous  members,  or  the  shale,  limestone,  and  grit 
(6,  c),  are,  however,  of  comparatively  small  dimensions  in  and  around 
the  Silurian  region,  when  compared  with  their  representatives  in 
Derbyshire  and  the  north  of  England.  In  that  territory,  particu- 
larly in  the  west  of  Yorkshire  and  Lancashire,  they  swell  out  into 
a  vastly  thicker  series.  In  ascending  order  those  strata  consist  of  the 
great  scar  limestone,  estimated  to  vary  in  thickness  from  500  to 
1,000  feet ;  and  that  mass  is  followed,  in  the  west  of  Yorkshire,  by 
considerable  alternations  of  shale  and  limestone,  considered  by  Pro- 

*  Any  one  who  is  desirous  of  understanding  the  peculiarities  of  this  coal-field 
may  refer  to  the  "Silurian  System,"  p.  113.,  where  the  proofs  of  the  existence  of 
a  vertical  mass  of  basalt  (*)  rising  up  through  the  strata  are  explained,  as  well  as 
the  extraction  of  coal  by  shafts  from  beneath  the  overlying  table  of  basalt. 

T 


274  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XI. 

fessor  Phillips  to  be  about  1,000  feet  thick ;  while  the  whole  is  sur- 
mounted by  800  feet  of  millstone  grit.* 

Again,  besides  its  grand  protrusions  of  basalt  and  greenstone,  the 
bold  coast  of  Northumberland  and  South  Berwickshire  exhibits  these 
lower  carboniferous  limestones  opening  out  into  different  courses  and 
interlaced  by  copious  masses  of  schist  and  several  coal  seams.  One  of 
the  calcareous  bands,  near  to  the  centre  of  the  group,  is  especially 
characterized  by  Posidonomya  Becheri  (Bronn),  a  shell  which 
marks  tlie  thin  courses  of  black  or  culm  limestone  in  Devonshire. 
This  fossil,  which  is  also  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  schists  and 
'  kiesel-schiefer '  of  the  Rhenish  provinces  of  Prussia,  both  with  and 
without  limestone,  is  therefore  a  good  type  of  the  lower  carboniferous 
age;  though  in  tracts  where  the  limestones  expand,  it  occurs  in 
one  of  their  upper  bands.  It  was  by  such  proofs,  and  by  the  relations 
of  the  strata,  that  Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself  showed,  that  the 
Rhenish  schists  with  Posidonomyae  were  the  exact  equivalents  of 
the  British  carboniferous  or  culm  limestone  of  Devon,  and  that 
the  sandstones  which  overlie  them  (the  ^Jungere  Grauwacke,'  or 
*  Flotz-lehrer  Sandstein'  of  the  Germans),  are  the  representatives 
of  the  British  millstone  grit.f  It  is  in  this  lower  division  of  the 
Carboniferous  rocks,  as  composed  of  schists,  and  some  limestones  with 
Producti  and  other  fossils,  and  a  great  underlying  sandy  series,  that 
the  chief  Scottish  coal-fields  are  developed.  They  are  truly  a  con- 
tinuation of  those  beds  of  North  Northumberland,  which  extending 
into  Berwickshire,  seem  there  to  graduate  downwards  into  the  Old 
Red  Sandstone. 

Having  alluded  to  the  convolutions  of  the  Pembrokeshire  lime- 
stone, it  is  right  to  explain,  that  the  violence  of  the  movements  which 

*  See  the  Memoirs  of  Professor  Sedgwick, "  On  the  General  Structure  of  the 
Cumbrian  Mountains,"  and  "  On  the  Carboniferous  Chain  from  Penyghent  to 
Kirkby  Stephen."  (Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  N.  S.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  47.  et  seq. ;  also 
Phillips,  Geology  of  Yorkshire,  vol.  ii.) 

t  See  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  N.  S.,  vol.  vi.  p,  228.  et  seq. 


Chap.  XT.]  CARBONIFEROUS  ROCKS  OF  IRELAND.  275 

produced  them,  affected  likewise  most  remarkably  all  the  Carboni- 
ferous rocks  of  that  region,  and  particularly  the  coal.  Thus  the  coal 
which  is  there  nearly  all  in  the  state  of  stone-coal,  culm*  or 
anthracite,  has  been  for  the  most  part  shivered  into  small  fragments, 
and  is  frequently  accumulated  in  small  troughs  or  hollows,  the 
'  slashes '  of  the  miners.  Of  the  great  lateral  pressure  and  violent 
fractures  to  which  the  strata  have  been  subjected,  the  following 
woodcut  may  convey  some  idea. 

Slash  of  Culm. 
(From  Sil.  Syst,,  p.  377.) 


b 


a.  Contorted  culm  strata  with  stone  coal.   b.  Fault,   c.  Slash  of  finely  triturated  culm  between 
violently  contorted  strata,  and  probably  upon  a  great  line  of  fracture. 

These  great  disturbances  were  produced  after  the  accumulation 
and  solidification  of  the  deposits  under  consideration. 

Lower  Carboniferous  Rocks  in  Ireland.  —  There  is,  perhaps,  no 
country  of  the  same  size  in  which  the  carboniferous  rocks  are  so 
widely  extended  and  at  the  same  time  so  little  productive  of  coal  as 
Ireland.  This  is  doubtless  in  some  measure  due  to  the  fact,  that  by 
far  the  greater  portion  of  the  Irish  Carboniferous  series  of  strata 
pertain  to  those  lower  divisions,  which,  though  very  rich  in  coal 
in  Scotland,  exhibit  little  or  none  of  it  in  those  parts  of  England 
which  lie  in  the  same  latitudes  as  the  mass  of  the  Irish  rocks  of 

*  The  variations  in  mineral  character  of  the  anthracitic  or  culm  trough 
of  North  Devon,  which  was  doubtless  at  one  time  a  mere  extension  of  the 
Pembrokeshire  strata  of  the  same  age,  have  been  partially  adverted  to  in  the 
previous  chapter.  (See  p.  260,  and  section,  p.  256.)  One  thin  course  of  black 
limestone  with  Posidonomyae  is  there  the  true  representative  of  the  great  mas- 
sive calcareous  cliffs  of  the  opposite  coast  of  Pembroke,  and  of  the  diversified 
North  British  Series ;  so  much  for  great  mineral  changes  of  the  same  rocks  in 
our  own  isles !    (See  pp.  256.  et  seq.,  and  271.  et  seq.) 

T  2 


276  SILURIA.  [Chap.  xr. 

this  age.  The  great  overlying  and  productive  coal-fields  of  England, 
therefore,  either  never  existed  in  Ireland,  or  have  been  removed  by- 
denudation.  Exclusive  of  the  strata  which  are  to  be  separated  as 
being  of  Devonian  age  (see  p.  255.),  the  'yellow  sandstone'  of 
Griffith,  so  defined  where  it  is  inter-stratified  with  courses  of  lime- 
stone and  shale  with  Carboniferous  fossils,  is  the  oldest  member  of 
the  system.  This  is  followed  by  shale  or  schist,  which  assumes  a 
slaty  aspect,  particularly  in  the  Cork  district,  and  alternates  with 
other  courses  of  limestone.  The  middle  portion  of  the  system  is 
composed  of  the  great  lower  limestone,  followed  by  the  dark  grey, 
earthy  limestone,  known  under  the  name  of  *  Calp,'  whilst  the 
'  Upper  Limestone '  of  the  midland  and  southern  districts  of  Ireland 
is  covered  by  the  '  Millstone  Grit.' 

This  great  succession  of  limestones  and  shales,  the  latter  occasion- 
ally affected  by  a  slaty  cleavage,  is  seldom,  indeed,  seen  in  one  clear 
and  consecutive  section,  but  undulating  over  very  wide  areas,  is 
usually  much  obscured  by  gravel,  shingle,  and  clay.  AVhen,  how- 
ever, the  limestones  form  natural  escarpments,  as,  for  example,  on 
the  south  bank  of  Lough  Erne,  and  in  the  hills  near  Florence 
Court  to  the  south  of  Enniskillen,  where  they  exhibit  a  splendid 
succession  and  numerous  fossils,  includino;  lars^e  Producti  in  the 
lower  and  Posidonomyae  in  the  higher  strata,  they  contain  no  seams 
of  coal  worthy  of  notice.  In  the  Cork  district,  indeed,  (where 
the  lower  schists  are  so  slaty  and  crystalline,  that  they  might  be 
mistaken  for  much  older  rocks,)  some  coal  has  been  found ;  but  the 
quantity  and  value  of  it  are  little  known. 

The  limestone  series  of  Ireland  is  proved  to  be  of  exclusively 
marine  origin,  from  the  multitude  of  well-preserved  fossils  it  con- 
tains ;  and  of  these  Mr.  Griffith  (with  the  assistance  of  Professor 
M'Coy)  has  already  prepared  a  list  of  about  500  species  *,  a  consider- 

*  A  Synopsis  of  the  Characters  of  the  Carboniferous  Limestone  Fossils  of 
Ireland,  1844 


Chap.  XI.  J 


UPPER  PRODUCTIVE  COAL-FIELDS. 


277 


able  number  of  which  are  stated  to  be  identical  with  those  of  the 
underlying  and  Devonian  rocks,  but  altogether  different  from  those 
of  the  Silurian  system.  These  lower  members  of  the  system,  which, 
unluckily  for  Ireland,  constitute,  as  before  stated,  by  far  the  larger 
portion  of  all  that  is  called  carboniferous,  are  surmounted  (but  very 
partially)  by  grits  and  sandstones,  in  which,  at  three  or  four  localities 
(Kilkenny  in  the  south,  and  Ballycastle,  Dungannon,  and  Coal  Island 
in  the  north),  a  few  thin  beds  of  coal  are  situated ;  but  as  they  have 
as  yet  proved  to  be  of  comparatively  slight  value,  and  have  no  special 
bearing  on  the  object  of  this  work,  I  forbear  to  say  more  respecting 
them.* 

Overlying  productive  Coal-fields.  —  The  lower  Carboniferous  series 
hitherto  spoken  of,  or  the  shale,  limestone  and  millstone  grit,  is  all 
over  Europe  and  North  America  essentially  of  marine  origin.  It  has, 
indeed,  affinities  to  the  upper  portion  of  the  underlying  Devonian 
rocks,  into  which  it  graduates.  It  is,  however,  distinguished  from 
them  by  its  chief  animal  remains,  including  many  remarkable  fishes ; 
and,  above  all,  by  the  intermixture  of  terrestrial  plants  in  an  infinitely 
greater  quantity  than  are  known  in  the  preceding  epoch.  With 
the  repeated  evidences  of  thin  seams  of  coal  being  intercalated  with 
bands  of  limestone  of  exclusively  marine  or  estuary  character,  it  is 
indeed  a  fair  inference,  that  the  vegetables  (often  in  great  matted 
bodies)  out  of  which  such  lower  coal  was  formed,  were  transported 
from  the  mouths  of  great  rivers,  or  broke  away  from  the  shores  of 
broad  jungles,  into  the  adjacent  waters,  and  so  together  were  asso- 
ciated with  marine  remains. 

*  I  must  not,  however,  omit  to  do  justice  to  a  recent  spirited  endeavour  of  the 
Marquis  of  Downshire,  who,  discovering  a  fine  mass  of  rock-salt  and  gypsum  on 
his  estates  near  Carrickfergus,  sunk  a  shaft  through  it,  which,  when  I  visited  the 
spot  in  1852,  had  traversed  a  considerable  thickness  of  the  New  Red  forma- 
tion ;  it  being  expected  that  coal  in  a  good  and  unbroken  state  might  be  found 
underlying  this,  the  only  extensive  mass  of  New  Red  Sandstone  which  had  then 
been  found  in  Ireland. 

T  3 


278  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XI. 

When,  however,  we  examine  the  nature  of  the  great  overlying 
coal  strata,  particularly  those  of  England,  another  order  of  things  is 
opened  out  to  us. 

In  most  of  these,  whether  in  the  South  Welsh  basin,  or  the 
northern  and  Durham  fields,  we  lose  all  traces  of  marine  life,  and 
can  recognize  only  huge  accumulations  of  terrestrial,  lacustrine  or 
fluviatile  origin.  Thus  in  South  Wales,  where  the  coal  measures  are 
estimated  to  attain  the  great  thickness  of  12,000  feet,  and  one  hundred 
coal  beds  are  intercalated  at  various  levels,  we  have  undeniable  evi- 
dence of  successive  terrestrial  conditions — each  of  these  coal-seams 
having  immediately  beneath  it  a  band  of  sandy  shale,  called  under- 
clay,  and  abounding  in  Stigmaria,  or  the  roots  of  Sigillaria,  one  of  the 
plants  out  of  which  coal  has  been  generated.  For  this  important 
fact,  science  is  chiefly  indebted  to  Mr.  Logan,  who  demonstrated  that 
the  under-clay  of  the  miner  was  the  real  soil  of  a  primeval  marsh 
or  jungle.    (See  also  Mammatt's  Geological  Facts,  &c.  1834,  p.  73.) 

The  diagram  in  the  beginning  of  this  Chapter  is  intended  to 
convey  a  general  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  wet  and  swampy  tracts 
in  which  the  vegetation  of  this  period  flourished. 

The  comparative  rarity  of  true  dicotyledons  or  forest  trees  in 
this  flora,  is  as  remarkable  as  the  extraordinary  uniformity  in  the 
families  of  plants  of  which  it  was  composed.  These  consisted  chiefly, 
as  before  said,  of  Lepidodendra,  Equisetaceae,  Asterophyllites,  and 
Sigillariae,  with  some  curious  extinct  pine-trees,  a  few  of  which 
resembled  the  living  Araucaria  of  Norfolk  Island.  As  many  of  these 
are  found  in  the  roof  of  the  coal,  and  sometimes  even  in  the  coal 
itself*,  there  can  remain  but  little  doubt,  that,  in  most  of  these  cases, 

*  Few  persons,  who  are  attentive  observers  of  the  contents  of  their  cellars,  will 
have  failed  to  detect  the  forms  of  plants  in  the  coal  itself.  Goppert  has, 
indeed,  recently  demonstrated,  by  microscopic  examination  (and  Witham  in  part 
anticipated  him,  "Observations  on  fossil  Vegetables,"  1833),  that  the  vegetable 
fibres  and  tissues  of  all  the  families  of  the  plants  of  this  era  are  to  be  detected  in 
the  coal  itself.  In  some  layers  all  the  plants  are  calamites,  in  others,  ferns.  (Quart. 
Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  v.;  Mem.  p.  17.) 


Chap.  XI.]  UPPER  CARBONIFEROUS  FAUNA.  279 

the  mineral  resulted  from  the  fossilization  of  extensive  ancient 
jungles  or  marshes.  It  may  fairly  be  inferred,  that  this  conversion 
of  vegetables  into  coal,  took  place  at  a  period  in  the  formation 
of  the  crust  of  the  earth,  when  very  different  physical  conditions 
prevailed,  and  when  a  warmer  and  more  equable  (though  probably 
not  a  hot)  climate  pervaded  our  islands,  as  well  as  latitudes  far 
to  the  north  and  south  of  them.  The  supposition  of  many  and  suc- 
cessive subsidences  of  vast  swampy  jungles  beneath  the  level  of  the 
waters,  best  explains  how  the  different  vegetable  masses  became 
covered  by  beds  of  sand  and  mud,  so  as  to  form  the  sandstone  and 
shale  of  such  coal-fields.  But  this  theory  of  oscillation,  or  of  the  sub- 
sidence en  masse  of  ancient  marshes  and  their  re- elevation  (with  occa- 
sional sand-drifts),  though  good  in  such  examples  as  those  of  the 
South  Welsh  and  Newcastle  coal-fields  in  England,  as  also  of  the  large 
coal-fields  in  British  North  America,  to  which  Sir  C.  Lyell  has  re- 
cently called  attention  *,  can  have  little  application  to  those  other 
seams  of  coal  which,  as  before  mentioned,  are  interstratified  with 
beds  containing  marine  shells,  the  animals  of  which,  such  as  Producti 
and  Spirifers,  must  have  lived  in  comparatively  deep  sea-water. 

In  such  examples  (and  nearly  all  the  older  coal  beds  come  into 
the  category)  we  may,  on  the  contrary,  endeavour  to  explain  the 
facts  by  the  supposition,  that  ancient  streams  like  the  present  Missis- 
sippi and  other  large  rivers,  which  flowed  through  groves  on  low 
lands  and  mud  banks,  transported  great  quantities  of  trees,  leaves, 
and  roots  entangled  in  earth,  and  deposited  them  at  the  bottom 
of  adjacent  estuaries,  or  that  they  were  carried  en  masse  into  the 
broad,  open  sea.    (See  Postscript,  p.  288.) 

The  coasts  of  Northumberland  and  Berwickshire  exhibit  fine 
proofs  of  such  conditions;  but  the  most  remarkable  confirmation 

*  See  an  excellent  general  sketch  of  the  chief  carboniferous  deposits  of  Europe  and 
America,  with  illustrations  of  the  prevailing  plants,  in  the  24th  and  25th  chapters 
of  Ly ell's  Manual  of  Geology,  1851.    See  also  Ansted's^  "  Ancient  World." 


280 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XI. 


of  this  view  of  the  method  by  which  some  of  the  older  coa  has 
been  formed,  which  ever  fell  under  my  own  observation,  occurs  in 
the  Russian  field  of  the  Donetz,  in  the  Southern  steppes.  There, 
besides  numerous  beds  of  shale  and  sand,  with  remains  of  plants, 
bands  of  limestone,  charged  with  species  of  Productus,  Spirifer, 
Bellerophon,  Nautilus,  and  other  marine  shells  and  many  corals, 
alternate  several  times  with  grits,  sand,  and  shale  charged  with 
coal*,  as  well  as  numerous  terrestrial  plants,  including  tree  ferns, 
Sigillariae,  Equiseti,  Calamitesf,  &c.  &c. 

In  geology,  less  indeed,  than  in  other  sciences,  can  we  ever 
hope  to  account  for  certain  results  by  one  modus  operandi  only. 
For,  nature  appears  to  have  worked  out  phenomena  apparently  simi- 
lar, through  distinct  paths  and  by  devious  processes ;  and  of  this  no 
clearer  proof  can  be  given,  than  that  coal  was  formed  out  of  vege- 
tables which  were  accumulated  by  at  least  the  two  methods  above 
described. 

General  Ohservations  on  the  Organic  Remains, — In  treating  of 
the  general  physical  relations  of  the  Carboniferous  rocks  of  the  British 
Isles,  and  of  some  changes  which  they  have  undergone  beyond  the 
region  of  the  annexed  map,  it  has  been  stated,  that  in  North 
Northumberland,  as  in  Berwickshire  and  other  parts  of  the  South  of 

*  See  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  89.  et  seq.,  PI.  i.  and 
large  woodcut  showing  the  vertical  succession,  p.  111. 

f  The  old  or  primeval  coal  is  here  spoken  of  in  contradistinction  to  the 
secondary  and  tertiary  coals,  which  were  formed  at  periods  long  afterwards,  and 
do  not  exhibit  those  uniform  geological  characters  or  that  wide  and  equable 
spread  which  characterize  the  old  coal.  The  enquirer  who  wishes  to  study 
the  British  fossil  plants  of  this  period  must  consult  the  Fossil  Flora  of  Lindley 
and  Hutton.  The  same  subject  is  developed  by  M.  Adolphe  Brongniart,  who 
has  given  his  views  in  an  admirable  sketch  of  the  successive  floras  imbedded 
in  the  crust  of  the  earth.  The  more  recent  publications  on  the  fossil  plants  of 
Germany,  by  Goppert  and  linger,  are  productions  of  high  merit.  In  comparing 
these  works  with  those  on  the  coal  plants  of  America,  we  find  that  the  same 
species  inhabited  very  distant  regions,  or  had  a  wide  range  throughout  many 
latitudes. 


Chap.  XL]  LOWER  CARBONIFEROUS  FAUNA.  281 

Scotland,  the  greater  part  of  the  coal  is  either  inferior  to  lime- 
stones charged  with  the  remains  of  marine  animals,  or  interstratified 
with  them.  Most  of  the  fossils,  indeed,  of  those  tracts,  such  as 
Nautilus,  Productus  and  Spirifer,  with  Crinoidea  and  Crustacea,  were 
unquestionably  inhabitants  of  the  sea. 

Such  was  also  the  case  as  respects  the  large  sauroid  fish,  Me* 
galicthys  Hibberti,  Agass.,  whose  remains  occur  both  in  the  lower 
and  middle  coal  measures,  and  the  shark-like  fishes,  Gyracanthus 
formosus,  and  G.  tuberculatus ;  the  Ctenacanthus ;  Hybodus,  &c. 

It  is  in  the  lower  or  purely  marine  limestones  of  the  Carboni- 
ferous epoch,  that  the  geologist  takes  his  final  leave  of  Trilobites. 
Abounding  in  the  Silurian  era,  these  crustaceans  had,  we  see, 
dwindled  to  a  comparatively  small  number  in  the  Devonian,  whilst, 
in  the  lower  Carboniferous,  the  three  genera,  Phillipsia,  Griffith- 
ides  and  Brachymetopus,  mark  the  last  appearance  of  any  indi- 
viduals of  this  family  in  the  ascending  scale  of  natural  deposits. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  among  the  superior  coal  strata  where 
Trilobites  became  extinct,  that  the  Limulus  appears  for  the  first 
time,  a  genus  of  crustaceans  which  has  lived  on  to  the  present  day 
— the  great  King  Crab  of  the  Indian  seas  being  the  existing  type. 


Fossils,  54. 


Limulus  rotundatus, 
Prestwich. 


From  the  Coalbrook  Dale 
Coal  Field. 


One  example  of  this  primeval  Limulus  is  here  given.  It  is  a 
rarer  species  than  the  L.  trilobitoides  of  Buckland.*  Limulus  anthrax, 

*  See  the  Bridgwater  Treatise,  t.  46'^,  fig.  3. ;  —  that  very  remarkable  work  of 
my  eminent  friend  the  Dean  of  Westminster. 


282  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XI. 

Prestwich,  is  another  rare  form  from  Coalbrook  Dale.*  We  may, 
however,  remark,  that  the  Pterygotus,  found  in  the  Silurian 
Rocks  and  the  bottom  beds  of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone,  pertains  to 
the  same  group  of  crustaceans.     (See  p.  237.) 

Here,  also,  we  last  meet  with  any  large  Orthoceratites.  Those 
scavengers  of  the  ancient  seas  had  now  begun  to  diminish  rapidly, 
and  with  them  most  of  the  genera  of  Cephalopods,  which  have  a 
simple  form  of  air-chamber,  their  office  being  taken,  in  the  Triassic 
and  later  secondary  strata,  by  other  groups  of  Cephalopoda,  such  as 
-Ceratites,  Ammonites,  &c.,  in  which  the  air-chambers  are  minutely 
foliated  at  their  edges. 

The  true  characters  of  the  very  numerous  genera  and  species  of 
fossils  which  occur  in  this  group,  must,  indeed,  be  studied  in  other 
works ;  but  in  support  of  the  opinion,  that  the  corals  of  the  lower 
division  often  lived  where  they  are  found,  a  woodcut  is  here  given 
of  a  gigantic  specimen  of  Lithostrotion  floriforme  fa  (Sil.  Syst.)  the 


Fossils,  55. 
Coral  of  the  Mountain  Limestone. 


Lithostrotion  floriforme,  Fleming,  in  its  natural  position  in  the  rock." 


lower  parts  of  which  are  rooted  in  the  shale  /,  whilst  the  superior 
portion  is  imbedded  in  a  limestone,  e,  with  a  mass  of  red  con- 

*  Trans.  Geol.  See.  Lond.  vol.  v.  pL  41.  f.  1—4. 

\  My  friend,  Mr.  Lonsdale,  who,  as  before  stated,  described  all  the  corals  in  the 
Silurian  System,  does  not  admit  the  generic  word  Lonsdalia,  as  applied  to  this 
form  by  Mr.  Milne  Edwards  ;  he,  Mr.  Lonsdale,  having  first  defined  and  limited 
the  genus  Lithostrotion.  See  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  602.,  and 
Annals  of  Nat.  Hist.,  November,  1851. 


Chap.  XI.]  LOWER  CARBONIFEROUS  FAUNA.  283 

cretions,  d  d.  This  coral,  when  in  its  native  bed,  appeared,  there- 
fore, to  be  precisely  in  its  original  position,  and  conveyed  to  me 
the  impression  that  it  had  remained  undisturbed  beneath  the  sea, 
whilst  fine  red  sand  at  one  time,  and  mud  with  calcareous  matter 
at  another,  were  deposited  around  it.  The  small  figure,  in  the 
woodcut,  represents  the  large  shell  Productus  hemisphericus,  which 
in  nature  is  four  inches  broad,  and  shows  by  comparison  the  very 
great  size  of  the  coral,  which  has  a  width  of  two  feet  five  inches.* 

The  large  Producti  are,  however,  of  all  its  fossils,  the  most 
characteristic  of  the  lower  carboniferous  group,  the  same  species 
being  found  in  this  rock  through  many  degrees  of  latitude,  in 
Europe,  Asia,  and  America,  and  even  in  India  and  Australia.  A 
few  of  the  characteristic  fossils  of  these  formations  are  exhibited  in 
the  next  woodcut. 

Fossils,  56. 

Some  Fossils  of  the  Carboniferous  Limestone. 


1.  Brachymetopus  Ouralicus,  De  Vern.  2.  Phillipsia  pustulata,  Schlotli.  (P.  gemmulifera,  Phill.) 
3.  Spirifer  striatus?  Mart,  sp.  4.  Productus  giganteus,  Sow.  5.  Pleurorhynchus  aliformis, 
Sow.    6.  Goniatites  crenistria,  Phillips. 


*  See  Silurian  System,  p.  107.    The  coral  is  from  Lilleshall,  Shro])tihiie. 


284 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XI. 


Associated  with  these  species,  which  are  found  wherever  the  lime- 
stone exists,  are  fishes  of  the  placoid  order — chiefly  Cestracionts, 
their  hard  bony  palates  and  fin  defences  being  the  only  portions 
preserved  to  us ;  but  these  are  sufficient  to  show,  that  they  were 
both  very  numerous,  and  of  many  genera.  Psammodus,  Cochliodus, 
Ctenacanthus,  as  well  as  Megalicthys,  Gyracanthus,  Hybodus,  &c., 
are  familiar  types,  which,  with  many  others,  must  be  studied  in  the 
great  work  of  Agassiz,  or  in  the  subsequent  publications  of  Egerton 
and  other  authors.* 

But  besides  these  numerous  evidences  of  the  presence  of  the  sea, 
fresh  water  shells  (Unionidae)  every  now  and  then  occur  in  thick 
layers,  as  we  ascend  in  the  series,  and  are  among  the  most  charac- 
teristic of  the  upper  portions  of  the  formation. 

An  estuariau  intermixture  is  also  observable  in  coal-bearing 
strata  of  parts  of  Shropshire,  Staffordshire,  and  Lancashire.    It  is 


Fossils,  57. 
Insect  and  Shells  of  the  Coal. 


1.  Wing  of  (Cory- 
dalis  ?) 

2.  Prodnctus  scab- 
riculus,  Sowerby. 

3.  Unio  acutus, 
Sow. 


(From.  Sil.  Svst.  p. 
iOo.) 


well  seen  in  the  district  of  Coalbrook  Dale,  where  remains  even  of 
insects  allied  to  the  Corydalis  of  America,  are  found  associated 

*  See  Palaeichthyologic  Notes,  by  Sir  Ph.  de  M.  Grey  Egerton,  Bt.,  M.P., 
Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  iv.  p.  302  ;  vol.  v.  p.  329  ;  vol.  vi.  p.  1.  and  Nos.  4,  5. 
in  vol.  ix.  The  collections  of  ichthyolites  made  by  Sir  P.  Egerton  and  his  associate 
the  Earl  of  Enniskillen,  are,  it  is  believed,  unrivalled. 


Chap.  XI.]  UPPER  CARBONIFEROUS  FAUNA.  285 

with  marine  and  fluviatile  shells  and  land  plants.  The  figures  in 
cut  57.  represent  this  case  of  intermixture  as  formerly  pointed  out 
by  myself.  A  fuller  account,  however,  of  it  is  given  by  Mr.  Prest- 
wich,  in  his  elaborate  memoir  on  the  strata  and  fossils  of  that 
district.* 

Fossils,  58. 
Fekn  from  Coal  of  Coalbrook  Dale. 


Pecopteris  lonchitica,  Brongn.  (From  Sil.  Syst.  p.  105.) 

Other  probable  examples  of  such  associations,  indicating  the  con- 
tiguity of  land  on  which  plants  grew,  and  from  which  they  were 
transported  to  marine  or  brackish  water  estuaries,  are  seen  near 


Fossils,  59. 
Uppermost  Limestone  of  the  Coal. 


1.  Cypris  inflata,  natural 
size,  and  magnified  12 
times.  2.  Cvclas  (or 
Edmondia?)"  3.  Mo- 
diola,  from  Ardwick, 


Manchester,  in  a  some- 
what similar  band  of 
limestone.  (From  Sil. 
Syst.  p.  84.) 


*  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lend.,  vol.  v.  p.  413.  One  of  the  plants,  Pecopteris  lon- 
chitica (Brongn.),  which  is  given  in  the  upper  woodcut,  is  associated  in  these 
tracts  with  forty  or  fifty  species  of  terrestrial  plants  belonging  to  Calamitaceae, 
Polypodiaceae,  and  Lycopodiace£e.  Of  these,  the  Stigmaria  ficoides  (considered 
to  be  the  root  of  Sigillaria),  Neuropteris  cordata,  Odontopteris  obtusa,  and  the 
Pecopteris  here  figured,  are  perhaps  the  most  common. 


286  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XI. 

Shrewsbury,  Manchester,  and  other  localities,  among  some  of  the 
younger  coal  strata.  In  the  environs  of  Shrewsbury,  small  shells 
of  the  genus  Cyclas  (?)  with  the  minute  crustacean  Cypris  (or 
possibly  the  marine  genus  Cythere)  are  commingled  in  the  same 
limestone  with  a  minute  shell,  originally  termed  Microconchus 
carbonarius,  but  now  referred  by  naturalists  to  the  marine  or  estuary 
genus  Spirorbis.* 

The  preceding  and  following  figures  (cuts  59,  60.),  formerly  pub- 
lished in  the  Silurian  System,  explain  more  particularly  the  contents 
of  this  peculiar  limestone  of  the  coal  strata. 


Fossils,  60. 
Uppermost  Limestone  of  the  Coal. 
(From  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  84.) 


Microconchus  (now  called  Spirorbis)  carbonarius,  Sil.  Syst.  The  real  size  is  given  in  the 
minutest  of  these  figures,  whilst  the  upper  figures  are  somewhat  magnified,  and  the  lower 
very  greatly  so. 

In  all  such  cases,  and  still  more  where  the  coal  is  intercalated 
among  purely  marine  animal  remains,  we  must  believe,  that  the 

*  Some  of  the  coal  sandstones  in  the  environs  of  Manchester  exhibit  on  their 
surfaces  the  clearest  indications  of  havinj^  been  shore  deposits ;  certain  tracts  being 
marked  on  them,  of  animals  which  must  have  crawled  at  ebb  tides.  INIr.  Binney 
states  also,  that  the  shells  of  the  above  Spirorbis  occur  throughout  the  whole  of  the 
thick  series  of  the  Lancashire  coal-field,  and  thus  indicate  long-continued  marine 
conditions.  See  "  On  some  Trails  and  Holes  in  the  Carboniferous  Strata,  with 
Remarks  on  Microconchus  Carbonarius,"  by  INIr.  E.  W.  Binney.  Trans.  Lit.  and 
Phil.  Soc.  Manchester,  vol.  x.,  1851-2. 


Chap.  XI.]  CARBONIFEROUS  REPTILES.  287 

vegetables  from  which  it  was  formed  were  carried  down  into  seas 
or  estuaries  fed  by  freshwater  affluents. 

Whilst  researches  in  all  parts  of  the  world  have  only  produced 
one  small  reptile  from  the  Upper  Devonian  rocks,  it  was  stated 
that  the  same  period  afforded  comparatively  few  land  plants.  The 
appearance,  therefore,  of  land  plants  and  air-breathing  reptiles  was, 
as  far  as  our  evidences  go,  nearly  simultaneous. 

With  the  proofs  in  our  possession  of  the  large  quantities  of 
terrestrial  veo;etables  which  occur  in  the  Carboniferous  era  now 
under  consideration,  accompanied  as  they  are  in  numerous  cases  by 
river  and  lake  shells,  and,  in  other  instances,  by  insects,  and  land 
crabs,  it  might  be  expected  that  reptiles  would  also  be  found  in 
them.  And  such  has  proved  to  be  the  case.  The  first  discovery 
of  this  nature  was  made  in  the  coal-field  of  Saarbriick  in  Ehenish 
Bavaria,  wherein  two  species  of  Archegosaurus,  Goldfuss,  have  been 
found,  —  a  reptile  which  Hermann  Yon  Meyer  supposes  to  be  a 
connecting  link  between  Batrachians  and  Lizards. 

Since  then,  the  footsteps  of  a  large  reptile  allied  to  the  Cheiro- 
therium,  have  been  discovered  in  the  Carboniferous  strata  of  Pennsyl- 
vania. Recently,  Professor  M'Coy  detected  in  the  Museum  of 
Lord  Enniskillen,  the  remains  of  an  allied  reptile  from  British  coal- 
fields, which  Owen  has  described  under  the  name  of  Parabatrachus 
Colei.  Sir  C.  Lyell  has  also  communicated  the  still  mor^  interest- 
ing account  of  a  discovery  made  by  Mr.  Dawson  and  himself,  in 
the  coal-field  of  South  Joggins,  in  Nova  Scotia  *,  of  a  reptile  called 
Dendrerpeton  Acadianum,  which  Owen  and  Wyman  consider  to  be- 
long to  the  perennibranchiate  Batrachians.  With  this  reptile  were 
associated  many  land  plants,  and  the  shell  of  a  moUusk,  which  is 
supposed  to  have  been  air-breathing:  if  this  be  so,  it  is  the  first 
true  land-shell  which  has  been  found  in  strata  of  such  high  antiquity. f 


*  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  ix.  p.  55. 


I  Ibid  vol.  ix.  p.  58. 


288  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XI. 

These  discoveries  afford  us  proofs  of  associations  of  organic  remains 
which  might,  indeed,  have  been  anticipated  from  what  we  know  re- 
specting other  palajozoic  deposits. 

In  the  earliest  wide  and  general  diffusion  of  a  copious  and  peculiar 
vegetation,  we  further  recognize  the  prevalence  of  that  equable  tem- 
perature and  of  similar  conditions  over  various  latitudes,  which  must, 
in  my  opinion,  have  also  existed  in  the  preceding  periods.  In  the 
Carboniferous  deposits,  however,  we  are  for  the  first  time  surrounded 
by  proofs  of  the  existence  of  vast  plant-bearing  lands.  Of  these 
ancient  plants,  the  great  mass  of  the  Silurian  sediments  afford,  I 
repeat,  no  traces  in  any  part  of  the  world,  though  they  occur  in  just 
the  same  latitudes  as  the  Carboniferous  strata,  and  are  very  generally 
in  juxta-position,  often  with,  but  sometimes  without  the  interposition 
of  the  Devonian  rocks.  The  first  feeble  traces  of  such  vegetation 
are  observable  at  the  close  of  the  Silurian  era ;  and  if  the  Devonian 
rocks  exhibit  here  and  there  proofs  of  an  increase  of  land  plants, 
it  is  only  in  the  Carboniferous  period  that  we  are  presented  with  the 
complete  materials  for  the  elaboration  of  vast  coal-fields. 


P.  S.  —  Referring  to  the  preceding  pages,  let  me  state,  that  the  reader  will  find 
an  admirable  and  succinct  sketch  of  the  methods  by  which  coal  was  accumulated 
and  formed,  in  a  Report  by  Professor  H.  D.  Rogers  of  the  United  States,  as 
published  in  the  Transactions  of  the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement 
of  Science,  1842,  p.  433.  Having  explained  the  views  of  various  European  geo- 
logists, among  whom  he  justly  assigns  praise  to  Mr.  Mammatt,  for  having  been  one 
of  the  first  persons  who  sustained  by  physical  evidences  the  previous  theory  of 
De  Luc,  M'Culloch,  and  others,  of  the  formation  of  coal  out  of  terrestrial  vegeta- 
tion in  situ,  Professor  Rogers,  having  under  consideration  the  enormous  area 
occupied  by  the  carboniferous  strata  of  North  America,  endeavours  to  reconcile 
conflicting  hypotheses.  He  has,  indeed,  so  ingeniously  applied  the  opinions  of  his 
brother,  W.  Rogers,  and  himself,  respecting  the  influence  of  great  proxysmal  earth- 
quakes which  afi*ected  the  earth's  crust  in  ancient  periods,  as  to  suggest  how  the 
rapid  alternations  of  terrestrial  and  oceanic  remains,  to  which  attention  has  been 
called  in  this  work  (p.  277,  et  seq.),  can  be  best  accounted  for.  This  subject 
will  be  in  part  reconsidered  in  subsequent  chapters. 


289 


CHAPTER  XIL 

PEKMIAN  ROCKS. 

CHANGES  or  THE  SURFACE  BEFORE  THE  PERMIAN  DEPOSITS  WERE  ACCUMULATED. — 
ORIGIN  OF  THE  TERM  PERMIAN  AS  APPLIED  TO  THE   HIGHEST  GROUP  OF  PRIMEVAL 

DEPOSITS.  THE   PERMIAN    ROCK.S   OF  RUSSIA,  GERMANY,    AND  ENGLAND.  THE 

ORGANIC  REMAINS  OF  THE  GROUP. 

In  the  two  previous  chapters,  slight  allusions  only  have  been  made 
to  eruptions  of  igneous  or  volcanic  materials,  which  were  ejected  and 
spread  out  on  the  sea  bottom,  together  with  the  ordinary  sedimentary 
deposits ;  for  such  volcanic  ejections,  during  the  Devonian  and  car- 
boniferous eras,  were  not  by  any  means  so  abundant  in  the  British 
Isles  as  when  the  Silurian  rocks,  and  especially  their  lower  divi- 
sions, were  accumulated.    (See  ante,  pp.  54.  57.  &c.) 

The  great  upper  coal-fields  which  we  have  been  considering,  were 
probably  formed  under  conditions  which  geologists  would  consider 
comparatively  quiescent.  This  is  supposed  to  have  been  particularly 
the  case  with  all  that  portion  of  them,  in  which,  as  we  have  seen, 
coal  beds  must,  in  many  cases,  have  been  formed  by  repeated 
downward  movements  of  low  lands  beneath  the  waters,  followed 
by  many  elevations  of  the  same  into  the  atmosphere.  The  close, 
however,  of  that  period  was  specially  marked  by  convulsions  and 
ruptures  of  the  crust  of  the  earth,  which,  from  the  physical  evi- 
dences placed  before  us,  must  have  extended  over  distant  regions  of 
Europe,  as  well  as  of  America.    Whatever  may  have  been  the 

u 


290  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XII. 

previous  changes,  it  was  then  that  the  coal  strata  and  their  ante- 
cedent formations  were  very  generally  broken  up,  and  thrown,  by  grand 
upheavals,  into  separate  basins,  which  were  fractured  by  numberless 
powerful  dislocations.  The  order  of  ancient  sedimentary  succession 
was  thus  very  widely,  though  not  universally,  interrupted ;  and  all 
the  strata  previously  spoken  of  were  so  disturbed,  as  to  produce  a 
prevalent  break  or  discordance  between  the  carboniferous  and  inferior 
formations  and  those  which  succeeded  to  them. 

That  this  disturbance  was  not,  however,  general,  is  demonstrated 
by  the  fact,  that  both  in  Russia  on  the  east,  and  England  on  the 
west,  there  are  exceptional  tracts  in  which  the  carboniferous  and 
overlying  Permian  deposits  are  apparently  in  conformable  relations 
to  each  other. 

Still,  the  general  effect  of  the  great  disseverment  alluded  to,  in  de- 
termining the  outline  of  the  earth,  is  obvious  ;  for  whilst  the  SUurian, 
Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  rocks  were  at  that  period  so  heaved  up 
as  to  constitute  portions  of  mountain  chains,  the  strata  which  we  are 
now  considering,  though  allied  to  the  carboniferous  by  their  im- 
bedded plants  and  animal  remains,  have  been  usually  spread  out 
in  western  Europe  in  less  highly  inclined  positions;  constituting, 
therefore,  for  the  most  part,  countries  with  a  lower  level.  Whilst 
their  fossils  also  are,  on  the  whole,  different  from  those  of  all  pre- 
existing palaeozoic  rocks,  they  are  yet  far  more  connected  with 
the  fauna  and  flora  of  the  carboniferous  deposits,  than  with  the 
organic  remains  of  any  secondary  or  mezozoic  rock  subsequently 
formed. 

The  strata,  which  were  accumulated  after  the  great  deposits  of  coal, 
are  those  which  in  England  have  been  severally  termed  Lower  New 
Red  Sandstone,  Magnesian  Limestone,  and  marl  slate.  Similar 
rocks  have  been  long  known  in  Germany  under  the  names  of  Rothe- 
todte-liegende,  Kupfer-Schiefer,  Zechstein;  and  with  these  I  have 


Chap.  XIL]  THE  PERMIAN  ROCKS.  291 

united  an  inferior  portion  of  what  had  been  commonly  classed  with 
the  Bunter  Sandstein.  Having  become  satisfied  that  these  strata,  so 
different  in  mineral  character,  constituted  one  natural  group  only, 
which  must  be  distinguished  from,  yet  connected  with,  the  carboni- 
ferous series  beneath,  and  which,  from  its  organic  contents,  must  be 
entirely  separated  from  all  formations  above,  I  proposed  in  1841*,  to 
my  associates,  de  Verneuil  and  von  Keyserling,  that  the  group 
should  receive  the  name  of  Permian,  as  taken  from  an  enormous 
region  which  composed  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Permia.  To  that 
vast  country,  my  illustrious  friend  the  Baron  von  Humboldt  parti- 
cularly called  my  attention  when  about  to  revisit  Russia  with  my 
friend  de  Verneuil ;  and  there  we  found,  that  all  the  characteristic 
features  of  an  independent  assemblage  were  elaborated  on  a  very 
grand  scale. 

After  two  explorations  of  Russia  with  my  companions,  I  re-exa- 
mined (1844)  the  portions  of  Germany,  where  the  Zechstein  and  its 
associated  strata,  underlying  as  well  as  overlying,  are  best  displayed ; 
and,  by  placing  them  in  parallel  with  the  Russian  and  English  rocks, 
my  views  were  confirmed,  and  thus  all  the  deposits  above  mentioned 
were  included  under  the  term  "  Permian." 

The  value  of  this  euphonous  name,  for  a  series  of  strata  which 
constitute  one  natural  mass,  soon  became  so  obvious,  that,  although 
proposed  only  in  1841,  it  has  already  been  adopted  by  geologists 
of  different  nations,  including  my  own. 

In  Germany,  where  the  Rothe-todte-liegende  and  the  Zechstein 
had  long  held  their  head  quarters,  and  where  their  characters  had  been 
described  by  numerous  geologists,  from  the  days  of  Werner  and 

*  The  term  was  first  proposed  in  a  letter  addressed  by  myself  at  Moscow  to 
the  venerable  and  accomplished  Russian  palaeontologist  Dr.  Fischer,  October, 
1841.  See  Bronn  and  Leonhardt,  Journ.  an.  1841,  and  Phil.  Mag.,  vol.  xix. 
p.  417. 


292 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XII. 


Schlotheim,  to  those  of  the  great  geologist  Leopold  von  Buch,  whose 
recent  loss  we  deplore,  these  rocks  have  been  recognized  in  the  works 
of  Naumann  of  Leipsic,  and  of  Geinitz,  and  Gutbier  of  Dresden,  as 
the  "Permische  System."* 

In  France,  M.  Alcide  D'Orblgny,  in  his  systematic  work  on 
Palaeontology,  and  other  authors,  have  given  currency  to  a  name 
which  would  indeed  have  had  little  or  no  value  without  the  close 
palasontological  t  comparisons  of  my  colleagues,  de  Verneuil  and  von 
Keyserling,  as  worked  out  with  me  in  the  distant  eastern  regions  of 
Eussia  in  Europe. 

In  the  north  of  England,  where  its  most  varied  and  richest  fos- 
siliferous  members  were  first  described  by  Sedgwick  J,  its  organic 
remains  have  recently  been  illustrated  by  King,  under  the  term 
Permian ;  and  the  word  is  now  used  by  Sir  Henry  de  la  Beche  and 
the  Government  surveyors  in  the  construction  of  the  geological  map 
of  England. 

As  many  persons  may  not  have  access  to  my  large  work  on  the 
geology  of  the  Russian  empire,  in  which  a  full  description  is  given  of 
the  leading  characters  of  the  group,  and,  as  I  wish  to  impress  the 
reader  with  the  reasons  for  the  adoption  of  the  name  Permian,  a  few 
passages  from  the  writings  of  my  colleagues  and  myself  are  here  re- 
produced. By  the  first  of  these  extracts  it  will  be  perceived  that,  in 
describing  the  whole  structure  of  Russia,  we  began,  as  on  the  present 

*  See  Geinitz  and  Gutbier,  "Permische  System  in  Sacbsen,"  1848.  Dresden 
and  Leipsic. 

•f  See  Cours  Elementaire  de  Pal.  et  Geol.  Strat.,  par  Alcide  D'Orbigny,  vol.  ii. 
p.  370.  I  am  happy  to  learn  that  the  French  Government  have  rewarded  the 
labours  of  M  D'Orbigny  by  naming  him  Professor  of  Palseontology  in  the  Jardin 
des  Plantes.  My  friend  Professor  Philips  had  the  merit  of  having  first  suggested 
that,  on  account  of  its  fossils,  the  "magnesian  limestone"  of  England  should  be 
classed  with  the  palaeozoic  rocks.    Treatise  on  Geology,  p.  189. 

\  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  ii.  new  series,  p.  37.  et  seq. 


Chap.  XII.] 


PERMIAN  ROCKS  OF  RUSSIA. 


293 


occasion,  with  the  lowest  rocks  in  which  any  traces  of  life  could  be 
detected.    We  then  proceeded  : 

"  Having  worked  our  way  upwards  through  Silurian,  Devonian,  and 
Carboniferous  rocks,  we  have  now  to  describe  the  next  succeeding  natural 
group.  Spread  out  over  a  larger  surface  than  any  other  in  Russia,  the 
rocks  in  question,  with  certain  overlying  red  deposits,  which  we  cannot  sepa- 
rate from  them,  occupy  the  greater  part  of  the  Governments  of  Perm,  Oren^ 
burg,  Kazan,  Nijni  Novogorod,  Yaroslavl,  Kostroma,  Viatka,  and  Vologda, 
a  region  more  than  twice  the  size  of  the  whole  kingdom  of  France  ! "  * 

After  showing  to  what  an  extent  opinions  varied  respecting  the  age 
of  these  Russian  deposits,  most  authors  referring  them  to  the  New 
Ked  Sandstone  or  Trias,  others  to  the  carboniferous  era,  we  next 
observed  f : 

"  Such  was  the  state  of  the  question  when  we  entered  upon  the  survey 
of  Russia.  To  arrive,  therefore,  at  a  sound  conclusion  respecting  the  age 
of  these  rocks,  it  became  essential  to  traverse,  as  far  as  possible,  the 
countries  over  which  they  extended,  and  compare  the  phsenomena  which 
had  led  to  such  contradictory  opinions.  The  result  has  been,  that  though 
these  deposits  are  of  very  varied  mineral  aspect,  and  consist  of  grits,  sand- 
stones, marls,  conglomerates,  and  limestone,  sometimes  inclosing  great 
masses  of  gypsum  and  rock  salt,  and  are  also  much  impregnated  with 
copper,  and  occasionally  with  sulphur,  yet  the  whole  group  is  characterized 
by  one  type  only  of  animal  and  vegetable  life.^^ 

"  Convincing  ourselves,  in  the  field,  that  these  strata  were  connected 
by  their  organic  remains  with  the  carboniferous  rocks  on  the  one  hand, 
and  were  independent  of  the  Trias  on  the  other,  we  ventured  to  designate 
them  by  a  geographical  term,  derived  from  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Perm, 
within  and  around  whose  precincts  the  necessary  evidences  had  been 
obtained." 

"  With  the  highest  respect  for  the  labours  of  German  geologists  upon 
the  Zechstein,  and  for  the  researches  of  those  authors  who  have  placed 
the  Magnesian  Limestone  of  England  on  the  same  parallel,  we  are  con- 


♦  Russia  in  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  137.  f  Russia  in  Europe,  p.  138. 

u  3 


294 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XII. 


vinced,  that  neither  in  Germany  nor  in  Great  Britain  do  the  same 
accumulative  proofs  exist,  to  establish  the  independence  of  a  geological 
system.  If  mineral  characters  be  appealed  to,  no  German  writer  will 
contend,  that  the  thin  course  of  *  Kupfer  schiefer '  is  of  like  import- 
ance with  the  numerous  strata  which  in  Russia  constitute  many  bands  of 
various  structure ;  rendering,  in  fact,  the  Zechstein  itself  a  mere  sub- 
ordinate member  of  a  vast  cupriferous  series.  Subordinate,  however,  as 
it  is  in  some  tracts  of  Russia,  the  Zechstein  is  so  magnificently  displayed, 
in  others,  in  masses  of  both  limestone  and  gypsum,  that  it  more  than 
rivals  the  finest  sections  of  that  deposit,  whether  to  the  south  of  the 
Hartz,  or  in  Thuringia.  We  object,  however,  to  a  lithological  name, 
hitherto  reserved  for  one  portion  only  of  a  complicated  series ;  and  as 
the  Germans  have  never  proposed  a  single  term  for  the  whole  group, 
which  is  based  upon  the  Rothe-todte-liegende,  and  surmounted  by  the 
Trias,  we  have  done  so,  simply  because  we  first  found  in  Russia  the 
requisite  union  of  proofs." 

Occupying  the  enormous  area  before  mentioned,  the  Permian 
deposits  of  Russia  are  flanked  and  underlaid  on  the  west,  east, 
and  north,  by  upper  members  of  the  carboniferous  rocks,  but  with 
little  or  no  coal.  These  Permian  strata  of  Russia  seldom  exhibit 
a  mineral  succession  similar  to  that  of  rocks  of  the  same  age  in 
Western  Europe;  and  in  different  tracts  of  the  vast  region  ex- 
plored, they  exhibit,  as  explained  in  the  preceding  quotation,  many 
variations  in  their  contents  and  relations.  In  some  places,  as  on 
the  river  Kama,  near  the  Volga,  cupriferous,  red  grits  with  plants 
underlie  the  chief  limestone,  to  which  succeed  marls;  but  along 
the  eastern  limits  of  the  system,  as  flanked  by  the  Ural  Mountains, 
gypseous  limestones  form  the  base,  followed  by  the  red  copper  grits, 
sands,  marls,  and  pebble  beds,  which  extend  on  all  sides  around  the 
city  of  Perm.  On  the  whole,  indeed,  whether  we  appealed  to  the 
sections  on  the  banks  of  the  great  Dwina,  above  Archangel,  or  to 
the  western  flank  of  the  Ural  Mountains,  or  to  the  banks  of  the 
Lower  Volga,  near  Kazan,  localities  removed  from  each  other  by 


Chap.  XII.]  PERMIAN  ROCKS  OF  RUSSIA.  295 

vast  distances,  we  found  that  limestones,  often  interstratified 
with  much  gypsum,  prevailed  towards  the  base  of  the  Russian 
deposits. 

In  some  parts  of  the  region  salt  springs  occur.  These  may, 
doubtless,  rise  from  bodies  of  rock  salt  in  older  palseozoic  rocks, 
since  the  mineral  is  known  to  occur  in  the  Devonian  Old  Red 
Sandstone  or  Devonian  of  Western  Russia;  but  in  the  steppes 
south  of  Orenburg,  it  is  certainly  subordinate  to  true,  red  Permian 
deposits.*  These  salt  beds  range  up  to  the  foot  of  the  older 
palaeozoic  and  crystalline  rocks  of  the  South  Ural  Mountains  to 
the  east  of  Orenburg,  the  strata  of  Permian  age  being  alone  visible 
in  the  low  wooded  slopes  at  the  foot  of  the  rocky  chain  of  older  rocks 
represented  in  this  vignette. 


The  Gurmaya  Hills  of  the  South  Ural  Mountains. 
As  seen  from  the  Steppes  of  Orenburg.   (From  "  Russia  in  Europe,"  vol.  i.  p.  450.) 


*  Russia  in  Europe,  &c.,  vol.  i.  p.  184. 
u  4 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XII. 


21 


Along  certain  portions  of  the  west  flank  of  the 
same  chain  the  Permian  strata  occur  in  almost 
I  apparent  conformity  to  the  carboniferous  rocks. 
I  There  they  have  manifestly  undergone  a  move- 
^  ment  impressed  on  them  by  great  forces,  di- 
\  rected  from  north  to  south,  or  parallel  to  the 
\  Ural  mountains ;  all  the  strata,  whether  carbo- 
\  niferous  or  Permian,  having  been  raised  up  and 
\  thrown  off  sharply  to  the  west,  as  represented 
.  ^  I  in  the  woodcut  on  the  side  of  the  page. 

At  the  imperial  baths  of  Sergiefsk,  and  on 
the  banks  of  the  river  Sok,  a  tributary  of  the 
Lower  Volga,  magnesian  limestone  and  marl 
are  surmounted  by  gypsum,  copper  ore,  native 
sulphur,  with  sulphureous  and  asphaltic  springs 
U  in  the  middle  masses,  whilst  other  marlstones 
§  ^  and  white  limestones  form  the  summit.  A  con- 
^  I  siderable  volume  of  gaseous,  sulphureous  water, 
^  J  which  forms  a  large  pool,  issues  from  these 
I  rocks.  (See  diagram,  Russia  in  Europe,  &c., 
1       p.  158.) 

^  Near  Kazan,  about  150  miles  to  the  north 

of  Sergiefsk,  huge  masses  of  gypsum  («),  rising 
high  above  the  level  of  the  river  Volga,  are 
surmounted  by  limestone  cliffs  with  Zechstein 
fossils  (6),  and  the  latter  by  red,  green,  and 
white  marls  (c),  as  here  represented. 


"So 


1 

§ 


Permian  deposits  near  Kazan. 
(From  "  Russia  in  Europe,"  p.  162.) 


Thick  deposits  of  gypsum,    h.  Limestone  with  fossils,    c.  Red  and  green  shelly  marls. 


Chap.  XII.]  PERMIAN  ROCKS  OF  RUSSIA.  297 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  central  tracts  between  the  Ural 
Mountains  and  the  Volga,  as  on  the  Dioma,  and  Kidash,  tributaries 
of  the  great  river  Kama,  the  limestone,  which  in  some  tracts  assumes 
a  definite  horizon,  and  is  underlaid  by  coarse  grits,  is  repeated  at 
various  levels  in  a  succession  of  beds,  interlaminated  with  sandstones, 
and  yellow,  white,  and  greenish  marls,  occasionally  containing  plants, 
and  small  seams  of  impure  coal,  —  the  whole  being  surmounted  by 
red  grits  and  conglomerates,  with  copper  ore. 

Now,  the  calcareous  and  gypseous  deposits  which  interlace  this 
series  are  throughout  characterized  by  an  analogous  group  of  fossils^ 
and  even  by  some  of  the  same  species,  as  the  Zechstein  of  Germany 
and  the  magnesian  limestone  of  England  ;  whilst  the  beds  of  copper 
grit,  with  most  of  the  red  conglomerates^  which  in  Kussia  are  upper- 
most, contain  bones  of  reptiles  ( Thecodont-saurians),  belonging  to  a 
genus  which  in  Germany  occurs  in  the  copper  slate  beneath  the 
limestone. 

In  the  exploration  of  Russia,  therefore,  geologists  were  taught,  by 
this  diversified  Permian  group,  not  to  dwell  on  the  local  mineral  dis- 
tinctions of  Central  or  Western  Europe,  but  to  look  to  the  wide 
spread  of  certain  fossil  remains,  which,  in  vastly  distant  countries, 
occupy  the  same  general  horizon,  between  the  carboniferous  rocks  be- 
neath, and  all  those  overlying  strata  which  can  be  called  secondary. 

The  survey  further  proved,  by  the  extension  of  some  of  these 
fossils  upwards  into  red  and  green  marls  and  sands  far  above  the  chief 
bands  of  limestone,  that  the  Zechstein  of  Germany  cannot  be  pro- 
perly considered  the  summit  of  this  natural  group. 

Revisiting  the  districts  of  central  Germany  *,  which  I  had  often 
traversed,  and  which  had  been  rendered  classical  by  the  writings  of 
many  native  geologists,  I  ascertained  that  the  Flora  of  the  Rothe- 
todte-liegende,  as  collected  by  Colonel  Gutbier  and  Professor  Geinitz, 
has  essentially  the  same  supra-carboniferous  type  as  the  Permian 
Flora  of  Russia,  and  that  certain  fishes  of  the  todte-liegcnde  of 
*  In  the  year  1844,  and  after  my  journeys  in  Russia. 


298 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XII. 


Silesia  are  closely  analogous  to,  if  not  identical  with,  Russian  forms. 
Further,  seeing  that  the  whole  of  the  vast  red  deposit  (which  accord- 
ing to  M.  Credner,  of  Gotha,  swells  out  in  Thuringia  to  a  max- 
imum thickness  of  about  2500  feet)  was  conformably  succeeded  by 
the  Zechstein,  and  was  transgressive  to  the  coal  beneath  it,  I  natu- 
rally placed  it  (this  lower  red  sandstone  and  conglomerate)  as  the 
base  of  the  Permian  group  in  Germany;  the  more  so  as  by  this 
means  the  successive  strata  of  that  country  and  England  were 
brought  into  parallel  positions.  Next,  it  was  evident,  that  all  the 
copper  slates,  marls,  and  limestones  both  plain  and  dolomitic,  whether 
in  Russia,  Germany,  or  England,  were  occupied  by  a  similar  fauna. 
Lastly,  I  became  convinced  that  the  analogy,  with  Russia  on  the  one 
hand,  and  with  England  on  the  other,  might  be  completed  by 
grouping  with  the  Zechstein  a  certain  lower  portion  only  of  the  vast 
series  of  red  sandstones  which  overlies  that  formation  in  Germany. 

Any  one  who  looks  at  the  natural  succession  of  those  overlying 
rocks  in  Hessia,  Thuringia,  and  Saxony  will  see,  that  the  Bunter 
Sandstein  is  divided  into  two  parts,  as  faithfully,  indeed,  laid  down 
on  maps  by  several  good  native  geologists.  It  is  the  lowest  of  these 
only  that  I  have  grouped  with  the  Zechstein,  of  which  it  frequently 
forms  the  natural  and  conformable  cover.  As  yet  scarcely  any  organic 
remains  have,  I  admit,  been  detected  in  this  Lower  Bunter  Sandstein 
of  the  Germans.  Still,  in  several  places,  the  deposit  is  characterized 
by  the  presence  of  the  plant  published  by  M.  Adolphe  Brongniart  as 
Calamites  arenarius,  which  has  quite  a  palaeozoic  aspect,  and  differs 
from  all  known  plants  of  the  mezozoic  or  secondary  series.* 

*  la  a  recent  excursion  to  central  Germany,  when  accompanied  by  Professor  J.  Morris,  I  had 
an  opportunity  of  confirming  the  Permian  classification,  by  appeals  to  nature  and  to  the  collec- 
tions of  diff'erent  individuals,  as  well  as  by  reference  to  maps.  In  Saxony  we  examined  the  grand 
sections  of  the  Rothe-todte-liegende  under  the  guidance  of  Professor  Geinitz,  and  ascertained 
from  him  how  symmetrically  that  vast,  old,  coarse  formation  of  conglomerate,  sandstone  and 
interpolated  porphyries,  is  there  succeeded  by  the  Zechstein,  the  fossils  of  which  that  author 
has  so  ably  described.  (See  Permische  System  in  Sachsen.)  He  further  pointed  out  to  us  a 
thin-bedded  limestone  in  the  Plauen-Grund  W.  of  Dresden,  and  considered  by  him  to  be  subor- 


Ohaf.  XII.] 


PEKMIAN  ROCKS  OF  RUSSIA. 


299 


If  therefore  this  view  be  sustained,  it  may  be  said  that  the  Per- 
mian of  Germany  is  a  lower  or  palaeozoic  Triasy  the  central  mass 
of  which  is  the  Zechstein  limestone,  and  base  the  E-othe-todte- 
liegende;  whilst  the  Upper  or  Secondary  Trias  is  marked  by  its 
middle  limestone,  the  Muschelkalk,  with  its  underlying  red  Bunter 
Sandstein,  and  its  overlying  red  Keuper  marls. 

But  whether  this  lower  "  Bunter  "  be  abstracted  from  the  Trias  or 
not,  let  me  again  call  attention  to  the  fact,  that  whilst  the  Permian 
and  Trias  are  conformable  to  each  other,  and  exhibit  nowhere  any  of 
those  signs  of  disseverment  which  so  often  mark  the  close  of  the  coal 
deposits,  their  respective  fauna  and  flora  are  entirely  dissimilar ;  the 
one  exhibiting  the  last  traces  of  primeval  life,  the  other  being  charged 
with  the  exuviae  of  plants  and  animals  entirely  distinct  from  those 
which  preceded  them. 

dinate  to  the  copious  lower  red  sandstones  of  that  tract,  which  are  penetrated  to  such  great 
depths  by  shafts  that  reach  productive  coal  seams. 

In  the  south-east  parts  of  Thuringia  (Saalfeld),  where  the  higher  members  of  these  strata  appear' 
we  saw  how  the  Weiss-liegende  or  upper  member  of  the  Lower  Red  Sandstone,  is  succeeded  by 
the  Kupfer  Schiefer  and  the  Zechstein  with  its  subordinate  schists  and  overlying  dolomites  and 
gypsum,  as  described  by  M.  Richter  (Einladungs-Programm  der  Realschule  Saalfeld,  1853) ; 
and  again  how  all  these  dip  conformably  under  the  noble  escarpments  of  Bunter  Sandstein 
which  range  from  Rudolstadt  eastwards. 

At  Berlin,  through  the  kindness  of  M.  Beyrich,  we  inspected  many  fishes  and  plants  from  the 
Rothe-todte-liegende  of  Silesia  (Friedland,  Ruppersdorf,  &c.),  rocks,  which  after  a  former  exa- 
mination, I  classed  as  Permian ;  and  I  was  more  than  ever  impressed  with  the  belief,  that  the 
ichthyolites  which  there  occur  in  bituminous  schists  or  micaceous  red  flagstones  (Palaeoniscus, 
Holacanthodes,  'and  Xenacanthus),  pertain  to  the  same  system  of  life  as  the  ichthyolites  of 
the  Kupfer  Schiefer.  Again,  in  the  numerous  fossil  plants  of  this  red  sandstone  which 
were  laid  before  us.  Professor  Morris,  who  assisted  me  materially  in  describing  the  Permian 
plants  of  Russia,  was  of  opinion,  that  like  them,  this  Silesian  flora  was  to  be  distinguished  from 
the  ordinary  carboniferous  flora;  for  among  these  plants  we  could  perceive  no  Stigmaria, 
Lepidodendron,  nor  any  form  abundant  in  the  old  coal ;  but  on  the  contrary,  species  of  Neu- 
ropteris  and  Odontopteris,  and  also  those  coniferse  (Araucarites  or  Voltzia)  which  first  begin  to 
appear  in  the  Permian  era.  (See  Russia  and  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  218.,  and  Plates,  vol.  ii.) 

At  Gotha  we  had  the  advantage  of  examining  the  collections  of  that  good  geologist  and 
miner,  M.  Credner,  who  communicated  to  me  the  new  part  of  his  geological  map  of  Thuringia, 
**  Geogn.  Karte  des  Thiiringer-Waldes."  The  double  division  of  the  Bunter  Sandstein  to  which 
I  formerly  adverted,  as  made  by  M.  Althaus,  of  Rothenburg,  and  others,  has  also  been  clearly 
laid  down  in  an  useful  and  instructive  map  by  M.  Ludwig,  '  Petrog.  Karte,  der  gegend 
zwischen  Frankfurt,  Giessen,  Fulda,  und  Hammelburg ;  Darmstadt,  1853.' 


300  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XII. 

The  general  succession,  which  for  the  most  part  applies  to  Western 
Europe,  Is  expressed  in  this  diagram,  though,  as  before  said,  there 
are  tracts  both  in  Eussia  on  the  east,  and  in  England  on  -the  west, 
where  these  Permian  rocks  repose  with  apparent  conformity  on  the 
subjacent  coal  strata. 


Permian  Rocks  of  Britain. — Let  us  now  see  of  what  the  British 
Permian  rocks  (No.  9.  of  map)  consist. 

In  one  district  of  the  original  Silurian  region,  or  that  which  lies  to 
the  south-west  of  the  Staffordshire  coal-field  (near  the  Severn),  this 
group  seemed  to  me  occasionally  to  exhibit,  in  its  lowest  part,  a 
sort  of  transition  upwards  from  the  coal  measures.  Calcareous  shale 
with  thin  courses  of  coal  is  there  followed  by  sandstone  with  trappean 
tuff,  and  quartz  pebbles,  with  fragments  of  plants,  and  concretions  of 
iron  stone,  all  of  which  ought  probably  to  be  grouped  with  the  car- 
boniferous rocks.  But  the  overlying  members,  — red  shale,  argilla- 
ceous marl,  and  incoherent  yellowish  sandstone  with  calcareous  laminae, 
some  very  thin  layers  of  poor  coal,  may  be  viewed  as  the  base  of  the 
Permian.  These  strata  are  succeeded,  in  apparent  conformity,  by 
dark  red  sandstone  and  shale,  here  and  there  charo-ed  with  concretions 
of  dark  mottled  limestone.  These  sandstones  are  surmounted  by 
conglomerates,  which  in  parts  are  so  calcareous  as  to  be  burnt  for 
lime,  and  in  others,  as  at  Alberbury  near  Shrewsbury,  become 
almost  compact,  yellow,  magnesian  limestones. 


Chap.  XII.]  PERMIAN  ROCKS  OF  BRITAIN.  301 

In  an  adjacent  part  of  Staffordshire  and  Worcestershire,  on  the 
contrary,  the  older  rocks  of  the  coal-field  have  been  heaved  up  to  the 
surface  from  beneath  a  former  cover  of  the  red  ground  or  Permian 
rocks;  and  hence  the  formations,  as  in  many  places  around  the 
Dudley  coal-field,  are  separated  by  a  powerful  fault,  thus : 


Relations  of  Permian  Rocks  to  the  Coal  near  Hales  Owen. 

Kent  Hills.  Coal  near  Hales  Owen. 


b  a 
c.  Trappean  conglomerate,    h.  Red  sandstone  with  calcareous  concretions,    a.  Coal. 

In  the  tract  near  Hales  Owen  calcareous  matter  so  abounds  in  the 
red  Permian  rocks,  that  it  constitutes  zones  of  earthy,  concretionary 
limestone  {b  of  this  diagram),  which  are  perfectly  undistinguishable, 
as  formerly  pointed  out,  from  some  of  the  cornstones  of  the  Old 
Red  Sandstone.  Thus,  the  coal  of  this  part  of  England  was  shown 
to  lie  between  two  similar  red  deposits,  Sil.  Syst.,  p.  55. 

In  following  this  succession  upwards,  the  trappean  breccia  and 
conglomerate  of  the  great  Lickey  Hills  above  Hagley  Park  is  met 
with,  but  the  order  is  there  no  further  very  distinctly  traceable. 
Fragments  of  a  few  other  rocks,  besides  the  prevalent  trap  which  I 
described,  having  been  found  in  these  breccias  since  my  examina- 
tion, the  government  geologists,  Kamsay  and  Jukes,  view  them  as 
stratified  aqueous  deposits,  forming  an  integral  part  of  the  Permian, 
and  as  the  equivalents  of  the  ordinary  conglomerates  of  the  group.* 

In  one  portion  only  of  the  annexed  map  do  the  Permian  conglo- 
merates and  sandstones  contain  any  traces  of  fossils  except  plants ; 
and  this  is  to  the  north  of  Bristol,  where,  in  the  form  of  a  magnesian 
or  dolomitic  conglomerate,  they  have  afforded  remains  of  sauroid 
reptiles,  which  were  first  described  by  Messrs.  Riley  and  Stuchbury 

*  Professor  Ramsay  and  the  Government  Surveyors  are  now  employed  in  de- 
ciphering the  real  limits  and  contents  of  the  Permian  rocks  of  central  England. 


302  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XII. 

under  the  name  Thecodonto-saurus,  and  to  which  the  Khopalodon, 
Fischer,  is  considered  to  be  nearly  allied  by  Professor  Owen.* 

The  same  conglomerate  is  seen  in  patches,  accumulated  on  the 
edges  of  the  carboniferous  limestone  and  old  red  sandstone,  around 
parts  of  the  southern  rim  of  the  South  Welsh  coal  basin. f 

This  rock  has  usually  been  placed  on  the  same  parallel  as  the 
magnesian  limestone  of  the  north  of  England  ;  and  the  analogy  of  the 
succession  in  Shropshire,  where  the  lower  red  sandstone  is  inter- 
polated between  the  coal-fields  beneath  and  the  magnesian  conglo- 
merate above,  favours  the  view.  There,  the  upper  coal  is  surmounted 
by  a  considerable  thickness  of  red  sandstone  and  shale  (the  Lower 
New  Eed),  which,  in  their  turn,  are  covered  by  a  yellow  magnesian 
limestone  —  in  some  parts  highly  brecciated,  in  others  a  conglomerate, 
and  this  rock  is  again  overlaid  by  red  sandstone,  marl,  &c.  The 
general  order  in  the  portions  of  Shropshire,  near  Cardeston  and  Alber- 
bury  is  as  here  given. 

Position  of  the  Permian  Rocks  in  Shropshire. 


OL  6  o 

d.  Red  sandstone  and  marl.  1 

c.  Magnesian  conglomerate  and  yellow  limestone .  >  Permian  Rocks. 

b.  Dark  red  sandstone  (Lower  Red).  J 

a.  Coal  measures  —  upper  division  with  thin  courses  of  limestone. 

In  their  range  to  the  north  of  England,  these  rocks  become  more 
diversified  in  mineral  character  and  much  richer  in  fossil  contents, 
and  therefore  more  completely  represent  the  Permian  of  the  continent. 
Thus,  at  Manchester,  the  red  shale,  subordinate  to  sandstones  of  this 
age,  is  already  charged  with  casts  of  fossil  shells  of  the  genera 
Schizodus,  Avicula,  Turbo,  Eissoa,  &c.t 

*  Russia  in  Europe,  &c.,  vol.  i.  p.  637. 

•j-  This  dolomitic  conglomerate  is  also  finely  exhibited  near  Thornbury,  on  the 
east,  and  Bridgend  on  the  west,  of  the  Severn.    (See  map.) 

X  See  the  Fossils  of  these  Manchester  rocks,  as  published  by  Captain  Brown 
and  Mr.  Binney,  Manchester  Geol.  Trans.,  vol.  i.  p.  63. 


Chap.  XII.]  PERMIAN  ROCKS  IN  ENGLAND.  303 

Extending  northwards,  or  from  Nottinghamshire  into  Yorkshire^ 
red  marls  alternate  with  sandstones,  and,  as  shown  by  Sedgwick, 
overlie  the  magnesian  limestone ;  thus  offering  an  ascending  series 
similar  to  that  of  the  Russian  and  German  examples  before  cited.* 

The  inferior  member  of  the  group,  or  the  "  Rothe-todte-liegende " 
of  Germany,  where  it  occurs  in  Yorkshire,  is  known  as  the  "  Pon- 
tefract  rock"  of  Smith. f  It  consists  of  yellowish  sandstones  and 
conglomerates,  containing  various'  plants.  Reddish  sandstones,  re- 
occur, however,  near  Ripon,  and  are  not  unlike  some  of  the  same  age  in 
Shropshire  and  Staffordshire:  they  there  occupy  the  same  position, 
being  covered  by  the  magnesian  limestone  or  Zechstein  of  the  Bedale 
district,  whence  they  expand  over  a  large  tract  of  central  Yorkshire. 

The  succession  of  strata  in  the  north  of  England,  as  originally 
described  by  Professor  Sedgwick,  in  his  excellent  "  Memoir  on  the 
Magnesian  Limestone,"  and  there  paralleled  by  him  with  the  Zechstein 
of  Germany  and  its  associated  beds,  consists,  in  the  lower  part,  of 
flaglike  marls,  the  equivalents  of  the  "  Kupfer  Schiefer,"  and  in  the 
upper  of  the  yellow  magnesian  limestone  ("  Zechstein")  of  Yorkshire, 
Nottingham,  and  Durham.  The  whole  of  the  series,  together  with 
the  above-mentioned  overlying  red  beds,  are  included  in  the  term 
"  Permian." 

Recently  Professor  King,  who  had  long  studied  the  fossils  of  the 
calcareous  members  of  the  group,  has  placed  the  detailed  component 
parts  still  more  closely  in  comparison  with  the  corresponding  beds 
of  Germany.  Thus,  whilst,  with  Sedgwick,  he  considers  that  the 
lower  sandstones  of  Yorkshire  and  Durham,  whether  red,  white, 
or  yellow,  which  lie  between  the  coal  and  the  magnesian  limestone, 
are  the  true  equivalents  of  the  German  Rothe-liegende,  and  that  the 
marl  slate,  with  its  fishes,  stands  in  the  place  of  the  copper  slate 

*  See  Sedgwick  on  the  Magnesian  Limestone,  Geol.  Trans.  2nd  ser.,  vol.  iii  p.  37. 
f  So  named  by  William  Smith,  the  *  father  '  of  English  geology,  whose  lessons 
in  the  field  along  the  Yorkshire  coast  (1826)  were  of  great  service  to  me. 


304  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XII. 

of  Germany  —  he  also  shows,  that  the  fossiliferous  beds  of  compact 
limestone  represent  the  lower,  —  and  the  brecciated,  concretionary 
limestones  of  Durham  the  upper  Zechstein  of  the  Germans,  with 
its  overlying  beds  of  dolomite,  rauchwacke  and  "  stinkstein." 

In  England,  there  is,  perhaps,  no  other  yellow  limestone  so  charged 
with  magnesia  as  to  form  a  true  dolomite;  and  hence  in  the  early  days 
of  geology,  it  was  natural  to  define  this  rock  as  the  Magnesian  Lime- 
stone*, and  to  associate  with  it  certain  subordinate  strata.  But  now 
that  yellow  magnesian  limestones  are  known  to  occur,  on  a  stupen- 
dous scale  (in  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  North  America  j,  and 
are  also  of  some  magnitude  in  the  Devonian  and  Carboniferous  series 
of  Russia)  whilst  the  Jurassic  masses  of  the  Alps  are  to  a  great  extent 
crystalline  dolomites,  it  becomes  necessary  to  abandon  the  term 
"  magnesian,"  and  to  place  the  English  formation  under  a  name 
which  establishes  its  synonymy,  through  fossil  contents  and  position, 
with  rocks  of  other  countries.  % 

The  Permian  deposits,  as  developed  in  Russia,  and  as  applied 
to  Germany  and  England,  do  not  sto,  as  before  said,  in  the  as- 
cending order,  with  the  Zechstein.  They  also  include  another  over- 
lying red  sandstone,  which,  in  many  parts  of  Germany  constitutes 
the  conformable  roof  of  the  Zechstein,  and  contains  the  plant 
Calamites  arenarius,  Brongn.,  which  has  a  quasi  carboniferous  aspect. 
In  general  language,  therefore,  the  Zechstein  of  Germany,  or  mag- 
nesian limestone  of  England,  may  be  viewed  as  the  calcareous 

*  I  am,  however,  disposed  to  think  that  some  of  the  yellow  beds  of  the  carboni- 
ferous limestone  of  the  Clee  Hills  are  exceptions,    (See  Sil.  Syst.  p.  119.) 

■j-  See  Dale  Owen's  Geology  of  Wisconsin,  Iowa,  and  Minnesota,  with  Map, 
on  which  vast  magnesian  limestones  are  laid  down  as  the  Lower  Silurian  of  that 
author.  1853. 

J  True  dolomite,  whether  crystalline  or  earthy,  is  known  by  its  containing  45 
per  cent,  of  magnesia.  Another  proof  of  the  inapplicability  of  mineral  terms  to 
designate  the  age  of  strata,  is  the  use  of  the  term  "  oolitic  "  for  rocks,  which  in 
England  have  a  structure  that  is  scarcely  ever  found  in  their  continental  equi- 
valents.   It  is  therefore  merely  an  insular  lithological  name  which  misleads. 


Chap.  XII.]  PERMIAN  FLORA.  305 

centre  of  an  arenaceous  group,  or,  as  before  said,  a  lower  "  Trias 
the  upper  red  marl  and  sand  of  Yorkshire,  described  by  Sedgwick, 
being  as  much  a  parcel  of  it  as  those  red  sandstones  and  conglomerates, 
or  "rothe-todte-liegende,"  which  in  Western  Europe  lie  beneath  it. 

There  are,  indeed,  parts  of  Europe,  as  in  the  Ardennes  of  Belgium, 
where  these  rocks,  so  diversified  elsewhere,  are  represented  by  a  mere 
band  of  pebbly,  silicious  conglomerate,  which  being  sterile  of  fossils 
was  named  Peneen  "  by  M.  D'Omalius  D'Halloy.*  In  France,  i,  e, 
in  the  Vosges  and  at  Lodeve  in  Dauphine,  this  group  has  not  the 
distinctive  characters,  lithologically  or  zoologically,  which  it  exhibits 
in  Kussia,  Germany  and  Britain,  being  simply  a  red  sandstone.  But 
even  there  it  is  distinguished,  as  in  other  regions,  by  a  peculiar  flora, 
containing  certain  ferns  and  conifers  which  M.  Adolphe  Brongniart 
classes  with  Permian  plants. 

Permian  Fossil  Remains.  —  The  fauna  and  flora  of  the  Permian 
rocks  are,  as  before  stated,  essentially  palaeozoic;  for  whilst  in  great 
measure  specifically  distinct  from  that  of  the  carboniferous  system,  the 
amount  of  their  agreement  is  surprising  when  we  reflect  upon  the 
phenomena,  adverted  to  in  opening  this  chapter,  of  a  great  physical 
revolution  which  pretty  generally  affected  the  known  surface  of  the 
earth  at  the  close  of  the  preceding  or  carboniferous  era.  That  disrup- 
tion, therefore,  however  violent  and  extensive,  was  not  universal,  but 
was,  we  may  suppose,  so  productive  of  new  conditions  as  to  occasion 
the  destruction  of  many  genera  and  species  of  plants  and  animals. 

The  Permian  flora  has  not  been  yet  so  developed  in  the  British 
Isles  as  to  show  in  what  degree  it  differs  from  that  of  the  carboni- 
ferous group,  to  which,  in  fact,  it  every  where  bears  a  resem- 
blance. We  know,  indeed,  that  some  of  the  species  found  in  the 
yellowish  sandstones  of  Pontefract,  and  in  the  lower  red  sandstones 
which  may  be  classed  as  Permian,  are  identical  with  plants  of  the 

*  Elemens  de  Geologie,  p.  276.    "  Peneen,"  means  sterile. 

X 


306 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XII. 


adjacent  coal-fields ;  and  at  Ashby  de  la  Zouch,  Sternhergia  has 
lately  been  detected,  together  with  silicified  wood,  by  the  Rev.  W. 
H.  Coleman.  Prof.  Sedgwick*  long  ago  pointed  out  the  traces  of 
Calamites  in  the  lower  New  Red  Sandstone ;  and  we  here  reproduce 
figures  of  two  fossil  plants,  found  in  the  marl  slate  of  Durham,  from 
Professor  King's  elaborate  work.f 


Fossils,  55. 
Permian  Plants,  &c. 


1. 


3.  Fenestella  retiformis.Schlo- 
theim ;  "  Magnesian  lime- 
stone "  of  Humbleton  Hill. 
The  figures,  except  f.  2, 
are  much  reduced. 


In  certain  foreign  tracts,  however,  which  have  been  closely  ex- 
amined, the  lower  Permian  strata  contain  many  plants  and  some 
thin  beds  of  coal.  The  sandstone  of  Lodeve,  before  adverted  to, 
affords,  according  to  M.  Ad.  Brongniart,  ferns  of  the  genera  Sphe- 
nopteris,  Pecopteris,  Neuropteris,  Alethopteris,  Callipteris,  with  An- 
nularia  floribunda  (Sternberg),  and  several  conifers  of  the  genus 
Walchia4  The  sandstone  and  conglomerates  also  beneath  the 
magnesian  limestone  near  Zwickau  in  Saxony,  have  rewarded  the 
researches  of  Colonel  Gutbier  §  with  about  sixty  species  of  plants. 
One-third  only  of  these  are  known  in  the  carboniferous  epoch ;  the 
other  two-thirds  are  forms  which  specifically  are  unknown  in  any 

♦  Proc.  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  i.  p.  344. 

f  Monogr.  Perm.  Foss.  1848,  pi.  1.,  &c. 

+  See  Russia  in  Europe,  &c.,  vol.  i.  p.  219. 

§  Geinitz  und  Gutbier,  Gaea  von  Sachsen,  1843.  "  Permische  System  in 
Sachsen,"  1850. 


Chap.  XII.]  PERMIAN  FAUNA.  307 

other  deposit.  Among  the  plants  most  characteristic  of  the  group, 
may  be  mentioned  the  Sphenopteris  erosa,  S.  lobata,  and  the  great, 
reed-like  Calamites  gigas.  The  large  silicified  stems  of  tree  ferns 
called  Psaronius,  so  much  admired  by  collectors  for  the  exquisite 
conservation  of  the  fibre  of  the  plant,  and  for  the  beautiful  polish 
they  take,  occur  abundantly  in  the  lower  red  (Permian)  beds  of 
Saxony.*  Whilst  in  Russia  these  species  of  plants  are  found  in 
beds  above  all  the  limestone  courses,  they  are  confined  to  the  lower 
strata  of  Saxony,  and  are  there  commingled  with  some  species  known 
in  the  upper  coal  deposits. 

On  the  whole,  it  was  the  opinion  of  M.  Adolphe  Brongniart,  to 
whom  the  plants  brought  from  Russia  were  referred  f,  that  they 
exhibit  a  continuation  of  vegetable  life  of  the  same  general  characters 
as  those  which  prevailed  in  the  carboniferous  era.  But  whilst  the 
genera  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  coal  period,  the  species,  with  two 
or  three  exceptions,  are  different.  On  the  other  hand,  no  one  of  the 
Russian  or  Permian  genera,  Neuropteris,  Odontopteris,  Lepido- 
dendron,  Sphenopteris,  Noeggerathia,  &c.,  occur  in  the  overlying 
Trias,  in  ascending  into  which  the  geologist  has  before  him  an  en- 
tirely different  flora. 

The  chief  Permian  animal  remains  bear  also  a  strong  resemblance 
to  their  congeners  of  the  carboniferous  era.  When  the  work  on 
Russia  was  written,  my  companions  and  myself  were  not  aw^are 
of  more  than  166  fossil  Permian  species,  but,  by  the  publication 
of  the  works  of  Geinitz  in  Saxony  |  and  King  in  England,  this 
number  has  been  increased  to  230;  a  small  proportion,  therefore, 
when  compared  with  that  of  the  preceding  or  carboniferous  epoch, 
in  which  about  1050  species  of  animals  are  already  described. 

*  The  finest  collection  of  these  "Psaronites"  extant,  with  which  I  am  acquainted, 
is  that  of  my  valued  friend,  Mr.  Eobert  Brown,  the  eminent  botanist, 
f  Russia  in  Europe,  &c.,  vol.  i.  p.  218.  et  seq. 

X  Geinitz,  Die  Versteinerungen  des  Deutschen  Zechstein  gebirges,  1848. 

X  2 


308  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XII. 

The  corals  and  Bryozoa,  twenty-six  in  number,  have  the  pa- 
laeozoic type,  the  small  cup-coral  Polycoelia ;  apparently  showing  the 
quadripartite  arrangement  of  the  lamellse  characteristic  of  the  cup- 
corals  of  the  old  rocks.  The  abundant  Fenestella  retiformis,  and 
Synocladia  virgulacea,  Foss.  61.  f.  3.,  are  also  of  a  type  peculiar 
to  the  primeval  fauna.  Crinoids  are  rare ;  but  there  is  in  England  a 
species  of  the  genus  Cidaris,  the  earliest  known  representative  of  the 
modern  sea-urchins.*  The  Brachiopods,  of  which  about  thirty- 
eight  species  are  known,  offer  many  Producti,  analogous  to  those 
of  the  coal  period ;  and  about  five  species,  including  P.  hor- 
ridus,  the  most  common  Permian  form  in  Britain  and  Germany 
(Foss.  56.  f.  2.),  and  P.  Cancrini,  are  identical  with  carboniferous 
forms.  Eleven  species  of  Spirifer  also  occur,  one  of  which,  S.  undu- 
latus  (f.  1.),  is  the  most  characteristic,  and  S.  cristatus  is  supposed 
to  be  common  to  the  carboniferous  and  Permian  rocks.  Of  the 
genus  Orthis,  which  prevails  so  greatly  from  the  Lower  Silurian  to 
the  carboniferous  inclusive,  we  here  find  no  trace ;  nor  does  it 
occur  in  any  superior  formation.  Its  place  is  possibly  taken,  in 
the  Permian  rocks,  by  the  new  genus  Strophalosia,  King  (Orthothrix 
of  Geinitz)  f,  or  Aulosteges  of  Helmersen,  which  is  but  rarely  found 
in  older  strata.  Of  the  few  species  of  Terebratula  which  are  known, 
two  or  three  are  exceedingly  abundant,  and  one,  T.  elongata  of 
Schlotheim,  can  scarcely  be  distinguished  from  a  common  carboni- 
ferous species.  The  Athyris  Roissyi,  too,  is  apparently  identical  with 
the  Devonian  and  carboniferous  shell. 

The  genus  Pentamerus,  so  characteristic  of  the  Silurian  epoch, 
and  so  rare  in  the  Devonian  strata,  but  which  has  also  been  found 

*  The  species  of  Cidaris  often  quoted  from  carboniferous  rocks,  belong,  as  has 
been  well  shown  by  M'Coj,  to  a  different  family.  They  are  now  termed  ArchcBo- 
cidaris.    See  Annals  Nat.  Hist.  2  ser.  vol.  iii.  p.  352. 

t  Composed  of  those  species  of  Producti  which  have  a  distinct  hinge  area  and 
hinge  teeth. 


Chap.  XII.]  PERMIAN  FAUNA.  309 

in  the  carboniferous  rocks  of  England,  has  not  yet  been  detected 
in  the  Permian  deposits.  In  unison,  however,  with  the  prevailing 
evidences  of  the  development  of  nature,  which,  in  modifying  beings 
at  successive  periods,  often  retained  some  features  of  the  preceding 
types,  the  Pentamerus  was  represented  in  the  Permian  division,  by 
the  curious  terebratuloid  shell,  named  Camarophoria  by  Prof.  King, 
which  offers  in  its  internal  arrangement  an  approach  to  the  structure 
of  the  Pentamerus.  Two  of  the  most  frequent  Permian  shells,  indeed, 
are  C.  (Terebratula)  Schlotheimi,  von  Buch,  and  C.  superstes,  de 
Verneuil,  both  figured  in  the  work  on  Russia,  vol.  ii.  pi.  8.  figs.  4,  5. 
These  singular  brachiopods  also  disappeared  at  the  close  of  the 
Permian  era,  and  their  places  were  occupied  by  genera  (Terebratula, 
Rhynchonella,  &c.)  which  exist  even  in  the  present  day. 

The  annexed  woodcut  represents  a  few  of  the  typical  Permian 
fossils ;  the  figures  being  about  half  the  natural  width. 


1.    Spirifer   undiilatus,  Sow. 

2.  Productus   horridus,  id. 

3.  Schizodus  (Axinus)  ob- 
scurus,  id.  All  from  the 
county  of  Durham. 


Fossils,  56. 
Permian  Shells. 


4.  Strophalosia  Morrisiana, 
King.  These  species,  ex- 
cept, perhaps,  the  Schizodus, 
are  equally  common  in 
Germany  and  Britain. 


In  the  lamellibranchiate  shells  (the  Dimyaria  and  Monomyaria  of 
most  geological  works),  we  note  the  same  diminution  of  genera 
and  species  in  reference  to  deposits  of  previous  eras ;  and,  whilst 
not  less  than  288  species  are  known  in  the  carboniferous,  about  fifty- 
three  only  have  been  obtained  in  the  Permian  deposits.    Modiola  is 

X  3 


310 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XI  I. 


one  of  the  most  characteristic  genera ;  M.  Pallasi,  and  M.  septifer, 
being  common  forms.  Schizodus,  King  {olim,  Axinus),  is  also  a  cha- 
racteristic genus:  S.  obscurus  and  S.  truncatus  are  from  western 
Europe ;  both  of  them  are  however  common  in  England  and  Russia. 
S.  Rossicus,  de  Yerneuil,  is  a  Russian  species  only.  The  genus 
Avicula  is  also  abundant;  the  small  spinose  A.  Kazanensis  being 
common  in  Russia.  The  Avicula  speluncaria  of  Schlotheim  is  one  of 
the  most  characteristic  species  of  western  Europe,  whilst  A.  kerato- 
phoga  and  A.  antiqua,  Miinst.,  are  frequent.  Area  tumida,  Sowerby, 
and  species  of  Edmondia,  Myacites,  &c.  are  British  shells  of  this  age. 

"  The  Gasteropods  appear  to  have  undergone  great  diminution  during  the 
formation  of  the  Permian  strata,  and  to  have  had  great  difficulty  in  accom- 
modating themselves  to  new  conditions.  For,  if  we  pass  over  the  seven 
minute  species  of  Turbo  and  Rissoa,  occurring  in  one  locality  near  Man- 
chester, the  number  of  Gasteropods  known  throughout  England,  Germany, 
and  Russia,  in  rocks  of  this  age,  amounts  to  but  fifteen  {now  twenty-one) 
species,  a  number  which  must  appear  still  more  insignificant,  when  we  reflect 
that  as  many  as  225  species  of  this  class  are  known  in  the  carboniferous.* 
These  fifteen  Permian  species  are  almost  all  new,  three  only  having  been 
able  to  live  on  from  the  carboniferous  to  the  Permian  epoch.  The  rarity 
of  individual  Gasteropods,  which  are  met  with  in  the  strata,  seems  to 
combine  with  the  paucity  of  species  to  make  us  presume  that  the  causes 
which  were  opposed  to  their  free  development,  produced  very  extensive 
effects." 

"  The  Cephalopods,  which  under  the  forms  of  Goniatites,  Nautilus,  and 
Orthoceras,  were  so  numerous  during  the  carboniferous  period,  that  160 
species  (now  many  more)  have  been  already  described  from  its  strata,  were 
almost  entirely  annihilated  previous  to  the  commencement  of  the  Permian 
era." 

At  least  it  is  remarkable,  that,  with  the  exception  of  a  Nautilus,  N. 


*  In  the  work  on  Russia,  the  Devonian,  Carboniferous,  and  Permian  rocks  were 
each  designated  as  "  Systems ; "  but,  as  explained  in  this  work,  they  are  now 
viewed  as  groups,  that  constitute  the  "  Upper  Palaeozoic  System ;  "  the  Silurian 
being  the  "  Lower  Pala30zoic."   (See  also  the  last  chapter.) 


Chap.  XII.]  PERMIAN  FAUNA.  311 

Frieslebeni,  Geinitz,  no  well  characterized  cephalopod  has  been  detected 
in  the  whole  extent  of  the  formation. 

"  Trilobites  are  entirely  wanting.  In  the  study  of  the  palaeozoic  succes- 
sion we  see  that  the  disappearance  of  this  race  is  regularly  announced  by  a 
gradual  diminution  of  its  numbers  during  the  preceding  epochs.  Appear- 
ing among  the  earliest  forms  of  life,  and  having  their  maximum  of  de- 
velopment in  the  Silurian  period,  trilobites  decrease  very  sensibly  in  the 
Devonian  strata,  and  in  the  carboniferous  deposits  are  reduced  to  some 
few  small  species,  of  which  Phillipsia  and  Griffithides  are  the  last  ex- 
piring forms.  And  here  we  are  presented  with  one  of  those  beautiful 
links  in  natural  history,  of  which  the  strata,  forming  the  earth's  crust, 
have  afforded  so  many  proofs.  For,  with  the  final  extinction  of  a  family 
destined  never  more  to  reappear,  its  place  is  taken  by  an  allied  crustacean, 
the  Limulus,  the  earliest  form  of  which  was  created  during  the  formation 
of  the  great  coal-fields,  and  was  followed,  in  our  Permian  system,  by  the 
large  and  remarkable  species  as  yet  peculiar  to  Russia,  the  Limulus 
oculatus  (Kutorga).  Unlike  the  trilobite,  the  Limulus  has  survived  all 
the  numerous  revolutions  which  have  followed  its  creation,  and  some  of  its 
species  are  coexistent  with  our  own  race."  * 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  if  there  are  only  a  few  species  of 
mollusks  which  are  common  to  the  older  rocks  and  the  Permian, 
the  latter  still  retains  its  connection  with  the  former  through  the 
genera  Productus,  Spirifer,  Strophalosia,  its  peculiar  group  of  corals, 
and  of  Bryozoa  (Fenestellae,  &c.).  It  is  the  constant  diffusion  of 
many  individuals  of  such  forms,  which  induced  my  associates  and 
myself  to  hold  firm  in  retaining  the  term  Permian,  as  marking 
the  close  of  primeval  life,  and  in  separating  it  from  the  Trias  and 
secondary  deposits,  with  which  it  has  no  form  in  common. 

The  fossil  fishes  of  this  era,  of  which  fifty-three  species  are 
known,  all  belong,  like  their  precursors,  to  the  division  with 
heterocercal  tails ;  a  distinction  that  becomes  more  and  more 
evanescent  in  all  the  succeeding  secondary  and  tertiary  formations, 
and  in  our  era  is  confined  to  the  shark  and  sturgeon  families ; 

*  Russia  in  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  209,  &c. 
X  4 


312  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XII. 

nearly  all  other  species  now  living,  about  8000  in  number,  having 
homocercal  tails. 

Of  true  heterocercal  fishes  of  the  Permian  group,  two  figures 
only  are  here  given,  by  which  the  reader  will  see  that  the  backbone 


Fossils,  57. 
Permian  Fish. 


Platysomus  striatus,  Agassiz  ;  from  the  "  Marl  Slate,"  Durham. 

is  prolonged  with  a  bend  into  the  end  of  the  upper  lobe  of  the 
tail ;  whilst  in  the  homocercal  fishes,  or  those  common  in  the  younger 
rocks  and  in  the  present  time,  it  terminates  in  the  middle,  between 
the  equally  balanced  fins  of  the  tail. 

The  Palaeoniscus,  Pygopterus,  Ccelacanthus,  Acrolepis,  and  Platy- 
somus, which  are  the  prevailing  genera  of  the  Permian  era  (the 
same  generic  forms  being  found  in  England,  Germany,  and  Russia), 
are  all  known  in  the  Carboniferous  epoch,  but  the  species  of  the 
younger  deposit  are  wholly  distinct. 


Fossils,  68. 


Palaeoni3CU3  Frieslebeni,  Agassiz ;  from  the  "  Kupfer  Schiefer  "  of  Mansfeld,  in  Thuringia. 


Chap.  XII.]  PEKMIAN  FAUNA.  313 

Lastly,  in  enumerating  the  chief  features  of  the  Permian  fauna, 
we  have  to  recollect,  that  whilst  a  very  few  reptiles  have 
been  found  in  the  next  subjacent  formations  (Carboniferous  and 
Devonian),  the  strata  of  this  newer  era  contain  the  relics  of  The- 
codont Saurians,  which  Owen  refers  to  a  higher  order  of  reptiles 
than  any  of  the  older  fossils  of  this  family,  by  showing  that  they 
are  even  allied  to  the  living  monitor.*  The  Palaeosaurus  and  Pro- 
tosaurus  were,  according  to  him,  Sauri  which  occasionally  walked 
on  dry  land. 

Struck  with  this  fact  of  the  Permian  deposits  containing 
Saurians,  Agassiz  thought  that  the  group  ought  to  be  placed 
at  the  base  of  the  secondary  rocks,  which  mark  the  great  era  of 
reptiles.  But  the  recent  discovery  of  Saurians  and  Batrachians 
in  the  Carboniferous  rocks  of  Europe  and  America,  and  of  one 
reptile  in  the  Upper  Old  Red,  have  satisfied  my  colleagues  and 
myself,  that  we  were  right  in  being  guided  by  the  general  facies 
of  the  mollusks  and  plants,  and  in  grouping  the  Permian  with 
antecedent  deposits,  with  which  they  are  naturally  united  by 
many  links. 

In  reviewing  the  few  reptiles  of  the  Devonian,  Carboniferous,  and 
Permian  rocks,  which  have  been  discovered,  we  have  yet  scarcely 
sufficient  materials  to  enable  us  to  decide  on  the  relative  value 
of  such  animals  in  the  scale  of  creation.  As  far,  however,  as  the 
above  mentioned  evidences  go,  Professor  Owen  is  of  opinion,  that 
the  solitary,  small  reptile  of  the  Upper  Old  Ked  Sandstone,  found  in 
the  vicinity  of  Elgin  (see  p.  254.),  belongs  to  the  Lacertilia,  a  higher 
order  than  the  Batrachia,  to  which  the  reptiles  of  the  coal  are  referred. 
At  the  same  time  the  latter  possess  characters  in  their  skull  and  teeth 
which  bring  them  nearer  to  the  Saurian  order  than  any  modern  Ba- 
trachian. 

*  See  Russia  in  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  213,  and  Professor  Owen's  description, 
p.  637,  App. 


314  SILUKIA.  [Chap.  XII. 

The  same  eminent  comparative  anatomist  affirms,  that  the  The- 
codonts of  the  Permian  are  more  nearly  allied  to  the  Crocodilians  of 
the  Lias,  and  so  to  the  higher  order  of  reptiles,  than  any  living 
monitor ;  and  "  just,"  says  he,  "  as  the  coal  Batrachia  are  more 
sauroid,  so  the  lacertilian  sauroids  of  the  Trias  (New  Red)  are  more 
Crocodilian  than  existing  frogs  and  lizards  are."  In  a  letter  to 
myself,  from  which  the  above  view  is  derived,  he  adds,  "  So  far  as 
Old  Red  (Upper),  Coal,  and  Permian  reptiles  are  known,  they  support 
the  general  fact,  that  the  more  ancient  forms  of  vertebrata  adhered 
closer  to  the  general  archetype  of  that  sub-kingdom  than  the  more 
modern  forms." 

Thus  we  learn,  that  in  the  oldest  rocks  (Upper  Palaeozoic),  in 
which  they  first  appear,  the  reptiles  are  as  wonderful  and  elaborate 
in  structure  as  the  primeval  fishes  which  accompanied  them,  or  as  the 
corals,  crinoids,  shells,  and  Crustacea  which  preceded  them  during 
the  Silurian  or  Lower  Palasozoic  epoch. 

In  concluding  this  chapter,  it  may  indeed  be  re-asserted*,  that  the 
mass  of  the  organic  remains  of  the  Permian  system  constitute  a  mere 
remnant  of  the  earlier  creations  of  animals,  the  various  develop- 
ments of  which  we  have  followed  in  the  preceding  pages.  They 
exhibit  the  last  of  the  partial  and  successive  changes  which  these 
creatures  underwent  before  their  final  disappearance.  The  dwin- 
dling away  and  extinction  of  many  of  the  types,  which  were  produced 
and  multiplied  during  the  anterior  epochs,  already  announce  the  end 
of  the  long  palaeozoic  period. 

In  ascending  above  the  highest  of  the  Permian  deposits,  the 
geologist  takes,  indeed,  a  sudden  and  final  leave  of  nearly  every- 
thing in  nature  to  which  the  words  primary,  primeval,  or  palaeozoic 
have  been  or  can  be  applied. 

In  short,  the  two  greatest  revolutions  in  the  extinct  organic  world 


*  See  Kussia  in  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  205. 


Chap.  XII.]  CLOSE  OF  PRIMEVAL  LIFE.  315 

are  those  which  separated  the  primeval  or  palaeozoic  rocks  from  the 
mediaeval  or  secondary  strata,  and  the  latter  from  the  tertiary  and 
modern  deposits. 

To  the  consideration  of  these  two  remarkable  and  salient  features 
in  the  history  of  former  races,  we  shall  briefly  advert  in  the  con- 
cluding chapter. 


P.  S. — A  good  additional  palaeozoic  form  has  been  discovered  in  the  Zechsteinof 
Ilmenau,  and  is  described  by  Professor  Geinitz  as  Conularia  Holleleni.  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen-Geologischen  Gesellschaft,  vol.  ii.  p.  465. 

I  may  also  mention  here  a  fine  specimen  of  the  Xenacanthus  Dechenii,  Beyrich, 
which,  with  other  Permian  fishes  (Holacanthodes,  &c.),  I  saw  lately  in  the  Museum 
at  Bonn.  The  fish  in  question  has  the  fins  and  tail  expanded,  and  measures 
15  inches  in  length.  It  is  from  Ruppendorf.  (See  p.  339.  See  also  Leonh.  and 
Bronn,  Neues  Jahrb.  1849,  118.) 


316 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIII. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

GENERAL  VIEW  OF    THE   SILURIAN,  DEVONIAN,  AND  CARBONIFEROUS  ROCKS 
OF   SCANDINAVIA  AND  RUSSIA. 

In  the  last  chapter  only,  which  explained  the  nature  of  the  Per- 
mian Rocks,  has  a  sketch  been  given  of  the  development  of  any 
palaeozoic  deposits  upon  the  Continent.  An  effort  must  now  there- 
fore be  made,  to  delineate,  if  only  in  the  most  general  manner,  the 
equivalents  in  other  countries  of  the  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Car- 
boniferous groups  of  Britain. 

Throughout  large  portions  of  Western  Europe,  z.e.  Germany,  France, 
Spain  and  Portugal,  the  deposits  under  consideration  have  been 
in  some  tracts  so  much  metamorphosed  and  crystallized,  in  others 
so  penetrated  by  igneous  rocks,  and  even  so  dislocated,  that  not- 
withstanding the  researches  of  numerous  good  geologists  and  mine- 
ralogists, the  task  of  reducing  them  to  a  normal  order  of  succession 
is  far  from  being  completed.  Deferring,  therefore,  to  a  subsequent 
chapter,  such  explanation  of  these  complicated  regions  as  may  be 
practicable,  let  us  first  take  a  broad  view  of  the  succession  of  primeval 
life  in  Scandinavia  and  Russia  in  Europe,  where,  on  the  con- 
trary, the  series  of  the  older  sediments  is  exhibited,  over  very 
wide  areas,  in  the  clearest  and  most  symmetrical  order,  and  usually 
uninterrupted  by  the  intrusion  of  igneous  or  volcanic  rocks.* 

*  The  limits  of  this  work  do  not  permit  any  attempt  to  delineate  the  mineral 
structure  of  the  Ural  Mountains,  except  to  indicate  by  the  way  how  clearly 
they  exhibit  the  metamorphism  of  the  palaeozoic  deposits  of  Scandinavia  and 
Russia  in  Europe.  An  acquaintance  with  their  structure  must  be  sought  in  the 
works  of  many  authors,  from  the  time  of  Pallas  to  the  days  of  the  most  illustrious 
of  all  travellers  Humboldt,  who  explored  these  regions  accompanied  by  his  eminent 
friends  Gustaf  Rose  and  Ehrenberg,  and  extended  the  lights  of  physical  science  to 


Chap.  XIII.] 


OLDEST  ROCKS  OF  SCANDINAVIA. 


317 


In  Scandinavia  and  Lapland,  ancient  crystalline  rocks  occupying 
the  chief  mass  of  that  territory,  and  consisting  to  a  great  extent  of 
granite  and  gneiss,  with  many  varieties  of  schist  and  quartzose  strata 
in  which  nothing  organic  has  been  discovered,  are  covered  at  intervals 
by  true  representatives  of  the  Silurian  rocks. 

The  lowest  beds  which  are  charged  with  organic  remains,  are 
clearly  the  equivalents  of  the  lowest  Silurian  strata  of  the  British 
Isles,  Bohemia,  and  other  countries.  In  some  places  these  strata 
repose  upon  the  above-mentioned  crystalline  schists,  which  are  proba- 
bly altered  or  metamorphosed  primary  sediments.  The  first  of  the 
following  diagrams  represents  the  succession  of  Lower  Silurian  de- 
posits from  a  base  of  crystalline  gneiss  and  associated  strata  near 
Kinnekulle  in  Sweden.* 

the  frontiers  of  China.  Besides  the  "  Keise  nach  dem  Ural,  dem  Altai,  &c,,"  of 
those  authors,  the  reader  will  find  a  great  body  of  information  in  the  Archiv  fiir 
Wissenschaftliche  Kunde  Russland,  conducted  by  M.  Adolf  Erman,  the  explorer 
of  North-eastern  Siberia  and  Kamschatka.  Among  the  authors  who  have  written 
on  the  mineral  structure  of  Siberia,  Helmersen  and  Hoffman  also  stand  out 
conspicuously,  as  will  be  seen  by  those  who  consult  their  publications  in  the 
*'  Annuaire  des  Mines  de  Russie."  The  splendid  work  also  of  M.  Pierre  de  Tchiha- 
tcheff,  on  the  Altai  Mountains,  and  many  others,  would  have  to  be  noticed ;  but  as 
this  volume  is  chiefly  an  outline  of  the  nature  and  succession  of  the  older  sedi- 
ments, I  cannot  here  expatiate  upon  the  labours  of  many  of  my  contemporaries. 

In  the  work  "  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,"  references  are  given  to  the 
authors,  both  anterior  and  contemporary,  who  have  illustrated  the  older  sedimentary 
deposits  and  their  fossils  in  the  Russian  Empire.  Special  allusion  is  there  made  to 
the  original  sketch,  by  the  Hon.  W.  Fox  Strangways,  of  the  environs  of  that  metro- 
polis, in  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lend.  1  ser.  vol.  v.  p.  392.,  to  the  work  of  Pander  on  the 
fossils  of  the  same  district,  and  to  the  volume  of  Eichwald,  '  Systeme  Silurien 
de  I'Esthonie.'  Since  the  publication  of  our  work,  my  friends  and  self  have  been 
gratified  by  seeing  it  translated  (1849)  into  the  Russian  language  by  Colonel 
Osersky,  who  has  added  some  important  data  from  his  own  observation  and  other 
sources,  including  corrections  of  our  general  geological  map. 

*  A  detailed  geological  map  of  all  the  crystalline  and  metalliferous  rocks  of 
Sweden  and  Norway  has  for  some  time  been  in  preparation,  but  is  not  yet  pub- 
lished. This  task  was  undertaken  by  MM.  Forsells,  Erdman,  Franzen,  and 
Troilius. 


318 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIII. 


Lower  Silurian  Strata  of  Sweden  reposing  on  Gneiss. 
(From  Russia  in  Europe,  p.  15.) 


gn.  Gneiss.     t.  Trap  or  eruptive  greenstone.     bl.  Erratic  blocks. 


In  other  parts  of  Sweden,  as  near  the  Billingen  Hills,  the  two 
lower  strata  a,  b,  of  the  above  section  are  seen  to  rest  upon  granitic 
rocks  without  any  intervening  crystalline  schists.  In  such  cases  the 
lowest  sandstone,  which  is  used  as  a  millstone,  is  simply  a  re-aggre- 
gated granite,  the  arkose  of  Brongniart ;  the  materials  being  de- 
rived from  the  subjacent  rock. 

Oldest  Silurian  Strata  of  Sweden  resting  on  Granite. 
(From  Russia  in  Europe,  p.  16.) 


h.  Alum  schist,   a.  Facoid  sandstone,  a!.  Millstone,   gr.  Granite. 

Now,  whether  the  subjacent  rocks  be  composed  of  granite,  gra- 
nitic gneiss  or  flinty  slates,  quartzose  or  other  crystalline  masses, 
the  fundamental  strata  in  which  any  traces  of  former  life  can  be 
detected,  are  sandstones  and  schists,  which  stand  in  the  place  of  the 
lowest  fossiliferous  beds  of  Britain,  and  of  that  primordial  zone  in 
Bohemia  which  will  presently  be  noticed.  The  bottom  beds  con- 
tain fucoids  or  casts  of  sea-weeds  only;  but  the  lowest  band  of 
schist  is  well  characterized  by  its  fossils  in  several  parts  of  Sweden, 
and  particularly  at  Andrarum,  where  it  contains  trilobites  of  the 
genera  Paradoxides,  Olenus,  Conocephalus,  Agnostus,  &c. 


Chap.  XIII.]  SUCCESSION  OF  NORWAY.  319 

The  limestones  which  next  overlie  (c,  of  the  opposite  page),  and 
which  abound  in  Orthidae,  large  Orthoceratites,  Trilobites,  and  Cys- 
iidex,  are  distinctly  the  equivalent  of  the  British  Llandeilo  formation 
of  schists,  flags,  and  limestone,  &c.  Above  these,  but  connected  with 
them,  is  a  considerable  mass  of  shale  or  schist,  chiefly  characterized 
by  graptolites,  and  this  is  covered  by  other  limestones,  which  in  Goth- 
land are  profusely  charged  with  many  species  of  shells  and  corals 
that  are  found  in  the  limestones  of  Wenlock  and  Dudley.  The  whole 
of  these  are  capped,  in  the  south  of  Gothland,  by  certain  sandy  strata, 
which  are  meagre  equivalents  of  the  Ludlow  Rocks.* 

In  Norway,  all  these  Silurian  rocks,  very  clearly  divisible  into 
'  Lower '  and  *  Upper '  through  their  characteristic  fossils,  are  re- 
gularly exhibited  in  a  very  small  compass  in  the  Steensfiord,  between 
the  river  Drammen  and  Krokleven,  to  the  west  of  Christiania,  where 
their  uppermost  member  is  conformably  overlaid  by  a  great  accumu- 
lation of  Old  Red  Sandstone  with  conglomerate,  as  expressed  in  this 
diagram.! 

Succession  in  Norway. 
I  (From  Russia  in  Europe,  p.  10.> 

i  E. 

A  Krokleven. 


Lower  Silurian.  Upper  Silurian.  Old  Red  Sandstone 

0.  Azoic  crj'stalline  rocks.     a.  Lower  Sandstones,  Schists,  and  Flags.     b.  Limestone,  with 
•   Pentameri.  c.  Coralline  limestone  (Wenlock).  d.  Calcareous  flagstones  (Ludlow  ?).  c.  Old 
Red  Sandstone.      (p.  Rhombic  porphyry.       t.  Other  eruptive  rocks.) 

The  same  strata  of  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  prevail  in  the  Bay 
of  Christiania;  but  there  they  are  at  many  points  contorted  and 
penetrated  by  syenites,  greenstones,  and  hypersthenic  rocks,  whereby 

*  See  details  of  this  succession,  by  Murchison  and  De  Verneuil,  Quart.  Journ. 
Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  iii.  p.  1. 

.  f  For  the  particulars  of  these  phenomena,  consult  "  Russia  in  Europe,"  vol.  i. 
p.  10.  et  seq.,  and  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  i.  p.  467.  (Murchison  "On  the 
Palaeozoic  Deposits  of  Scandinavia,  &c.,  and  their  Relations  to  Azoic  or  more 
Recent  Crystalline  Rocks"),  1845. 


320 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIII. 


the  lower  alum  schists  are  crystallized,  and  the  limestone,  b,  con- 
verted into  marble.  The  next  section  (a  continuation  to  the  east  of 
the  preceding  diagram)  explains  their  relations,  and  shows  how  the 
undulating  and  broken  masses,  regaining  their  order,  fold  over  and 
dip  under  a  great  mass  of  Old  Red  Sandstone,  the  eastern  extremity 
only  of  which  is  represented  in  the  preceding  diagram. 


e.  Old  Red  Sandstone,  d.  Calcareous  flagstones,  c.  Coralline  limestone  and  shale  (Wen- 
lock),  beautifully  exposed  in  many  islands  of  the  bay.  h.  Limestone,  in  parts  a  marble  (Paradis 
backen).  a.  Lower  Silurian  Schists,  &c,,  in  parts  altered,  o.  Azoic  Gneiss,  t.  Various 
eruptive  rocks.  (The  t  of  this  section  represents  most  of  the  intrusive  rocks,  whether,  syenites, 
greenstones,  porphyries,  or  j'ounger  granites,  which  have  been  forced  through  the  strata. 
p  refers  to  the  large  rhombic  porphyry  on  the  summit  of  the  plateau.) 

Keferring  the  reader  for  the  general  description  of  Scandinavia 
and  for  the  detailed  description  of  its  fossils  to  the  works  of  native 
authors*,  let  me  here  only  call  attention  to  the  general  comparison 
of  the  lower  palaeozoic  strata  of  this  region  with  those  of  Britain.  In 
doing  so,  I  specially  advert  to  the  above  sections  of  a  tract  which  I 
examined  in  the  company  of  Professor  Keilhau,  in  the  year  1844,  when 
I  placed  the  older  strata  of  Norway  in  exact  parallel  with  the  Silurian 
and  Devonian  succession  of  my  own  country.  For,  although  the  many 
thousands  of  feet  of  the  Lower  Silurians  of  Britain  are  there  repre- 
sented by  a  few  hundred  feet  only  of  thickness,  these  black  Norwe- 
gian schists,  with  their  overlying  limestones,  are  as  copiously  charged 

*  In  this  brief  sketch,  no  justice  can  be  done  to  the  numerous  works  on  the 
rocks  and  fossils  of  Sweden  and  Norway,  countries  which,  from  the  time  of  Lin- 
naeus to  the  present  day,  have  contributed  so  much  to  the  progress  of  Natural 
History.  In  the  memoirs  of  Nilsson  of  our  time,  in  those  of  Wahlenberg  and 
Gyllenberg  of  past  years,  and  in  the  works  of  Loven  and  Angelin,  which  have 
recently  appeared,  the  fossil  organic  remains  have  received  much  illustration,  in 
addition  to  the  knowledge  formerly  communicated  in  the  "  Lethsea  Suecica " 
(1837)  of  Hisinger.  The  "  Gaea  Norvegica  "  of  Keilhau  has  great  merit  for  its 
description  and  delineation  of  the  various  rocks  of  Norway. 


Chap.  XIII.]  LOWER  SILURIAN. — SCANDINAVIA.  321 

with  characteristic  trilobites  and  other  fossils,  as  the  enormously  ex- 
panded British  rocks  of  the  same  age.  The  latter,  as  seen  in  North 
Wales,  have,  in  fact,  been  swollen  out  by  a  much  more  profuse  and 
active  deposit  of  materials ;  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  in  which  they 
were  accumulated,  having  been  subjected  to  a  turbulence  produced 
by  contemporaneous  submarine  volcanos,  from  which  this  northern 
region  was  exempt. 

The  primordial  fauna  of  Scandinavia,  which  I  long  ago  character- 
ized as  "  the  earliest  zone  of  recognizable  life,"  consists,  in  its  lowest 
stage,  of  fucoids  only.  The  next  stage  contains  a  number  of  trilo- 
bites, which  have  been  since  elaborately  described  by  M.  Angelin*, 
who  has  added  much  to  our  acquaintance  with  these  fossils.  Among 
the  Crustacea  of  these  lowest  shales  {Regiones  A,  B,  of  Angelin),  we 
recognize  several  of  the  genera  which  characterize  the  lowest  fossil 
beds  of  the  Silurian  region  of  Britain.  The  most  plentiful  fossils  are 
the  Agnostus  pisiformis,  and  many  species  of  Olenus,  one  of  which 
probably  also  occurs  in  the  lowest  schists  of  our  Malvern  Hills. 

Then,  the  Swedish  Regiones  C  and  D  of  Angelin  are  nothing 
more,  as  respects  their  fossils,  than  masses  of  Lower  Silurian  Rocks, 
as  originally  described  in  England  and  Wales,  and  which  reappear  in 
great  force  in  the  Bay  of  Christiania,  Norway.  They  are  specially 
identified  by  the  abundance  of  trilobites,  of  the  same  genera ;  — 
Asaphus,  Ogygia,  Remopleurides,  Trinucleus,  Illsenus,  Ampyx,  &c., 
as  our  British  strata  of  this  age.     Several  species  are  identical. 

Having  examined  these  Lower  Silurian  Bocks  over  various  tracts 
of  Sweden  and  Norway,  I  can  assure  geologists  that,  rich  as  they 
are  in  fossils  —  so  rich  that  they  have  enabled  M.  Barrande,  as  will 
soon  be  seen,  to  parallel  every  one  of  their  stages,  from  the  lowest 
upwards,  with  the  'primordial  and  succeeding  zones  of  Bohemia — the 
whole  of  this  Lower  Silurian  of  Scandinavia  never  exceeds  in  vertical 
thickness  1000  feet!  And  yet  this  mass  is  nearly  as  complete  in  the 
development  of  life,  as  the  30,000  feet  of  strata  of  the  same  age  in 

*  Palaeontologia  Suecica,  pt.  1.,  1852. 
Y 


322  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIII. 

Britain  !  'Nay,  the  general  succession  is  essentially  the  same  as  in  our 
islands.  For,  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Sweden  and  Norway  is  overlaid 
by  shale  and  limestone,  which  completely  represents  the  Wenlock  of 
England  ;  whilst  M.  de  Verneuil  and  myself  have  endeavoured  to 
show,  that  in  the  south  of  Gothland  still  higher  rocks  are  exhibited, 
which,  though  of  feeble  dimensions,  are  on  the  parallel  of  the  Ludlow 
formation  of  Britain. 

And  here,  in  respect  to  nomenclature,  I  may  observe,  that  the 
geologist  who  should  seek  to  separate  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Norway 
from  the  Upper,  and  call  the  higher  part  only  Silurian,  would  make 
an  effort  which  could  not  be  applied  to  any  map.  For  these  two 
groups  are  there  often  exhibited  in  the  space  of  an  English  mile,  and 
roll  over  in  such  frequent  and  parallel  undulations,  as  to  constitute 
one  united  mass  of  very  small  dimensions. 

The  remarkable  resemblance  of  the  fossils  of  the  chief  limestones 
of  Gothland,  and  of  certain  isles  in  the  bay  of  Christiania,  to  those  of 
Wenlock  and  Dudley,  a  very  great  number  being  common  to  the 
two  localities,  is  well  known  to  geologists  and  collectors.  I  have 
already  spoken  of  some  of  these — the  corals — on  page  215.  Those 
persons  who  may  wish  to  understand  how  the  calcareous  masses  of 
Gothland  repose  on  graptolite  schists,  and  these  again  upon  the  lower 
Silurian  rocks  of  Oland,  or  again  pass  upwards  into  schists  and  sand- 
stones (in  the  South  of  Gothland)  which  represent  the  Ludlow  rocks 
of  England,  must  refer  to  the  published  descriptions  of  M.  de  Ver- 
neuil and  myself.* 

Primeval  Rocks  of  Russia.  —  Following  the  older  rocks  from 
Scandinavia  into  the  Kussian  Baltic  provinces,  the  hard  crystalline 
nucleus  subsides,  and  the  lowest  Silurian  rocks  being  depressed  be- 
neath the  sea-level,  the  absolute  bottom  of  the  fossiliferous  strata  is 
no  longer  visible,  as  in  Scandinavia. 

Extending  from  the  bed  of  the  Neva  at  St.  Petersburg  to  the  cliffs 
west  of  Narva,  the  lowest  strata  are  shales,  often  unconsolidated, 
*  Quart.  Journ.  Geol  Soc.  vol.  iii.  p.  28,  &c. 


Chap.  XIII.]  "LOWER  SILURIAN.  —  RUSSIA. 


323 


in  which  little  more  than  fucoidal  remains  have  been  found,  or 
bodies  which  Pander  has  termed  Platydolenites.*  This  shale,  in 
which  green  grains  and  a  few  thin  sandy  courses  appear,  is  so  soft 
and  incoherent,  that  it  is  even  used  by  sculptors  for  modelling, 
although  it  underlies  the  great  mass  of  fossil-bearing  Silurian  rocks, 
and  is,  therefore,  of  the  same  age  as  the  lower  crystalline  and  hard 
slates  of  North  Wales ;  so  entirely  have  most  of  these  oldest  rocks  in 
Russia  been  exempted  from  the  influence  of  change,  throughout  those 
enormous  periods  which  have  passed  away  since  their  accumulation ! 

The  shale  is  followed  by  a  sandstone,  in  parts  coherent,  which  in 
other  tracts  is  a  green-grained  calcareous  grit  (as  under  the  Castle 
of  Narva),  containing  the  little  horny  Obolus  Apollinis  (the 
'  Ungulite'  of  Pander),  one  or  two  species  of  Siphonotreta,  and 
the  Acrotreta  of  Kutorga.  These  strata  of  green  sand  are  covered 
by  and  sometimes  interlaced  with  bituminous  schist  f;  whilst  the 
limestone  which  succeeds  is  identical,  through  many  of  its  fossils, 
with  the  chief  Lower  Silurian  limestone  of  Sweden ;  some  of  the 

*  Bullet,  de  la  Soc.  Geol.  de  Fr.  t.  viii,  p.  252.  In  some  greenish,  sandy  beds 
subordinate  to  the  lowest  Silurian  strata  of  the  Baltic  provinces  of  Russia, 
M.  Pander  also  recently  detected  very  minute  bodies,  not  larger  than  pins'  heads, 
which  he  supposed  might  be  the  teeth  of  fishes  ;  but  the  naturalists  to  whom  they 
have  been  submitted,  both  in  France  and  England,  including  M.  Barrande  and  Dr. 
Carpenter,  can  see  in  them,  when  placed  under  powerful  microscopes,  no  evidence 
whatever  of  hone.  They  are  probably,  it  is  suggested,  fragments  of  the  hard, 
crustaceous  ends  of  the  segments  of  some  trilobite. 

I  In  addition  to  various  able  Memoirs  which  he  has  written  on  the  crystalline 
and  palaeozoic  rocks  of  Russia,  and  to  the  geological  maps  which  he  has  prepared, 
my  associate  in  the  Imperial  Academy  of  St.  Petersburg,  Colonel  Helmersen,  has 
published  an  account  of  the  nature  and  position  of  this  schist,  which  in  some 
places  contains  about  25  per  cent,  of  bitumen  and  a  considerable  portion  of 
inflammable  gas.  It  is  certainly  one  of  the  oldest  deposits  which  have  combustible 
properties,  though  the  anthracitic  layers  of  the  South  of  Scotland  seem  to  lie  still 
lower  in  the  series.  It  is  probable  that  most  of  the  bituminous  and  anthracitic 
beds  of  these  early  periods  were  formed  out  of  the  marine  vegetables,  or  fucoids, 
of  which  the  ancient  rocks  ofier  impressions  and  casts,  occasionally  of  large  size. 
—  (See  Helmersen,  Sur  le  Schiste  argileux-bitumineux  d'Esthonie,  Journal  des 
Mines  de  Russie,  1838,  p.  97.) 

Y  2 


324  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIII. 

species  being  also  well-known  fossils  of  the  British  Isles.  This  lime- 
stone, for  the  most  part  thin-bedded  and  marly,  occupies  various  low 
hills  south  of  St.  Petersburg,  and  thence  ranges  into  the  cliffs  of  the 
Gulf  of  Bothnia,  where  it  thus  appears  in  relation  to  the  inferior  strata. 

Lower  Silurian  Rocks. — Cliffs  near  Waiwara. 


a.  Lower  Shale,  obscured  by  fallen  blocks.  b.  Ungulite  grit.  c.  Bituminous  schist,  vrith 
graptolites.  d.  Orthoceratite  Limestone  (covered  by  granite  blocks  which  were  transported 
from  Sweden  in  the  glacial  periods, '  Russia  in  Europe,'  vol.  i.  pp.  34.  51L,  et  seq.). 

These  lower  limestones,  which  constitute  the  chief  members  of 
the  Lower  Silurian  of  Russia,  are  filled,  as  in  Scandinavia,  with  a 


AsAPHUs  expansus,  var.  cornutus,  from  the  St.  Petersburg  Limestone. 
(From  "Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,"  vol.  i.  p.  37.) 

profusion  of  trilobites,  large  orthoceratites,  univalve  shells,  and 
cystideae,  characteristic  of  this  age.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  of 
the  trilobites,  the  Asaphus  cornutus,  is  here  represented. 


Chap.  XIII.] 


UPPER  SILURIAN.  —  RUSSIA. 


325 


Orthis  calligramma  and  the  great  Orthoceras  duplex  among  the 
shells,  and  Spheronites  aurantium  among  the  Cystideae,  may  be  con- 
sidered quite  characteristic  of  this  formation.  But  we  must  refer  to 
the  works  of  Pander  and  Eichwald,  and  of  my  colleagues  and  self, 
in  which  these  rocks  and  their  contents  are  described,  for  a  full 
description  of  the  fossils. 

Upper  Silurian,  —  Upper  Silurian  deposits,  like  those  of  Gothland, 
were  only  spoken  of  by  my  companions  and  self  as  existing  in  the  Isles 
of  Oesel  and  Dago.  With  the  little  time  at  our  command,  and  in 
a  flat  country  much  obscured  by  drift,  we  could  not  pretend  to  draw 
any  well  defined  line  between  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian. 
Seeing,  however,  that  Pentamerus  oblongus  occurred  in  a  cal- 
careous band  ranging  between  the  Lower  Silurian  cliffs  of  Esthonia 
and  the  Devonian  rocks  of  Livonia,  it  was  natural  in  our  rapid  sur- 
vey to  refer  that  stratum,  as  I  had  done  in  England,  rather  to  the  top 
of  the  lower  than  to  the  base  of  the  upper  group. 

Subsequent  researches,  however,  and  the  preponderance  of  certain 
fossils,  have  led  the  Russian  geologists  to  class  this  Pentamerus  band 
with  the  Upper  Silurian.*    In  truth,  the  whole  series  in  Russia,  as 

*  M.  Ozersky,  who  translated  the  work  of  '  Russia  in  Europe '  into  the  national 
language,  was  the  first  person  to  call  attention  to  the  succession  of  those  upper 
calcareous  Silurian  strata,  though,  when  he  wrote,  the  fossil  distinctions  above 
alluded  to  were  not  elaborated.  Afterwards,  in  a  short  article  (Erman's  Archiv 
fiir  Russland,  1848,  p.  236.),  M.  Pander  noticed  the  superposition  of  a  rock 
charged  with  Pentamerus  oblongus  and  many  corals,  to  the  well-known  lower 
limestone  of  St.  Petersburg.  The  most  important,  however,  of  these  contributions 
which  clear  up  the  subdivisions  of  the  Russo-Baltic  Silurians,  is  by  Professor 
Kutorga,  as  given  in  a  recent  map  of  the  government  of  St.  Petersburg,  the  result 
often  years  of  labour  ("  Compte  rendu  de  la  Societe  Mineralogique  de  St.  Peters- 
bourg,  27  Janvier,  1852").  Representing  a  continuous  band  of  Upper  Silurian  be- 
tween the  Devonian  and  the  Lower  Silurian  to  the  west  of  St.  Petersburg  (a  tract 
which  I  never  examined),  he  admits  that,  to  the  south  and  east  of  the  metropolis, 
the  succession  is  what  my  friends  and  self  represented  it  to  be ;  viz.,  Devonian 
rocks  at  once  resting  on  Lower  Silurian,  with  one  or  two  minute  traces  only  of  the 
lower  band  of  the  Upper  Silurian,  or  the  limestone  with  Pentamerus  oblongus. 

Y  3 


326 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIII. 


in  Scandinavia,  is  of  such  very  small  vertical  dimensions  —  not, 
perhaps,  a  fortieth  part  of  the  magnitude  of  the  grand  British  de- 
posits— that  in  a  region  where  all  these  strata  are  conformable,  it  is 
only  by  close  examination  of  organic  remains  that  such  distinctions  can 
be  drawn.  The  lower  limestone,  with  Orthoceras  duplex  (Foss.  59.), 


Foss.  59.  Orthoceras  duplex.  Wahlexberg. 


A  characteristic  Eussian  and  Scandinavian  Fossil. 


Orthis  biforatus,  many  Cystideje,  Trilobites  of  the  genera  Asaphus, 
Ampyx,  Cybele,  Illaenus,  &c.,  and  many  other  true  Lower  Silurian 
fossils,  is  conformably  overlaid  by  another  limestone,  in  which  certain 
Wenlock  forms,  particularly  a  multitude  of  corals,  predominate,  but 
in  which  the  Pentamerus  oblongus  also  occurs.  Both  these  calcareous 
masses  (Lower  and  Upper),  which  are  perfectly  united  and  conform- 

The  Russian  geologists  seem,  however,  to  have  to  learn,  that  in  Britain  this  species 
of  Pentamerus  ranges  from  the  top  of  the  Caradoc  or  bottom  of  the  Wenlock 
shale  down  into  the  middle  part  of  the  Llandeilo  formation;  and  they  will  therefore 
understand  the  nature  of  my  reasoning  pp.  86.  98.  ante.  Wherever,  as  in  Russia 
and  America,  this  species  appears  for  the  first  time.,  in  ascending  order.,  in  strata 
otherwise  exclusively  charged  with  Wenlock  fossUs,  the  geologists  of  such  countries 
have  a  perfect  right  to  class  the  rock  as  Upper  Silurian.  According  to  Kutorga, 
the  band  of  true  Lower  Silurian  limestone  above  noted  is  first  followed  upwards 
by  a  course  of  limestone  without  fossils,  which  he  leaves  in  the  lower  di- 
vision ;  next  by  a  magnesian  limestone  with  Pentamerus,  and  this  again  by  beds 
containing  fucoids,  encrinites,  and  corals.  According  to  this  author,  these  beds  are 
surmounted,  in  the  islands  of  Oesel,  Dago,  and  Moen,  by  still  higher  Silurian 
strata.  These  Russian  isles  seem,  in  fact,  to  be  equivalents  of  the  southern  end  of 
Gothland  (Hoburg),  where  I  have  described  certain  strata  which  probably >e- 
present  the  Ludlow  Rocks.  (Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  iii.  p.  1.)  In 
another  work,  "Uebersicht  des  Silur-Schichten  Systems  Lieflands  und  Esthlands, 
1852,"  M.  Schrenk,  the  well  known  explorer  of  the  botanical  and  mineral  condition 
of  the  north  Ural  Mountains,  has,  in  conjunction  with  Professor  Schmidt, 
extended  considerably  the  range  of  the  Upper  Silurian.  He  speaks  of  a  mixture 
of  the  fossils  of  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  rocks. 


Chap.  XIII.]  DEVONIANS.  —  RUSSIA.  327 

able,  constitute  only  what  would  be  called  one  formation,  not  dis- 
tinguishable except  by  fossils.  The  upper  division  occupies  the 
whole  of  the  isles  of  Oesel,  Dago,  Wormes,  and  a  narrow  zone  on 
the  mainland,  as  indicated  on  the  recent  map  published  by  Professor 
Kutorga.  The  chief  mineral  features  of  these  overlying  rocks,  in 
ascending  order,  consist  of  fine-grained  limestone,  passing  in  some  beds 
almost  into  marble,  and  thus  presenting  a  contrast  to  the  incoherent 
Lower  Silurian  limestones  of  St.  Petersburg;  next,  of  magnesian 
beds  (dolomite)  occasionally  somewhat  crystalline  and  cavernous,  here 
and  there  charged  with  white  silicious  concretions.  In  other  parts, 
they  are  friable  and  of  grey  and  yellow  colours. 

Rocks  having  the  same  mineral  aspect,  and  containing  the  same 
fossils,  appear,  as  I  am  informed  by  Count  A.  von  Keyserling,  along 
the  edge  of  the  Timan  Hills,  in  the  distant  region  of  the  Petchora, 
at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Tatchina,  and  near  the  shore  of  the  Icy 
Sea.  It  is  further  to  be  remarked,  that  in  no  part  of  Russia  has 
there  been  detected  the  slightest  unconformity  between  the  Lower 
and  Upper  Silurian ;  and  that  with  the  exception  of  some  of  their 
probable  equivalents  in  the  isles  of  Dago  and  Oesel,  the  Ludlow 
rocks  have  no  true  representatives. 

The  inferior  part  of  the  so-called  Upper  Silurian  of  the  Russian 
geologists  is  chiefly  characterized  by  the  following  fossils: — Pen- 
tamerus  oblongus,  P.  borealis,  Leptsena  depressa,  Atrypa  reticularis, 
Bumastus  Barriensis?  Orthoceratites,  some  Trilobites,  Leperditia 
marginata,  and  L.  Baltica ;  with  a  profusion  of  corals  of  the  genera 
Stromatopora,  Halysites,  Cyathophyllum,  Favosites,  &c.,  chiefly 
known  elsewhere  in  the  Wenlock  formation. 

Devonian  Rocks  of  Russia.  —  This  formation  constitutes  one  of  the 
most  widely  spread  deposits  of  the  Empire,  and  extends  over  a 
region  more  spacious  than  the  British  Isles.  This  great  extension 
is  not,  however,  due  to  the  thickness,  but  the  very  slight  inclination 
of  the  beds,  and  to  their  having  been  but  rarely  disturbed.  Though 


328  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIII. 

subjected  to  broad  and  very  slight  bends  only,  they  rise  into  the 
Valdai  Hills,  and  also  into  a  broad  dome  near  Orel ;  thus  constituting 
the  highest  eminences  of  this  comparatively  low  region. 

In  addition  to  many  shells,  some  of  them  peculiar  to  the  region, 
but  others  well  known  in  strata  of  this  age  in  Devonshire,  the 
Khenish  provinces,  and  elsewhere,  fossil  fishes  occur  in  numerous 
localities,  and  strikingly  characterize  this  deposit  in  Russia.  Several 
of  them  are  identical  with  species  of  the  Scottish  Old  Red  Sandstone, 
as  shown  by  Agassiz ;  whilst,  from  a  microscopic  examination  of  their 
teeth,  Owen  has  proved  that  others  belong  to  Dendrodus,  a  genus  * 
of  sauroid  fishes,  equally  characteristic  of  the  formation  in  North 
Britain.  The  forms  of  Coccosteus,  Cephalaspis,  Acanthodes,  Dipla- 
canthus,  Cheiracanthus,  and  Cheirolepis,  have  not,  it  is  true,  been 
found;  but  other  Scottish  species  not  less  remarkable  have  their 
exact  representatives  in  Russia.  Such  are  the  great  Asterolepis 
(Chelonicthys)  Asmusii,  Ag. ;  and  the  smaller  species,  A.  minor, 
Ag. ;  Glyptosteus  favosus,  Ag. ;  Bothriolepis  ornata,  Eichw.  (Glyp- 
tosteus  reticulatus,  Ag.)  ;  Holoptychius  Nobilissimus,  Ag. ;  Dendro- 
dus strigatus,  Owen  ;  D.  biporcatus,  Owen;  Cricodus  incurvus,  Ag. 
(Dendrodus,  Owen) ;  Ptericthys  major,  Ag.,  &c.f 

Ravine  of  the  Belaia  m  the  Valdai  Hills. 

(From  p.  46.  Russia  in  Europe.) 

The  lower  beds  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  f,  con- 
sist of  various  sands  and  marls,  in 
which  ichthyolites  are  disseminated, 
but  of  which  the  bed  d  is  a  complete 
congeries  of  fish-bones  surmounted 
by  a  copious  mass  of  red,  white,  and 

 green   argillaceous    marls.  Then 

f J*  t^^^^ZigZH-^Tr     follow  bituminous  schists  (^f,  h.,  i) 

■  ^-       .    with  courses  of  bad  coal,  constitu- 
'  /    ting  the  bottom  beds  of  the  carbo- 
jj^   niferous  deposits,  which,  after  other 
alternations  of  sands  and  marls 
ss-z^r  J  Z),  are  followed  by  the  carboniferous 
limestone  m,  n,  with  many  charac- 
teristic  fossils,  including  even  species 
^ri'js'c    which  are  well  known  in  Britain, 
^S^^Z-Zi-^—  b    such  as  the  Productus  hemispJuBricus, 
^  /^^^^--t-i"^-^-^  -Ir^"^-^"'^^/T   P-  punctatus,  and  F.  semireticulatus. 

__2SjM<ft^*'^  .  


*  Russia  in  Europe,  &c.,  vol.  i.  p.  635. 


t  Ibid.  p.  40.,  and  fig.  p.  636. 


Chap.  XIII.]  DEVONIANS.  —  RUSSIA.  329 

Reposing  on  Silurian  rocks,  these  Devonian  strata  are  in  num- 
berless places  overlaid  by  carboniferous  limestone.  In  some  tracts 
the  bottom  beds  are  flag-like  shelly  limestones  and  marls,  in  others, 
sandstones  both  soft  and  hard,  which  range  over  extensive  northern 
districts  to  the  banks  of  the  lake  of  Onega  and  the  shores  of  the 
White  Sea. 

In  certain  parts,  as  in  the  Valdai  Hills,  their  upper  beds,  repre- 
sented in  the  opposite  woodcut,  are  red  and  green  marls,  containing 
several  of  the  above-named  fossil  fishes  of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone  of 
Scotland ;  the  whole  mass  being  covered  by  carboniferous  limestone, 
with  its  usual  fossils,  including  large  Producti. 

When  my  colleagues  and  myself  explored  Russia.,  the  con- 
nexion, between  the  character  of  the  fossils  and  the  nature  of  the 
matrix  in  which  they  are  imbedded,  was  more  pointedly  brought 
before  us  in  our  range  over  that  vast  Empire,  than  in  any  other 
region  with  which  we  were  acquainted.  In  Courland,  Livonia, 
and  the  Baltic  governments,  as  well  as  in  the  great  central  dome-like 
region  of  Orel,  to  which  the  system  extends,  and  where  it  has  since 
been  ably  examined  and  described  by  Helmersen — finely  laminated 
limestones  alternate  with,  and  are  subordinate  to,  great  masses  of 
sand,  marl,  and  flagstone  ;  and  whilst  in  the  calcareous  courses  mol- 
lusks  prevail,  with  occasionally  some  remains  of  fishes,  the  latter 
are  found,  almost  exclusively,  in  sandy  and  marly  beds.  In  tracing 
these  rocks  from  the  Baltic  provinces  to  the  White  Sea  and  Archangel, 
the  limestones  thin  out,  and  the  group  is  there  represented  only  by 
sands  and  marls.  Accordingly  we  find  that  where  the  rocks  have 
the  sandy  character  of  the  chief  masses  of  Old  Red  Sandstone  in  the 
British  Isles, — there  they  are  also  tenanted  by  fishes ;  —  a  remarkable 
geological  phenomenon,  showing  an  accordance  between  the  litho- 
logical  character  and  organic  contents  of  rocks  of  the  same  age  in 
very  distant  countries. 

Another  and  not  less  remarkable  fact  obtained  by  the  survey  of 


330  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIIT. 

Russia  is,  that  fossil  fishes,  of  species  well  known  in  the  Old 
Red  of  Scotland,  have  in  several  places  been  found  to  be  in- 
termixed, in  the  same  bed,  with  those  shells  that  characterize  the 
system  in  its  slaty  and  calcareous  form,  as  exhibited  in  Devonshire  and 
many  parts  of  the  continent.  This  phenomenon,  first  brought  to 
light  by  my  colleagues  and  myself,  demonstrates  more  than  any 
other  the  identity  of  deposits  of  this  age,  so  different  in  lithological 
aspect,  in  Devonshire  on  the  one  hand,  and  central  England  and 
Scotland  on  the  other.  The  same  admixture  has  since  been  recog- 
nized to  some  extent  in  the  Devonian  rocks  of  the  Eifel  and  the 
Hartz,  and  also  in  North  America,  as  will  be  stated  in  the  next 
chapter. 


Devonian  and  Carbonifekous  Rocks  in  the  Gorge  of  the  Tchussovaya  River. 
(From  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  38G.) 


Chap.  XIII.]  DEVONIANS.  —  RUSSIA.  331 

In  speaking,  however,  of  identical  formations  having  a  very  dis- 
similar aspect,  both  mineralogically  and  pictorially,  we  can  find  no 
greater  contrast  than  exists  in  the  different  parts  of  the  vast  Russian 
Empire  itself.  Thus  the  soft  red  and  green  Devonian  marls  of  the 
Valdai  Hills  are  represented  on  the  western  flank  of  the  Ural 
Mountains  by  hard,  contorted,  and  fractured  limestones,  as  in  the 
preceding  sketch,  made  in  the  gorge  of  the  river  Tchussovaya. 

With  the  progress  of  research,  M.  Kutorga  has  divided  the  De- 
vonian rocks  of  Russia  into  the  following  three  stages,  in  ascending 
order:  1,  clay  and  marl,  with  Lingula  bicarinata ;  2,  compact 
sandstone,  with  many  ichthyolites ;  and  3,  argillaceous  limestone, 
with  many  brachiopods. 

M.  Pander,  in  the  notice  previously  referred  to,  has  even  shown 
that  the  highest  of  these  beds  are  covered  by  other  sandy  strata, 
in  which  fossil  fishes  equally  abound,  whilst  in  the  more  southern 
tracts  near  Yoroneje*,  it  was  shown,  by  my  associates  and  myself, 
that  many  species  of  brachiopods  and  fishes  were  absolutely  com- 
mingled in  one  and  the  same  marly  stratum.  It  follows,  there- 
fore, that  the  minute  distinctions  traceable  in  one  district  are  not 
applicable  to  another ;  and  that  the  limestones  are  mere  mineral 
accidents  in  a  great  arenaceous  and  marly  series  of  strata ;  whilst, 
on  the  whole,  the  identification  of  the  group  with  its  equiva- 
lents in  other  parts  of  the  world  has  been  established  in  the 
clearest  manner. 

In  the  distant  region  of  the  Petchora,  Count  Keyserling  assured 
himself  that  certain  beds  charged  with  Goniatites  are  inferior  to  all 
the  other  Devonian  strata  of  Russia,  whilst,  as  we  shall  presently  see, 
the  chief  goniatite  deposit  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine  is  underlaid 
by  fossiliferous  limestone  and  sandstones  of  great  thickness,  which 
there  constitute  the  central  and  lower  members  of  the  Devonian 


*  Russia  in  Europe,  &c.,  p.  60. 


332  SILURTA.  [Chap.  XIII. 

series  of  the  Rhine.  It  would,  indeed,  appear  that  there  is  no 
known  equivalent  in  Russia  of  the  lower  shelly  greywacke,  or  great 
'  Spirifer-  Sandstein,'  which  forms  the  base  of  the  Devonian  rocks  of 
the  Rhine.* 

That  the  Devonian  is  completely  independent  of  the  Silurian  in 
Russia,  is  not  only  demonstrated  by  the  marked  difference  in  its 
fauna,  but  also  from  its  reposing  in  one  tract  on  the  Upper, 
in  another  on  the  Lower  Silurian,  as  demonstrated  by  Helmersenf, 
Kutorga,  and  others. 

Of  the  Carboniferous  system,  as  exhibited  in  Russia  in  Europe, 
it  is  enough  to  say,  that  its  lowest  members  only  are  there  well  de- 
veloped. In  the  small  section  above  given  (p.  328.),  we  see  in  the 
uppermost  strata  the  representatives  of  the  carboniferous  limestone, 
with  coal  bands  inferior  to  it  —  immediately  lying  on  the  red 
and  green  rocks  with  Devonian  fish.  To  the  north-east,  or  on 
the  Andoma  River  in  the  government  of  Olonetz,  this  division 
swells  out  in  its  calcareous  members,  but  loses  even  the  few  courses 
of  poor  coal  above  mentioned.  In  its  range  by  Moscow  to  Tula 
and  Kaluga,  the  limestone,  which  is  in  parts  yellow  and  a  true 
earthy  dolomite,  contains  also  thin  subordinate  seams  of  coal.  Again, 
in  the  southern  region  of  the  Donetz,  between  the  Don  and  the 
Dnieper,  where  these  lower  coal  strata  reappear,  they  are  of  much 
larger  dimensions,  with  several  beds  of  coal  of  better  quality,  which, 
as  in  other  places  (Ch.  XI.),  are  interstratified  with  beds  of  true 
carboniferous  limestone. 

In  this  last  tract,  however,  the  prevailing  horizontality  of  the 
palaeozoic  strata  of  this  vast  country  no  longer  exists.  The  lime- 
stone, sandstone,  and  shale,  with  coal,  have  there  been  violently 

*  Goniatites  occur  in  Upper  Silurian  in  Bohemia,  according  to  M.  Barrande. 

f  In  addition  to  Colonel  Helmersen's  survey  of  the  Devonian  rocks,  which 
extend  so  largely  throughout  Central  Russia,  M.  Raimund  Pacht  has  also  de- 
scribed in  some  detail  the  nature  of  these  rocks,  and  some  of  their  fossils,  in 
Livonia.    (Devonische  Kalk  in  Livland.    Dorpat,  1849.) 


Chap.  XIIL]  CARBONIFEROUS. — RUSSIA.  333 

extruded  to  the  surface  through  a  cover  of  surrounding  Jurassic 
and  even  cretaceous  deposits,  and  are  very  highly  dislocated. 

But  if,  as  it  has  been  suggested,  Kussia*  should  open  out  deep 
shafts  around  the  field  of  the  Donetz,  the  beds  of  lower  coal  which 
she  possesses  may  be  found  to  lie  in  valuable  and  regular  masses 
beneath  the  unbroken  secondary  rocks. 

Some  of  the  grandest  examples  of  the  carboniferous  limestones  of 
Russia  are  to  be  seen  in  the  banks  of  the  Volga,  near  Syzran,  where 
thick  beds  of  the  rock,  containing  fossil  species  common  to  this  divi- 
sion in  many  quarters  of  the  globe,  are  loaded  with  small  FusulinaB, 
which  were  first  noticed  by  Pallas,  and  are  remarkable  in  being  the 
oldest  of  this  class  of  forarainifers ;  the  Fusulinae  being  in  truth 
the  prototype  of  the  Nummulite,  which  becomes  so  abundant  in 
the  lowest  tertiary  deposits. 

Other  and  not  less  gorgeous  masses  of  the  same  limestone,  but 
wherein  no  coal  exists,  are  displayed  on  the  flanks  of  the  Ural 
Mountains,  where  they  undulate  conformably  with  underlying  lime- 
stones which  are  charged  with  Devonian  fossils. 

Without  repeating  sketches  which  are  given  in  another  work,  the 
reader  may  be  referred  to  the  preceding  woodcut,  p.  330. ;  for 
several  of  the  distant  peaks  there  represented  are  carboniferous  lime- 
stones overlying  rocks  of  Devonian  age.  The  clearest  proofs  are 
thus  exhibited  (the  two  formations  being  conformable  in  all  their 
undulations  on  the  western  flanks  of  the  Ural),  that  the  portion  of 
the  series,  which  is  slightly  coal-bearing  in  central  Russia,  and  much 
more  so  on  the  Donetz,  is  here  entirely  wanting. 

These  carboniferous  limestones,  every  where  more  or  less  charac- 
terized by  their  Producti,  are  overlaid  along  the  western  edge  of  the 

*  In  the  work  on  Russia  I  suggested,  that  whenever  the  Imperial  Government 
might  wish  to  make  trials  for  what  may  very  probably  prove  to  be  a  valuable  ana 
unbroken  coal-field^  sinkings  should  be  made  through  some  of  those  surrounding 
horizontal  secondary  formations  not  far  distant  from  the  edge  of  the  upcast  and 
dislocated  coal-field.    (See  Russia  in  Europe,  &c.,  p.  118.  et  seq.) 


334  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIII. 

Ural  Mountains  by  sandstones  and  grits,  which  occupy  much  the 
same  place  in  the  general  series  as  the  millstone  grit  of  England. 

In  Russia  these  strata  are,  however,  more  calcareous,  and  contain 
goniatites.  They  constitute  the  uppermost  courses  of  the  carbo- 
niferous system,  properly  so  called,  in  the  vast  territory  between 
the  Volga  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  where  they  are  seen  in  many 
localities  to  be  at  once  succeeded  by  the  Permian  deposits  before 
described  (see  diagram,  p.  296.).  As  they  only  contain  at  intervals 
very  rare  and  thin  traces  of  coal,  it  is  manifest  that  the  place  of  the 
great  upper  coal-fields  of  England  is  unoccupied  by  any  due  repre- 
sentative in  the  Russian  Empire. 

The  deposits  of  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  age,  which 
spread  in  such  wide,  horizontal,  and  slightly  broken  masses  over 
Kussia  in  Europe,  are  thrown  up  in  the  Ural  Mountains  as  meta- 
morphosed and  highly  mineralized  rocks,  some  idea  of  which  is  afforded 
in  the  previous  sketch  (p.  330.)  of  the  Devonian  and  carboniferous 
rocks  in  the  gorges  of  the  Tchussovaya  river.  Other  views  given 
in  a  subsequent  chapter  on  the  auriferous  rocks,  will  realize  to 
the  eye  the  condition  of  the  more  central  and  completely  altered 
rocks  of  that  chain.  In  the  mean  time  it  may  be  stated,  that  hard 
and  crystalline  palaeozoic  strata,  associated  with  numerous  eruptive 
rocks,  form  the  nuclei  of  all  the  mountainous  ridges  in  Siberia, 
whether  in  the  lofty  Altai  on  the  south,  where  they  have  been  well 
described  by  M.  Pierre  de  Tchihatcheff*,  or  in  those  hills  which  act 
as  separating  barriers  between  the  great  rivers  Ob,  Jenissei,  and 
Lena,  and  extend  to  the  Sea  of  Ochotsk  and  Behring's  Straits  on  the 
north-east.  Grand,  therefore,  as  is  the  spread  of  soft  and  slightly 
coherent  primeval  rocks  over  Russia  in  Europe,  the  hard  stony  tracts 
of  this  age  which  extend  over  the  Asiatic  regions  of  the  same  great 
empire  are  probably  much  more  extensive. 

*  See  the  magnificent  work,  L' Altai  Orientale,  of  M.  Pierre  de  Tchihatcheff. 
Some  Devonian  fossils  have  been  found  near  Lake  Baikal. 


Chap.  XIII.]  SUMMARY. —  SCANDINAVIA.  —  RUSSIA. 


335 


Restricting  our  view  to  Russia  in  Europe,  we  see  the  Silurian  and 
Devonian  rocks  arise  partially  to  the  surface  in  the  southern  provinces 
of  Podolia,  on  the  banks  of  the  Dnieper ;  and,  although  no  rocks  of 
such  high  antiquity  have  yet  been  detected  in  the  Caucasian  moun- 
tains, they  reoccur  in  the  same  latitude  near  Constantinople*,  have 
been  recognized  in  several  parts  of  Asia  Minor  to  the  south  of  the 
Black  Seat,  also  traced  (most  of  them  belonging  by  their  fossils 
to  the  Devonian  type)  to  even  the  southern  flanks  of  Mount  Ararat, 
and  thence  eastwards  into  Persia.  J 

Looking,  therefore,  to  Scandinavia  as  a  great  mass  of  ancient 
crystalline  rocks,  whose  origin  is  buried  in  obscurity,  we  know  that 
it  has  been  successively  overlapped  by  those  Silurian,  Devonian  §, 
Carboniferous,  and  Permian  strata,  which  occupy  such  an  enormous 
region  in  Russia.  The  discovery  in  Spitzbergen  of  certain  palaeo- 
zoic fossils,  one  of  which  Leopold  von  Buch  considered  to  be  of 
carboniferous  age,  and  others  of  which  have  been  clearly  identified 
by  De  Koninck  ||  with  Permian  forms,  at  once  shows  how  widely 
spread  were  these  primeval  deposits,  and  how  they  were  successively 
accumulated  around  a  large  crystalline  nucleus  of  preexisting  rocks. 
In  North  America,  we  shall  presently  see  another  grand  example 
of  this  phenomenon,  and  in  which  there  is  a  much  more  complete 
development  of  Silurian  rocks. 

*  Proc.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  ii.  p.  437.  The  Turkish  fossils  are  of  Lower 
Devonian  age. 

t  Tchihatcheff,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Pr.,  vol.  vii.  p.  389. 

I  Abich,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  1846,  vol.  ii.  2nd  pt.  p.  96. ;  and 

Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  652.  Prof.  Abich  also  found  carbo- 
niferous limestones  everywhere  overlying  these  Devonian  rocks,  and  characterized, 
too,  by  a  small  Fusulina,  of  a  species  distinct  from  that  found  in  Russia.  In 
extending  his  observations  to  the  eastward,  M.  Hommaire  de  Hell  discovered 
Devonian  rocks  in  Persia,  where  they  form  the  axis  of  the  Elburz  chain  and 
the  southern  slopes  of  the  mountains  of  Tchihenneme,  and  are  highly  fossili- 
ferous  in  the  valley  of  Touwa.  (Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  Fr.,  vol.  vii.  p.  500.) 

§  See  p.  319,  ajite.  II  Bull.  Acad.  Roy.  Belg.,  vol.  xiii.  and  xvi. 


336 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

PRIMEVAL  SUCCESSION  IN  GERMANY  AND  BELGIUM. 

GENERAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  OLDER  ROCKS  EXTENDING  WESTWARDS 
FROM  POLAND  AND  TURKEY  IN  EUROPE  INTO  THE  ALPS  AND  CARPATHIANS. 
DEVONIAN,  CARBONIFEROUS,  AND  PERMIAN  ROCKS  OF  SILESIA  AND  MORAVIA. 
SILURIAN  ROCKS  (lOWER  AND  UPPEr)  OF  BOHEMIA.  LOWER  SILURIAN,  DEVONIAN, 
CARBONIFEROUS,  AND  PERMIAN  ROCKS  OF  SAXONY,  THE  THURINGERWALD,  ETC. 
GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE  SUCCESSION  OF  DEVONIAN  AND  CARBONIFEROUS  ROCKS 
IN  THE  RHENISH  PROVINCES  AND  BELGIUM. 

If  the  general  order  of  the  older  strata  be  so  clearly  exposed  in  that 
vast  portion  of  Russia  in  Europe,  which  has  from  the  remotest  an- 
tiquity been  exempted  from  all  intrusion  of  every  description  of 
plutonic  or  volcanic  rocks,  we  no  sooner  pass  to  the  south-west  and 
enter  the  Danubian  and  Turkish  provinces,  than  we  meet  with  rocks 
more  or  less  crystalline,  which  have  been  penetrated  at  numerous  in- 
tervals by  ancient  igneous  matter.  These  extend  from  the  Balkan 
into  the  ranges  of  Thrace  and  Transylvania  on  the  one  hand,  and  into 
the  Carpathians  on  the  other,  but  have  as  yet  been  so  little  examined 
in  detail,  as  to  leave  us  in  ignorance  of  the  extent  to  which  a  palaeozoic 
classification  can  be  applied  to  them.  We  know,  however,  from  the 
works  of  Boue,  Smyth,  and  others,  that  these  rocks  are  usually  so 
crystalline,  that  few  spots  remain,  like  those  near  Constantinople, 
whence  the  palaeontologist  can  expect  to  derive  fossils. 

When,  however,  we  reach  the  Eastern  or  Austrian  Alps,  we 
find  that,  metamorphosed  as  most  of  the  strata  have  been  in  that 
mighty  pile  of  mountains,  there  are  nevertheless  certain  "  oases  " 
at  wide  intervals,  which  indicate  a  succession  very  similar  to  that 
which  we  have  been  following  through  other  countries.  Thus,  in 
the  ridge  south  of  Werfen  in  the  Salzburg  tract,  Orthoceratites, 


Chap.  XIV.J       PALEOZOIC  ROCKS.  —  ALPS  —  POLAND.  337 

Orthidae,  Cardiol^e,  and  other  fossils^  have  been  detected,  which  mark 
a  remnant  of  a  true  Silurian  zone,  the  chief  mass  of  which  is  in  a 
crystalline  state.  In  the  Alps  near  Gratz  in  Styria,  certain  grey 
schists  and  calcareous  flagstones  contain  a  good  many  Devonian 
fossils,  and  similar  rocks  have  there  been  traced  through  a  district  of 
some  extent. 

Near  Bleiberg,  in  the  Carinthian  portion  of  the  Eastern  Alps,  is  a 
limestone  with  large  Producti,  which  is  universally  recognized  to  be  of 
carboniferous  age  ;  whilst  in  various  parts  of  the  Western  Alps,  the 
rocks  contain  courses  of  anthracite,  associated  with  plants  of  the 
same  era.  On  the  whole,  however,  it  may  be  said,  that  in  nearly 
all  the  countries  extending  over  the  southern  regions  of  Germany, 
the  clear  separation  of  the  palaeozoic  rocks,  which  can  be  easily 
effected  in  many  other  parts  of  Europe,  is  impracticable ;  and  this 
is  doubtless  owing,  in  great  measure,  to  their  numerous  mutations 
of  structure,  as  well  as  to  the  dislocations  and  inversions  which  all 
the  rocks  there  have  undergone,  from  the  Silurian  to  the  Eocene 
Tertiary  inclusive. 

When,  however,  we  travel  westward  in  a  more  northern  parallel, 
and  pass  from  the  central  provinces  of  Kussia  into  Poland,  Prussia, 
and  the  northern  states  of  Austria,  we  find,  that  although  the  palaeo- 
zoic rocks  of  those  regions  have  no  longer  the  wholly  unaltered  facies 
which  they  presented  to  us  on  the  banks  of  the  Neva,  the  Volga, 
and  the  Dwina,  and  though  they  have,  unlike  their  Russian  equiva- 
lents, been  penetrated  by  many  eruptive  rocks,  yet  they  still  contain 
numerous  examples  wherein  order  and  the  normal  relations  may  be 
clearly  observed. 

In  Poland,  and  in  many  low  districts  of  Northern  Germany,  so 
widely  spread  are  the  younger  secondary  and  tertiary  deposits,  that 
the  rocks  under  consideration  rise  only  in  small  patches  to  the  sur- 
face.   Thus,  around  Kielce*,  to  the  south  of  Warsaw,  a  nucleus 

*  See  Russia  in  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  39. 
z 


338  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

of  Devonian  rocks,  with  much  limestone,  and  charged  with  many 
characteristic  fossils,  is  followed  by  carboniferous  limestone  and  by 
thick-bedded  coal-seams,  over  a  small  district  that  ranges  from 
Kussian  Poland  into  the  Silesian  coal  tracts  of  Prussia.  Thence 
to  the  westward,  rocks,  which  have  been  or  may  be  classified  as 
Silurian,  Devonian,  Carboniferous,  and  Permian,  occupy  detached 
districts  in  the  south-east  of  Prussia,  in  Saxony,  and  the  smaller 
states  of  Germany,  and  spread  over  large  tracts  in  the  northern  terri- 
tories of  Austria  (particularly  in  Bohemia),  and  in  parts  of  Moravia. 

In.  traversing  the  E-iesen-Gebirge  to  the  south  of  Breslau,  the 
geologist  acquainted  with  the  full  development  of  the  palaiozoic  rocks 
of  other  regions,  is  struck  with  the  comparative  tenuity  of  their 
chief  upper  members — the  Devonian  and  Carboniferous  deposits. 
In  large  portions  of  these  mountains,  whose  mineral  characters  have 
been  recently  examined  in  great  detail  by  M.  Gustav  Rose,  and 
whose  geological  distinctions  will  soon  be  laid  down  on  a  map  by  M. 
Beyrich,  the  strata,  which  are  probably  of  Silurian  age,  have 
undergone  a  complete  metamorphosis.  They  have  indeed  passed  so 
entirely  into  a  state  of  crystalline  schist  and  marble,  that  no  fossils 
of  the  earlier  era  have  rewarded  the  labours  of  the  eminent  men 
above  mentioned,  or  of  my  old  friends  Dechen  and  Oynhausen, 
who  first  explored  these  ranges.  That  these  older  crystalline  strata 
are,  however,  the  equivalents  of  the  Silurian  rocks,  is  to  be  surmised, 
because  they  are  clearly  surmounted  and  followed  by  greywacke 
schist  and  limestone,  charged  with  many  Devonian  forms.  In 
the  district  of  Waldenburg,  south  of  Breslau,  and  at  Silberberg, 
to  the  north  of  Glatz,  I  have  seen  the  Devonian  limestone,  charged 
with  Clymeni^e  and  many  other  typical  fossils :  it  has  a  thickness  of 
50  to  60  feet,  and  is  covered  by  an  overlying  limestone,  of  similar 
thickness,  laden  with  great  Producti  and  several  other  shells  well 
known  in  the  mountain  limestone  of  Britain*,  especially  those  of 

*  At  one  spot,  Falkenberg,  I  collected  in  the  carboniferous  limestone  the  fol- 


Chap.  XIV.]  UPPER  PALEOZOIC.  —  GERMANY.  339 

the  lower  carboniferous  zone.  The  two  beds  are  separated  by  a 
very  thin  mass  of  schist.  This  carboniferous  limestone  is  overlaid 
by  rocks  occupying  the  place  of  the  millstone  grit  of  English 
geologists,  and  which,  assuming  very  much  the  same  mineral  cha- 
racters as  the  rocks  whereon  they  repose  (and  being  perfectly  con- 
formable with  them),  were  in  old  times  confounded  with  the  so-called 
and  undefined  ^  grauwacke.'  It  is  in  this  portion  of  the  series, 
i.  e.  in  the  schists  and  sandstones  associated  with  the  carboniferous 
limestone,  that  most  of  those  plants  have  been  found,  which  Professor 
Goppert  has  described  as  transition  plants  (Calamites  transitionis, 
Sfc.y  I  am  assured  by  M.  Beyrich,  that  nearly  all  the  plants  so 
described  (for  others  will  hereafter  be  mentioned  in  true  Devonian 
rocks,  at  Saalfeld,  p.  358.)  have  been  taken  from  such  carboniferous 
deposits.  Above  these  come  the  small  productive  coal-fields  of 
Waldenburg,  succeeded  by  a  copious  development,  particularly 
along  the  south  flank  of  the  Riesen-Gebirge,  of  red  rocks,  which, 
many  years  ago,  I  grouped  with  the  Permian  deposits.*  At 
Ruppersdorf,  for  example,  these  red  rocks  are  micaceous  flagstones 
with  dark,  bituminous  schist,  containing  fishes  of  the  genus  Palaeo- 
niscus,  the  Holacanthodes  gracilis,  Beyr.,  and  the  Xenacanthus 
Decheni. 

Resting  upon  conglomerates,  the  whole  of  these  rocks  are  viewed 
by  Beyrich  as  an  equivalent  of  the  Rothe-todte-liegende.  Even 
taken  in  this  sense,  they  constitute  the  lower  half  of  the  Permian 
rocks ;  for  their  ichthyolites  are  closely  allied  to  those  of  the  Zech- 
stein,  whilst  their  plants  can  only  be  viewed  as  a  special  flora,  which, 
though  approaching  to  the  carboniferous  type,  is  marked  by  peculiar 

lowing  fossils,  viz.  Productus  gigas,  P.  antiquatus,  Leptaena  analoga,  Orthis  cre- 
nistria  (var.),  Spirifer  lineatus,  S.  pinguis,  S.  glaber,  with  a  minute  Phillipsia, 
a  small  Orthoceras,  and  several  species  of  corals. 

*  See  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  200.    I  examined 
this  tract  when  alone,  in  the  year  1844. 


340  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

forms.  No  Stigmarlan  or  Lepidodendron,  such  as  are  found  in  the 
true  coal,  have  been  found  in  this  zone,  but  it  exhibits  Coniferse 
approaching  to  the  Voltzia*,  with  those  specific  forms  of  Neuropteris 
and  Odontopteris,  which  characterize  the  Permian  flora. 

Again,  in  Moravia,  from  all  that  I  can  learn,  whether  from  ex- 
amining the  collections  of  Professor  Glocker  of  Breslau,  who  has  so 
long  explored  that  province,  or  from  consulting  a  recent  publication 
of  Professor  von  Hingenauf,  or  from  a  partial,  personal  survey  in 
1847,  it  would  appear,  that  the  order  of  the  palaeozoic  rocks  is  very- 
analogous  to  that  which  prevails  in  Silesia.  There  I  have  observed 
crystalline  schists  and  limestone,  which  may  represent  Silurian  rocks, 
followed  by  masses  of  limestone,  which  at  Rittberg  and  other 
places  around  Olmiitz  are  charged  with  Devonian  fossils.  Some 
of  the  strata,  in  tracts  that  I  have  not  seen,  are  referred  to 
the  carboniferous  era.  The  crystalline  rocks  which  range  thence, 
or  from  the  Sudeten  mountains  into  the  Bohmerwald-geblrge, 
and  have  been  generally  described  by  PartschJ,  Heinrichs,  and 
others,  consist  of  gneiss,  mica  schist,  chlorite  schist,  and  horn- 
blendic  slates,  with  masses  of  saccharoid  limestone ;  the  w^hole 
penetrated  by  granite,  syenite,  greenstone,  serpentine,  &c.  Al- 
though portions  of  these  vast  masses  may  represent  the  Silurian 
rocks,  the  greater  part  of  the  schistose  rocks,  including  limestones  in 
which  fossils  have  been  detected,  are  clearly  of  Devonian  age,  as  I 
have  elsewhere  shown. § 

Silurian  Rocks  of  Bohemia. — If  the  traveller  has  worked  his 

*  This  inference  respecting  the  character  of  the  Silesian  plants  is  derived  from 
an  examination  of  a  collection  shown  to  Professor  Morris  and  myself  by  M.  Beyrich, 
during  a  recent  tour  in  Germany. 

t  Uebersicht  der  Geologischen  von  Mahren  und  Osterr.  Schlesien.  Wien.  1852 
(with  a  Map). 

+  Jahrbuch  der  K.  K.  Gaol.  Reich.  3  Heft.  Sept.  1851. 

§  See  Edinb.  Phil.  Mag.  1847,  p.  66.,  and 'Devonische  Formation  in  Mahren,' 
Leonh.  N.  Jahrb.  I.,  1841.  The  observations  were  made  conjointly  with  my  old 
colleagues.  Von  Keyserling  and  De  Verneuil,  in  the  year  1847. 


Chap.  XIV.] 


SILURIAN  ROCKS  OF  BOHEMIA. 


341 


way  round  from  Britain  through  Scandinavia  and  Russia  into 
Germany,  and  has  there  lost  the  clue  whereby  he  could  have  iden- 
tified the  lower  crystalline  schists  and  limestones  of  Silesia  and 
Moravia,  with  their  representatives  in  the  western,  northern,  and 
eastern  regions  of  Europe,  he  will,  indeed,  be  rejoiced  when  he  enters 
upon  the  territory  around  Prague,  and  there  sees,  under  the  guidance 
of  M.  Barrande,  a  most  complete  and  symmetrical  exposure  of  the 
whole  Silurian  System,  whether  as  respects  the  clear  order  of  the 
strata,  or  the  vast  abundance  of  organic  remains. 

The  geologist  who  would  form  an  adequate  idea  of  the  relations 
of  this  '  Bassin  Silurien,'  so  admirably  developed  by  that  author, 
must  traverse  the  tract  as  I  have  done,  from  Przibram  and  Ginetz  on 
the  south-east,  to  Skrey  on  the  north-west,  or  visit  the  environs  of 
Beraun.  He  will  then  at  once  recognize  the  truthfulness  and  ac- 
curacy of  the  divisions,  which  have  been  established  after  a  most  inde- 
fatigable and  persevering  study  of  the  rocks  and  their  organic  remains 
during  the  last  twenty  years.  The  simple  and  regular  form  of  this 
basin,  and  the  order  in  which  its  concentric  deposits  are  arranged, 
have  enabled  its  explorer  to  ascertained  the  existence  of  three  charac- 
teristic stages,  into  which  he  divides  what  he  has  there  called  the 
"  Silurian  System."    (See  the  annexed  diagram.)* 

*  Though  the  conclusions  are  stated  briefly  in  the  text,  I  must  be  allowed  to 
say  that  they  could  only  have  been  arrived  at  through  intense  labour  and  unwea- 
ried research,  as  well  as  by  the  liberal  employment  of  Bohemian  workmen.  The 
last  twenty  years  have  been  occupied  in  unravelling  this  grand  and  rich 
Silurian  fauna.  To  most  persons  the  acquisition  of  the  Bohemian  or  'Czeck' 
language  would  have  been  an  insurmountable  barrier ;  but  finding  that  without  this 
key  he  could  not  direct  his  workmen,  M.  Barrande  made  himself  a  Bohemian  scholar 
in  order  to  become  a  thorough  geological  expounder  of  these  rocks.  His  Silurian 
collections  are  truly  more  interesting  than  those  ever  made  by  any  one  individual 
in  my  day;  and  the  evidences  of  faithful  scrutiny  and  of  a  philosophical  spirit 
pervade  all  the  pages  of  a  work  which  will,  I  am  sure,  be  duly  appreciated  by  every 
geologist  and  naturalist  who  consults  it. 

z  3 


342 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


2  (l-ff^K^^^ 


2    ^  P5 


(•ajosxTssoj) 
^00103 


J ust  as  in  the  British  Isles,  the  lowest 
fossil-bearing  strata,  c  of  the  section,  re- 
pose on  a  vast  mass  of  azoic  schists,  con- 
glomerates, and  greywacke,  A,  B.  These 
are  in  parts  semi-crystalline,  and  rest 
upon  gneiss  and  granite.  The  argillaceous 
schists,  c,  which  are  the  lowest  in  which 
fossils  occur,  he  terms  "  Zone  Primor- 
diale."  This  primordial  fauna  is  specially 
characterized  by  trilobites  of  the  genera 
Paradoxides,  Conocephalus,  Ellipsoce- 
phalus,  Sao,  and  Agnostus;  and  it  also 
contains  a  rare  Orthis  and  some  Cystideaj. 
According  to  the  opinion  of  M.  Barrande, 
in  which  I  entirely  agree,  this  zone  is  re- 
presented in  Britain  (as  before  said,  p.  43.) 
by  the  rocks  containing  Lingula,  Agnostus* 
and  Paradoxides  in  North  Wales,  and,  pos- 
sibly, also,  by  those  which  in  the  south-west 
flank  of  the  Malvern  Hills  contain  the 
Olenus  ;  whilst,  as  has  already  been  noted, 
Olenus,  together  with  Paradoxides  and 
Agnostus,  are  typical  of  the  lowest  band 
containing  animal  life  in  Scandinavia, 
(Begiones  A,  B,  of  Angelin).  The  large 
species  of  Paradoxides  in  Bohemia,  also 
belong  to  the  same  primordial  group. 
And  to  the  same  epoch  must  be  referred 
the  curious  forms  which  have  recently 


dBJ.T. 


*  Mr.  Salter  has  added  Agnostus  and  Cono- 
cephalus to  the  list.  They  were  lately  detected 
by  him  in  the  "  Lingula  Flags  "  of  North  Wales. 


Chap.  XIV.]  SILURIAN  KOCKS  OF  BOHEMIA.  343 

been  described  by  Dr.  Dale  Owen,  as  characterizing  the  lowest 
Silurian  rocks  of  vast  tracts  in  North  America. 

The  next  zone  or  the  stage  d,  which  is  one  of  schists  and 
quartziferous  sandstones  (quartzites),  and  represents  the  great  and 
superior  mass  of  the  Lower  Silurian  (Llandeilo  and  Caradoc),  is 
charged  with  abundant  casts  of  Trinucleus,  Ogygia,  Asaphus,  Illgenus, 
Remopleurides,  and  many  other  trilobites.  In  it  also  has  been  ob- 
served the  same  development  of  the  genus  Orthis  among  the  bra- 
chiopods,  and  of  Cystidese  among  the  echinoderms,  which  stamps  the 
character  of  the  great  mass  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  Scan- 
dinavia, Kussia,  Britain,  and  North  America. 

Prague  and  its  Imperial  palace,  the  Hradschin,  stand  upon  these 
Lower  Silurian  rocks,  which,  dipping  under  Upper  Silurian  schists 
and  limestones  to  the  south  of  the  city,  rise  up  again  to  the  surface 
on  the  banks  of  the  Moldau,  a  few  miles  further  south,  and  thus 
exhibit  the  superior  members  enclosed  within  a  trough. 

M.  Barrande  places  the  base  of  his  Upper  Silurian,  or  bottom 
of  his  stage  E,  where  the  quartzites  with  Trinuclei  &c.  are  over- 
laid by  black  schists  containing  many  graptolites.  Several  bands 
of  greenstone  and  trap,  which  the  author  considers  to  be  of  con- 
temporaneous age,  are  interpolated  in  this  portion  of  the  series, 
and  the  shales  are  followed  by  grey,  argillaceous  limestone  replete 
with  a  very  rich  fauna,  unquestionably  of  an  Upper  Silurian 
type.  For,  although  it  may  be  contended,  that  the  schists  which 
contain  both  the  double  and  simply  serrated  graptolitic  bodies, 
ought  rather  to  be  classed  with  the  lower  division,  no  one  can  doubt 
that  the  limestones  into  which  those  schists  graduate  upwards  are  of 
that  true  Upper  Silurian  type,  so  well  marked  in  England  and 
Gothland.  Thus,  we  here  meet  with  the  well-known  fossils  Cardiola 
interrupta,  C.  fibrosa,  Phragmoceras  ventrlcosum,  P.  aurantium  (Cyr- 
toceras,  Barr.),  Orthoceras.  annulatum,  0.  nummularius,  Khynconella 
(Terebratula)  navicula,  K.  obovata,  R.  Wilsoni,  E.  marginalivS,  Nerita 

z  4 


344  .  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

haliotis,  Pentamerus  Knlghtli,  P.  galeatus,  Spirifer  trapezoidalis,  and 
forms  of  Leptaena,  all  of  them  published  in  my  original  work  as  Upper 
Silurian  species.  Again,  most  of  the  zoophytes  which  so  characterize 
the  Wenlock  and  Gothland  limestone  are  here  found  in  profusion,  in- 
cluding the  widely  known  corals,  Haly sites  (Catenipora)  escharoides, 
Favosites  Gothlandica,  &c.  Even  that  fossil,  which  has  not  other- 
wise, I  believe,  been  detected  out  of  England,  the  Ischadites  Konigi, 
Sil.  Syst.,  has  been  here  collected.  It  is  also  in  this  rich  stage,  that 
the  Bohemian  trilobites  have  their  maximum  of  specific  development : 
M.  Barrande  having  described  no  less  than  seventy-eight  species  from 
this  one  limestone ;  the  chief  genera  being  Acidaspis,  Calymene,  Chei- 
rurus,  Cyphaspis,  Lichas,  Phacops,  Harpes,  Bronteus,  and  Proetus. 

Ascending  from  this  limestone  (e  of  the  section),  the  remaining 
and  superior  stages  of  calcareous  rock  (f  and  g)  are  so  entirely 
conformable,  are  so  often  knit  together  in  parallel  folds  in  the  same 
hill  with  the  stage  E,  and  are  so  connected  zoologically  as  well  as 
stratigraphically,  that  M.  Barrande  has  united  them  all  in  one  natural 
group,  or  his  third  fauna.  The  band  r  is  a  thin-bedded,  hard  lime- 
stone, occasionally  containing  huge  concretions  like  the  hailstones  of 
the  Wenlock  limestone  of  England :  it  is  usually  of  a  light  colour, 
and  somewhat  crystalline,  and  therefore  offers  a  strong  contrast  to 
the  dark  and  earthy  rock  of  the  stage  beneath  it.  All  intervening 
bands  of  shale  and  schist  disappearing,  the  band  F  is  at  once  sur- 
mounted by  the  highest  limestone  G,  a  rock  usually  of  small  con- 
cretionary structure,  but  which  when  opened,  as  in  large  quarries  on 
the  banks  of  the  Moldau  (Branik,  Wiscocilka,  &c.),  exhibits  extensive, 
flattish  and  slightly  undulating  surfaces,  the  upper  layers  of  which 
are  covered  by  grey  shale,  H  of  the  diagram. 

M.  Barrande  refers  all  these  three  limestones  and  their  shales, 
inferior  and  superior,  to  the  Upper  Silurian  group,  since  he  has 
found  (just  indeed  as  I  long  ago  anticipated*),  that  the  British  divi- 

*  See  Silurian  System,  pp  196.  301.,  et  passim. 


Chap.  XIV. J  SILURIAN  KOCKS  OF  BOHEMIA.  345 

sion  into  Wenlock  and  Ludlow  Eocks,  was  not  to  be  looked  for  in 
distant  lands.  In  truth,  he  has  detected  abundant  Ludlow  rock  fossils 
in  the  lower  limestone,  e  ;  and  whilst  the  upper  stages,  r,  G,  H, 
contain  some  of  the  same  species  as  that  rock,  they  are  also  distin- 
guished by  many  which  are  locally  peculiar  to  each  of  them.  In 
this  way  F  is  marked  by  its  profusion  of  brachiopods,  whilst  the 
cephalopods,  so  abundant  in  the  lower  limestone,  are  reduced  to  a  few. 
Of  trilobites,  though  there  are  seventy-five  species,  they  all  belong 
to  the  same  genera  as  those  of  stage  e. 

In  stage  G,  or  the  highest  limestone,  there  would  seem  at  first 
sight  to  be  some  reason  for  rather  classifying  this  mass  as  Devonian, 
seeing  that,  as  well  as  the  rock  beneath,  it  contains  Goniatites,  a 
genus  of  cephalopod  unknown  in  the  Silurian  of  Britain,  but  abun- 
dant in  the  Devonian  and  carboniferous  rocks  of  many  countries. 
This  one  feature,  however,  (and  the  Bohemian  species  are  peculiar 
and  not  known  Devonian  types,)  cannot  prevail,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
author,  in  the  face  of  the  much  more  decisive  fact,  that  many  true 
Silurian  types  pervade  the  three  limestones,  and  unite  them  in  one 
natural  group.  Thus,  we  here  meet  with  forty  species  of  trilobites  of 
the  genera  mentioned  in  the  opposite  page,  with  the  addition  of 
Dalmanites  (Phacops).  Now,  although  all  these  genera,  with  the 
exception  of  Calymene,  are  known  in  the  Devonian  rocks,  no  one  of 
the  Bohemian  species  has  been  found  in  them  * ;  and  the  resemblance 
is  therefore  confined  to  the  brachiopod  shells,  of  which  a  few  species 
are  certainly  found  in  Devonian  strata.! 

In  an  invaluable  table  appended  to  his  work  (plate  51.  vol.  i.),  which 
contains  the  result  of  as  much  philosophical  thought  and  profound 
research  as  I  ever  saw  embodied  in  a  single  page  of  natural  history, 

*  I  have  tlie  authority  of  M.  Fridolin  Sandberger  to  state,  that  he  knows  of  no 
species  of  a  trilobite  of  the  Upper  Silurian  of  Bohemia  in  the  Devonian  rocks  of 
the  Rhine. 

t  Barrande,  in  Haidinger's  iJ^'aturwissensch.  Abhandl.  1847  vol.  i. 


346  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

M.  Barrande  brings  at  once  before  the  eye  the  proof,  that  every  one 
of  the  few  trilobites  which  occur  in  the  Devonian  rocks  belongs  to 
a  genus  which  took  its  rise  and  had  its  maximum  development  in 
the  Silurian  period.  In  other  words,  the  Devonian  trilobites  are  only 
the  expiring  remnants  of  the  crustaceans  of  the  first  great  natural 
epoch  in  which  those  animals  flourished.  M.  Barrande  has  also  de- 
fined the  upper  limit  of  Silurian  life  by  showing  that  his  highest 
limestone  contains  three  species  of  Calymene,  a  genus  never  yet  found 
in  the  Devonian  rocks ;  the  form  which  was  originally  taken  for  a 
Calymene  in  the  lowest  Rhenish  '  grauwacke'  being  now  recognized 
as  a  Phacops. 

In  short,  more  than  1200  species  of  fossils  have  already  been 
obtained  through  the  labours  of  this  naturalist  from  his  rich 
Silurian  basin;  and,  just  as  in  Britain  and  other  parts  of  the 
world,  so  in  Bohemia,  the  most  assiduous,  nay,  microscopic,  re- 
searches, continued  during  many  years,  have  failed  to  detect  the  trace 
of  a  vertebrated  animal  in  any  of  the  Silurian  rocks,  except  their 
uppermost  strata.  After  all  his  laborious  researches,  M.  Barrande 
has  collected  two  fragments  only  of  fish-bones ;  and  it  is  remarkable 
that  in  this  same  upper  stratum  he  has  also  found  the  peculiar  crus- 
tacean named  Pterygotus,  and  has  thus  ascertained  the  same  union 
of  inhabitants  in  the  uppermost  Silurian  rock  of  Bohemia,  which  I 
had  observed  in  the  Ludlow  rocks  of  England  (see  Sil.  Syst.,  tab.  4  ; 
and  pp.  143.  205.  ante). 

Notwithstanding  their  strict  conformity,  the  Lower  and  Upper 
Silurian  rocks  of  Bohemia  are  supposed  to  be  more  separated  from 
each  other  by  their  fossils  than  in  their  wide  geographical  distribution 
in  the  British  Isles.  This  fact  may  to  a  great  extent  be  explained, 
by  an  appeal  to  the  usual  phenomena  of  clear  separation  wherever 
a  limited  tract  only  is  surveyed,  as  before  adverted  to. 

But  here  we  have  not  even  occasion  to  search  for  any  other  cause 
than  the  obvious  one  on  which  M.  Barrande  dwells,  to  account 


Chap.  XIV.]  SILURIAN  ROCKS  OF  BOHEMIA.  347 

satisfactorily  for  the  specific  separation,  in  this  tract,  of  the  animals 
of  his  three  Silurian  zones.  He  shows,  in  short,  that  after  the  accu- 
mulation of  what  he  calls  the  primordial  zone,  the  sea  bottom  of  this 
region  was  powerfully  disturbed  by  the  eruption  of  porphyries ;  and 
that  again,  after  the  completion  of  his  second  zone  or  at  the  close  of 
the  older  Silurian  period,  other  igneous  rocks  (greenstones,  trap,  &c.) 
were  so  copiously  and  repeatedly  evolved,  as  to  account  for  the  de- 
struction of  nearly  all  the  animals  then  living  in  these  environs; 
graptolites  especially  being  the  creatures  which  survived  such  tur- 
bulent conditions. 

Yet  even  under  this  point  of  view,  the  author  of  the  ^  Bassin  Silu- 
rien  de  la  Boheme  '  has  proved,  that  not  less  than  fifty- seven  species 
of  fossils  are  common  to  his  stages  d  and  E.  Thus,  when  the  observer 
is  working  his  way  up  through  the  Lower  Silurian  schists  and 
quartzites  of  the  stage  d,  with  their  Orthidae  and  Trinuclei,  he  meets 
unexpectedly  in  them  with  intercalated  bands  of  dark  shale, 
mineralogically  similar  to  those  of  the  superior  stage,  and  in  which, 
out  of  sixty-seven  species  which  have  been  discovered,  fifty-seven 
are  forms  that  characterize  the  Upper  Silurian  band  E.  This  is 
the  more  remarkable,  too,  as  the  fossils  otherwise  known  in  the 
stage  D  are  by  no  means  similar  to  those  of  the  overlying  rocks. 

M.  Barrande,  broaching  a  theory  at  once  original  and  ingenious, 
has  suggested,  that  these  schists  so  insulated  among  the  older 
strata,  may  be  regarded  as  having  been  the  seats  of  colonies  of 
animals  which,  existing  in  some  other  part  of  the  world  whilst  the 
Lower  Silurian  fauna  prevailed  in  Bohemia,  were  carried  to  these  spots 
by  currents,  and  thus  for  a  time  inhabited  the  region,  before  the 
more  general  introduction  of  exotic  species  at  a  subsequent  period. 

For  my  own  part,  I  must  say,  that  I  rather  prefer  to  explain  the 
fact  by  referring  to  what  may  almost  be  called  a  geological  law ;  viz., 
that  fossil  animals  are  frequently  associated  with  particular  condi- 
tions, disappearing  and  reappearing  with  changes  of  the  sea  bottom. 


348  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

Thus,  with  the  distribution  of  mud  and  silt,  accompanied  by  the  evo- 
lution of  calcareous  springs,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  that  here  the  grapto- 
lites  with  certain  mollusca  of  the  Wenlock  date  began  to  abound.  A 
return  however,  of  the  sandy  condition  of  the  sea  bottom,  occasioned 
by  new  currents,  brought  back  Trinuclei,  Orthidae,  and  other  pre- 
vious tenants  of  this  bay  of  the  sea,  to  be  eventually  succeeded  by  a 
still  more  prolific  spread  of  the  younger  races.  But  whether  the  geo- 
logist should  adopt  the  ingenious  speculation  of  M.  Barrande,  or  rest 
satisfied  with  my  simple  view  of  the  case,  the  alternation  is  unde- 
niable, and  thus  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  rocks  are  irrevocably 
linked  together  through  this  physical  interchange  of  a  number  of  their 
respective  fossils. 

Before  I  take  leave  of  this  rich  continental  centre  of  Silurian  life, 
which  my  eminent  friend  has  rendered  so  classical,  let  me  invite 
the  attention  of  the  reader  to  one  salient  proof  of  his  acumen  and 
sagacity  as  a  naturalist.  Every  one  knows  that  living  crustaceans, 
from  the  king  crab  (Limulus)  and  lobster  downwards,  proceed  from 
eggs;  and  in  reaching  maturity,  many  of  them,  even  of  the  higher 
grades,  are  known  to  pass  through  a  metamorphosis.  Now,  M. 
Barrande  has  discovered,  after  examining  myriads  of  fossils,  that  the 
trilobite  or  earliest  crustacean  underwent  a  similar  metamorphosis 
from  the  embryo  to  tlie  adult  state,  and  passed  through  many  changes 
of  form,  as  observed  in  living  Crustacea.  In  the  genus  Sao,  for 
example,  he  has  distinguished  no  less  than  twenty  stages  of  develop- 
ment of  the  same  species,  each  stage  being  marked  by  an  addition 
to  the  thoracic  ribs  of  the  animal ;  and  he  has  thus  taught  us,  by  true 
natural  proofs,  that  several  so  called  genera  and  many  species  named 
by  contemporary  authors  really  belong  to  this  one  creature.*  The 
same  analysis  of  forms  has,  indeed,  been  extended  by  the  author  to 
other  and  higher  deposits  of  the  Silurian  system ;  for  he  has  indi- 

*  See  particularly  Corda,  Prodrora.  einer  Monog.  der  Bohmische  Trilobiten,  in 
wiiicli  the  species  Sao  hirsuta  (Barr.)  has  been  divided  into  ten  genera  and  eighteen 
species ! 


Chap.  XIV.]  THURINGIA,  FRANCONIA,  ETC.  349 

cated  twenty-two  changes  in  his  beautiful  new  species  Arethusina 
Konincki  of  the  stage  E ;  and  altogether  he  has  found  the  phenomenon 
to  hold  good  in  twenty-six  species  of  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian 
strata.  He  has  even  followed  out  his  subject  into  other  families,  and 
has  traced  the  fossil  Nautilus  from  the  egg,  through  twenty  variations 
of  form,  to  its  completion  with  a  perfect  mouth. 

In  a  word,  the  work  of  M.  Barrande  will  convince  every  one 
who  studies  it,  that  we  have  now  obtained  quite  as  clear  an  insight 
into  the  first  recognized  stages  of  life  upon  the  globe,  as  into  that  of 
younger  deposits,  whose  secrets  are  so  much  more  easily  wrung  from 
the  stony  records  of  nature. 

Palceozoic  Rocks  (^Silurian,  Devonian^  Carboniferous,  and  Permian) 
of  TJiuringia,  Franconia,  Saxony,  and  the  adjacent  Principalities.  — 
The  older  sedimentary  formations  occupy  a  considerable  region  on  the 
north-western  flank  of  that  devious  chain  of  granitic,  gneissose,  and 
other  crystalline  rocks,  which,  ranging  from  north-east  to  south-west, 
divides  Saxony  from  Austria,  and  trends  into  the  Fichtel-Gebirge  of 
Bavaria.  From  that  chain,  the  deposits  in  question  descend  into  and 
spread  over  a  broad  and  comparatively  low,  undulating  tract,  which 
in  its  central  part  is  cut  through  transversely  by  the  river  Saal,  as  it 
flows  from  Hof  on  the  south-east  to  Saalfeld  on  the  north-west.  On 
their  north-western  boundary,  these  sedimentary  rocks  again  rise 
into  the  lofty  eminences  of  the  Thiiringerwald ;  the  whole  suc- 
cession under  consideration  having  a  dominant  strike  from  south- 
west to  north-east.  In  this  way  the  younger  strata  may  be  said 
to  occupy  a  broad  trough,  ranging  lengthwise  from  Ronneburg 
and  Gera  on  the  north-east,  by  Schleitz,  Plauen,  and  Hof,  to  Upper 
Franconia  on  the  south-west ;  whilst  the  older  rocks  of  the  series, 
rising  up  on  either  side,  are  often  in  a  highly  metamorphic  state, 
but  chiefly  on  the  south-eastern  flank  of  the  depression. 

The  first  effort  to  co-ordinate  the  various  sedimentary  rocks  of 
this  region  with  their  equivalents  in  the  Bhenish  provinces  and 


350  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

the  British  Isles,  was  made  in  the  year  1839  by  Professor  Sedg- 
wick and  myself.*  We  commenced  our  survey  by  examining  the 
mountainous  elevations  or  greywacke  of  the  Thiiringerwald,  and 
thence  extended  our  observations  to  the  shelly  limestones  of  Upper 
Franconia,  wherein  Count  Miinster  had  collected  his  transition 
fossils.  As  the  result,  we  indicated  that  which  has  proved  to  be 
the  true  general  succession.  We  spoke,  for  example,  of  a  slaty 
greywacke  with  greenish  slate,  and  quartzose  flagstones,  and  grits 
like  those  of  the  Longmynd ;  of  quartzites  in  roofing  slates  with 
a  greenish  tinge  (Schwartzburg,  &c.),  that  reminded  us  of  the 
lower  slates  of  Cumberland  and  Westmoreland.  The  whole  of  them 
were  said  to  exhibit  great  undulations,  to  be  powerfully  affected  by 
a  slaty  cleavage,  but  on  the  whole  dipping  to  the  south-east,  and 
surmounted  by  subcrystalline  limestones  with  alum  slate  (pyritous 
shale  of  Doschnitz,  &c.).  These,  again,  were  described  as  covered 
by  other  grey  schists  and  greywacke,  containing  also  courses  of  lime- 
stone; and  all  such  beds  disappeared,  we  said,  under  more  earthy 
and  arenaceous  strata,  resembling  the  Devonian  rocks  of  the  Rhenish 
provinces  we  were  then  describing.  Finding,  however,  no  fossils 
except  encrinites  in  the  lower  part  of  these  rocks,  we  could  assign  to 
them  no  more  definite  place  than  that  they  were  probably  of  the  age 
of  the  slates  of  the  Ardennes.  On  the  other  hand,  we  considered 
the  fossiliferous  limestones  of  Franconia  (Elbersreuth,  Hof,  Gat- 
tendorf,  &c.),  which  are  replete  with  Clymenige,  Goniatites,  and 
Orthoceratites,  as  being  unequivocally  of  Devonian  age;  and, lastly, 
by  actual  sections  and  physical  proofs,  we  confirmed  the  view  of 
Count  Miinster  derived  from  fossils  only,  and  showed  that  the  lime- 
stones an^  associated  schists  of  Trogenau,  Hegnitz  Losau,  and  Wiirlitz 
near  Hof,  were  truly  of  the  age  of  the  carboniferous  or  mountain 
limestone.f 

*  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  2nd  ser.  vol.  vi.  p.  296. 

f  The  fossils  collected  in  these  limestones  were,  Productus  punctatus,  P.  anti- 


Chap.  XIV.]      PALEOZOIC  ROCKS  OF  SAXONY,  ETC. 


351 


In  calling  attention  to  this  view  of  succession,  which,  in  a  recent 
visit  with  Professor  Morris,  I  found  to  be  substantially  correct,  it  is 
by  no  means  contended  that  Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself  had 
done  more  than  throw  out  a  general  suggestion ;  for  at  that  time, 
not  only  was  there  no  true  geological  sketch  of  this  complicated 
country,  but  not  even  any  ordinary  geographical  map  which  could 
be  depended  on.  In  the  fourteen  years  which  have  since  elapsed, 
good  trigonometrical  surveys  have  been  made  of  large  portions  of  the 
region,  and  able  geologists  of  Saxony  and  Meiningen  have  con- 
structed geological  maps,  and  have  described  many  fossils  entirely 
unknown  in  former  days. 

Thus,  Professors  Naumann,  Cotta,  and  Geinitz,  in  Saxony,  and 
M.  Kichter  of  Saalfeld  in  Meiningen  have  elaborately  worked  out 
the  demarcation  of  the  mineral  masses  of  which  these  old  rocks  are 
composed,  and  some  of  their  lower  members  having  been  found  to  con- 
tain graptolites,  trilobites,  and  other  fossils,  such  inferior  greywacke 
has  very  properly  been  referred  by  those  authorities  to  the  Lower 
Silurian.*  With  this  view  I  quite  agree,  guarding  the  definition  of  the 
word  'Lower  Silurian'  by  explaining,  that  some  of  the  black  schists 
of  this  region  which  contain  graptolites,  may  be  of  the  age  of  that 

quatus,  P.  sublaevis,  P.  pustulosus,  a  large  Orthis  near  to  O.  crenistria,  Phill., 
Chonetes  papilionacea,  Euomphalus  pentangulatus,  and  several  corals  of  the  genera 
Syringopora,  Cyathopbyllum,  &c.;  —  a  perfectly  carboniferous  assemblage. 

*  I  must  not  omit  to  add  to  this  list  the  name  of  M.  Engelhardt  of  Ober-Steinach, 
who  has  made  a  large  collection  of  fossils,  some  of  which  are  manifestly  of  Lower 
Silurian,  and  others  of  Devonian  age.  The  strata  near  that  place  are  so  dis- 
located and  in  great  part  inverted,  that  I  can  well  understand  how  that  gentle- 
man, from  whom  I  recently  experienced  every  courtesy  when  I  visited  Steinach, 
should  have  been  led  to  indicate  an  order  of  strata  whereby  the  rocks  which 
are  jeally  Devonian  were  placed  under  the  Lower  Silurian  greywacke.  The 
formations  referred  by  him  to  the  Upper  Silurian  (under  the  names  of  Wenlock, 
Aymestry,  Ludlow,  &c. ;  Zeit.  Deutsch.  Geol.  Gesellsch  ;  Berlin,  vol.  iv.  p.  234.) 
are  for  the  most  part  Devonian,  as  proved  by  fossils,  which,  not  relying  on  my 
own  judgment  only,  I  referred  to  M.  Barrandc. 


352 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


zone  in  Bohemia,  which  forms  the  base  of  the  Upper  Silurian  of 
M.  Barrande. 

The  following,  therefore,  may  be  taken  as  an  improved  view  of  the 
succession,  completing  the  first  sketch  by  Sedgwick  and  myself. 

1.  Ancient  rocks  of  the  Thiiringerwald,  consisting  of  greenish,  talcose 
schists  with  white  quartz  veins,  which  in  former  times  afforded  some  gold. 
They  range  from  Steinheide  by  Igleshieb,  or  from  south-west  to  north-east, 
in  association  with  certain  bands  of  ferruginous  and  purple-coloured  grey- 
wacke,  not  unlike  the  bottom  rocks  of  my  British  sections.  These  masses 
occupy  the  highest  grounds  of  the  Oberland  of  Meiningen,  attaining 
an  elevation  of  near  3000  English  feet  above  the  sea.  2.  The  beds  of 
this  lofty  plateau  fold  over  both  to  the  north-west  and  south-east,  and  are 
throughout  affected  by  a  slaty  cleavage,  which  extends  to  all  the  overlying 
formations.  As  the  planes  of  this  cleavage,  usually  plunging  to  the 
north-west  at  a  high  angle,  are  dominant,  and  often  obliterate  the  lines  of 
true  bedding,  they  have  misled  some  observers  with  respect  to  the  physical 
succession  of  the  strata.  Attentive  observation,  however,  shows  that,  rolling 
over  in  undulations  to  the  south-east,  the  above  rocks  ('Griine  Grau- 
wacke' of  Richter),  containing  fucoids,  are  overlaid  by  the  group  which 
that  author  terms  *  Graue  Grauwacke.'  The  latter  is  composed  of  lime- 
stone and  aluminiferous  schists,  subordinate  to  much  greywacke,  slate,  and 
sandstone,  and  occasionally  contains  in  its  lower  beds  fine  examples  of  fucoids. 
Among  these  are  the  Phycodes  circinnatum,  and  the  Fucoides  Allegha- 
nensis,  together  with  Myrianites,  and  the  (graptolites  ?)  Cladograpsus 
nereitarum,  Nereograpsus  *  Sedgwicki,  and  N.  cambrensis,  (Nereites,  Sil. 
Syst.).  The  upper  beds  specially  contain  graptolites,  orthoceratites,  and 
some  forms  of  trilobites.  Of  the  truth  of  this  succession  I  convinced  myself 
in  examining,  with  M.  Engelhardt  and  Professor  Morris,  that  portion  of 
the  section  of  Ober-Steinach  which  pertains  to  the  Silurian  rocks.  The 
same  rocks  occupy  a  broader  surface  between  Schwartzburg  and  Saalfeld ; 
one  of  their  members  being  extensively  quarried  for  the  manufacture  of 
slate  pencils  (Criffelstein).  A  species  of  trilobite  found  by  M.  Engelhardt 
approaches  near  to,  if  it  be  not  identical  with,  Ogygia  (Asaphus)  Buchii  ; 
and  as  some  of  the  worm-like  bodies  (Nereites),  and  several  of  the  grapto- 
lites, both  double  and  single,  are  not  distinguishable  from  forms  known 
in  the  British  Isles,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  we  have  in  this  slaty 
group  a  true  equivalent  of  the  Lower  Silurian  formation. 

*  M.  Geinitz  regards  this  as  belonging  to  the  Graptolite  family. 


€hap.  XIV.]  SILURIAN  KOCKS  OF  SAXONY,  ETC. 


353 


In  fact,  several  of  its  numerous  graptolites  are  species  identical  with 
those  described  by  Portlock,  Salter,  M'Coy,  Harkness,  Nicol,  and  myself, 
from  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Britain ;  and  among  these,  as  seen  in  the  work 
of  Geinitz,  or  identified  by  M.  Richter,  are  the  following  :  Diplograpsus 
folium,  His. ;  D.  palraeus  and  D.  ovatus,  Barr. ;  D.  teretiusculus.  His. ;  Grap- 
tolithus  priodon  (Ludensis,  Sil.  Syst.) ;  G.  Sedgwicki,  Portlock ;  G. 
Becki,  Barr. ;  G.  latus,  M'Coy (?);  G.  spina,  Richt. ;  G.  turriculatus,  Barr.; 
G.  Nilssoni,  Barr.;  G.  Sagittarius,  His.;  G.  colonus,  G.  Proteus,  and 
Rastrites  peregrinus,  Barr.  * ;  with  some  other  species  common  to  this 
region  and  Bohemia,  including  the  remarkable  graptolite,  Retiolites  Gei- 
nitzianus,  Barr.  Several  of  the  species  occur  also  here,  and  in  the  Silurian 
rocks  of  Scandinavia,  North  America,  and  other  countries. 

The  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  the  Thiirlngerwald  and  of  the  Saal- 
feld  tract,  which  are  penetrated  at  intervals  by  porphyries  and  green- 
stones, are  irregularly  overlapped,  towards  their  south-eastern  flanks, 
by  masses  of  Devonian  age  (the  '  rothe  grauwacke,'  Richter),  which 
will  presently  be  considered.  Silurian  rocks,  with  schists  containing 
similar  graptolites,  again  emerge  from  beneath  younger  strata  in 
a  series  of  low  undulations  far  to  the  east  of  the  lofty,  wooded  Thii- 
ringerwald.  The  base  rocks,  in  fact,  of  the  low  ridges  extending 
from  Ronneburg  on  the  north-east,  through  Schleitz  to  Lobenstein 
on  the  south-west,  are  composed  of  graptolite  schists  and  roofing 
slates.  Similar  rocks  reappear  in  parallel  undulations  in  the  en- 
virons of  Plauen  and  Hof ;  and  it  is  probable  that  considerable 
portions  of  the  Thon-Schiefer  of  the  general  map  of  Saxony  will 
be  afterwards  found  to  belong  to  the  Lower  Silurian  division. 

The  exact  definition  of  the  outline  of  these  Silurian  rocks,  and 
their  separation  from  all  the  older  unfossiliferous  and  crystalline 
strata  on  the  one  hand,  and  from  the  Devonian  rocks  on  the  other, 
will  be  a  work  of  no  small  labour.  Their  regular  order  has  been 
repeatedly  interfered  with  by  pseudo-volcanic  or  eruptive  masses, 

*  vSee  some  of  these  forms  of  Graptolite,  p.  46,  ante^  and  pi.  12.  f.  1.  of  this 
work. 

A  A 


354  SILUEIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

which,  whether  they  constitute  stratified  layers  or  appear  as  intrusive 
bosses,  have  singularly  aiFected  the  ordinary  sediments.  These  ig- 
neous rocks  are,  indeed,  most  accurately  laid  down  on  the  map  by 
Professor  Naumann  and  his  associates.  So  rapidly  does  the  geologist 
here  proceed  from  one  formation  to  another,  that  one  small  hill  is 
often  seen  to  be  composed  of  Lower  Silurian  schists  with  graptolites, 
and  another,  within  gunshot,  of  true  Devonian  limestone.  These 
changes  are  well  seen  near  Schleitz,  where  the  low  ridges  of  black 
brittle  schist,  which  form  the  pleasure-grounds  of  the  reigning  Prince 
(Heinrich's  Ruhe),  are  laden  with  Graptolites,  Orthidae  and  other 
fossils  * ;  whilst,  on  the  western  side  of  an  intervening  small  hill  of 
eruptive  rock,  the  geologist  has  before  him  a  limestone  charged  with 
Clymeniae,  Cypridinae,  and  true  Devonian  fossils  !  On  the  whole, 
however,  it  may  be  said,  that  although  they  occupy  so  broad  an  area  in 
the  lofty  tract  of  the  Thiiringerwald,  the  Ijower  Silurian  rocks  only 
make  their  appearance  partially,  and  within  comparatively  narrow 
bounds,  in  the  central  portion  of  that  region  which  has  here  been 
designated  a  vast  undulating  trough.  Even  then,  their  superior 
members  are  alone  visible,  one  characteristic  band  of  which  is  com- 
posed of  the  black  schists  and  slates,  extending  from  Ponneburg  by 
Schleitz,  to  Lehestein,  and  Lobenstein. 

The  Devonian  rocks  of  this  portion  of  Germany,  previously  known 
to  us  through  the  palaeontological  illustrations  of  Count  Munster, 
have  recently  been  much  better  developed  by  the  labours  of  Pro- 
fessor Geinitz  and  M.  Pichter. 

From  the  densely  wooded  cover  of  the  lands,  it  is  exceedingly 
difficult  to  trace  any  absolute  junction  of  these  Devonian  rocks  with 

*  All  the  Silurian  fossils  figured  from  this  spot  in  the  work  of  Prof  Geinitz 
were  previously  found  by  M.  Berner,  an  intelligent  apothecary  of  Schleitz,  who 
had,  it  appears,  detected  Graptolites  in  these  strata,  many  years  before  the  atten- 
tion of  geologists  was  called  to  them.  M.  Berner  has  extensive  fossil  collections 
on  sale. 


Chap.  XIV.]     DEVONIAN  OF  THURINGIA,  FRANCONIA,  ETC.  355 

the  subjacent  Lower  Silurian  of  the  Thiiringerwald.  That  they 
lie,  however,  irregularly  upon  their  older  neighbours,  is  manifest 
from  the  faithful  delineation  of  their  outlines,  as  laid  down  in  the 
geological  map  of  Eichter,  which  shows  the  Devonian,  or  the 
'  Rothe  Grauwacke  '  of  that  author,  in  patches  or  hummocks  only, 
in  relation  to  a  great  spread  of  the  more  ancient  rocks.*  That  this 
is  their  true  position,  I  can  now  affirm. 

The  extent  to  which  this  Devonian  group  of  Thuringia,  Franconia, 
and  Yoigtland,  can  be  paralleled  in  its  details  with  that  of  the 
Rhenish  provinces  of  Prussia,  is  not  yet  completely  ascertained ;  for 
beginning  with  what  is  now  usually  recognized  as  the  lowest  fos- 
siliferous  rock  of  the  Rhine,  or  the  '  Spirifer  Sandstein,'  I  have 
nowhere  been  able  to  detect  a  section  where  such  strata  are  infra- 
posed  to  the  fossiliferous  limestones  of  the  region. 

The  next  question  then  is,  can  we  even  divide  the  Devonian  of 
this  region  in  Central  Germany  into  lower  and  upper  limestones,  as  was 
first  done  in  Devonshire,  and  afterwards  in  the  Rhenish  provinces  ? 

This  separation  has,  indeed,  been  partially  made  by  Geinitz,  who  places  at 
the  bottom  of  this  group  certain  schists  near  Ronneburg,  which  Naumann 
has  identified  in  several  other  localities.  These  schists  contain  Tentaculites 


*  See  Beitrag  zur  Palaontologie  der  Thiiringer  Waldes  von  Reinhard  Richter, 
Dresden  and  Leipsig,  1848  5  and  Die  Yersteinerungen  der  Grauwacken  Formation 
in  Sachsen,  &c.,  von  Hans  Bruno  Geinitz,  Leipsig,  1853.  In  the  first  part  of 
his  able  work,  Prof.  Geinitz  describes  and  figures  many  species  of  graptolites,  be- 
fore referred  to,  p.  353 ;  and  in  the  second  he  adds  to  these  the  following  Silurian 
fossils: — Nereograpsus  tenuissimus,  Emmons;  Orthoceras  Brongniarti,  Troost; 
O.  tenue,  Wahlenberg ;  Leptocheles  (Dithyrocaris)  Murchisoni,  Agass. ;  Tentaculites 
tenuis,  Sow.;  Pterinaea  Sowerbyi,  M'Coy;  Nucula  levata.  Hall;  Cytherina  sub- 
recta,  Portlock  (?) ;  and  Orthis  callactis,  Dalm.  These  fossils  are,  however,  very 
obscure,  and  their  identification  therefore  doubtful.  In  the  Devonian  rocks  he 
describes  one  genus  of  trilobite  only,  the  Phacops ;  of  chambered  shells,  24  species, 
including  Orthoceratites,  Gomphoceras,  and  Cyrtoceras,  1 1  species ;  Clymenia,  6  ; 
Goniatites,  4;  Gasteropods,  8  species;  Lamellibranchs,  24  species;  Brachiopods, 
11  —  including  the  universal  Atrypa  reticularis  ;  Crinoids,  9  or  10  species;  and 
corals  about  1 1  species. 

A  A  2 


356 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


laevigatus,  Roemer;  T.  subconicus,  Gein.  ;  with  Phacops.  Then  follow 
certain  limestones  near  Plauen,  Wildenfels,  and  other  localities,  including 
the  well-known  Elbersreuth,  which  are  also  classed  as  older  Devonian. 
These  are  characterized  by  Orthoceratites,  0.  interruptum  and  0.  dimidi- 
atura,  Miinst.,  Clymenia  laevigata,  Miinst.,  and  peculiar  corals  and  crinoids. 
Then  succeed  stratified,  igneous  rocks,  some  of  which  are  greenstones, 
others  coarse  trappean  breccias,  and  others  again  finely  levigated  ash-beds, 
occasionally  calcareous  and  undistinguishable  from  the  '  Schaalstein '  of  the 
Rhine  (Plauschwitzer-schichten  of  Naumann).  Above  these  is  said  to  be 
placed  the  Clymenia  limestone,  properly  so  called,  and  in  which  many 
fossils  abound,  including  Goniatites  and  several  species  of  Posidonomya 
(P.  inversa  and  P.  regularis,  Goldf.,  &c.),  together  with  a  vast  profusion 
of  Cypridina  serrato-striata,  Roemer.  Not  professing  to  have  worked  out 
the  proofs  of  these  subdivisions,  I  must  say  that  in  the  tracts  I  have 
examined  there  are  no  evidences  of  two  Devonian  limestones,  separated  from 
each  other  by  slaty  rocks,  as  in  England  and  on  the  Rhine. 

In  short,  I  have  nowhere  seen  in  Saxony,  or  the  adjacent  tracts,  the  true 
representative  of  the  Eifel  limestone,  as  characterized  by  its  Stringocephali, 
CalceolcB,  &c.,  overlaid  by  another  which  represents  the  Clymenia  rock  of 
England  (or  the  Kramenzel-stein  of  the  Rhine).  But,  as  towards  the  end 
of  this  chapter  we  shall  indicate  that  those  two  calcareous  masses,  which 
are  so  clearly  separated  in  some  districts,  are  nearly  brought  together  in 
others,  so  is  it  possible  that  the  divisions  partially  indicated  through  their 
fossils,  by  Geinitz,  may  be  established  in  Voigtland,  and  that  the  trappean 
tufi*  (schaalstein)  of  Plauschwitz  and  other  places,  may,  as  he  believes,  se- 
parate these  two  rocks. 

However  this  may  be,  the  ascending  order,  in  several  places,  is  clear, 
from  a  highly  fossiliferous  and  nodular  limestone,  laden  with  Clymeniae, 
Goniatites,  and  Orthoceratites,  and  which  is  everywhere  characterized  by 
Cypridinae,  into  overlying  strata  in  which  land  plants  begin  to  appear.  The 
Devonian  limestone  is  surmounted  by  a  copious  accumulation  of  sandstones 
and  schists,  occasionally  siliceous, — the  'jiingste  grauwacke'  of  Geinitz, — 
charged  with  land  plants.  These  are  sometimes  followed  by  the  carboni- 
ferous limestone  or  '  kohlen-kalk'  with  its  large  Producti,  and  by  other 
strata  with  which  a  different  series  of  land  plants  is  associated. 

Such  an  ascending  order  is  seen  at  Hof,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Saal, 
between  the  town  quarries  replete  with  Cypridinae  and  an  overljing 
coralline  limestone.  This  succession  is  more  clearly  viewed  between  Gat- 
tendorf  and  Troguenau ;  the  intervening  space  between  the  Devonian 


Chap.  XIV.] 


DEVONIAN  OF  SAALFELD. 


357 


or  Clymenia  limestone  of  the  former,  and  the  Carboniferous  or  Pro- 
ductus  limestone  of  the  latter,  being  occupied  by  ferruginous  greywacke 
with  traces  of  plants,  and  by  a  mass  of  'kiesel  schiefer,'  which  there 
occupies  the  same  place  as  the  rock  so  called  by  the  geologists  of  the  Rhine 
country.* 

Again,  in  the  gorge  of  the  Saal  near  Saalfeld,  the  cliffs,  which 
M.  Bichter  has  described  in  a  section  f,  expose  a  magnificent  mass 
of  limestones,  which  are  throughout  characterized  by  Cypridina 
serrato- striata  and  C.  calcarata,  Koem.,  with  many  other  upper 
Devonian  types,  but  which  offer  no  evidence  whatever  of  a  second 
limestone  between  them  and  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks.  Here 
M.  E-ichter  has  detected  Phacops  latifrons,  Bronn,  and  P.  gra- 
nulatus,  Posidonomya  minuta  and  P.  intercostalis,  Eoem.,  with 
trails  of  worm-like  animals.  Here,  also  (no  igneous  rocks  appear- 
ing), the  ascending  order  seemed  to  me  to  be  clear  and  unequivocal. 
In  spite  of  the  dominant  slaty  cleavage,  the  planes  of  which  dip  to 
the  north-west,  the  Cypridina  limestones,  after  those  fine  convolu- 
tions which  render  the  gorge  so  picturesque,  are  seen  to  pass  under 
the  mass  of  red  rocks,  or  '  rothe  grauwacke  '  of  Richter  | ;  the  whole 
being  covered  unconformably  by  terraces  of  '  Zechstein.' 

The  lower  part  of  this  reddish  coloured  sandy  and  schistose  grey- 
wacke is  interlaminated  with  the  Cypridina-schiefer,  the  mass  of 
which  immediately  succeeds  to  the  limestone ;  and  from  this  point,  the 

*  Much  confusion  may  arise,  in  comparing  the  local  descriptions  of  German 
geologists,  from  the  use  of  mineral  terms  applied  to  rocks.  Thus,  in  this  region 
of  Thuringia  and  Saxony,  '  Kiesel  Schiefer,'  which  here  usually  designates  some 
of  the  older  Silurian  schists  and  also  some  Devonian  beds,  might  be  strictly 
applied  to  the  flinty,  schistose  strata  overlying  the  Cypridina  limestone  and  its  grey- 
wacke near  Hof,  and  which  are  unquestionably  on  the  parallel  of  the  so-called 
'  Kiesel  Schiefer,' — i.e.  lower  carboniferous — of  the  Prussian  and  Hessian  geologists. 

I  Beit.  Palaont.  des  Thiiringer-Waldes.    Dresden,  1848.    Tab.  i. 

\  I  convinced  M.  Richter  of  this  fact,  by  closely  scrutinizing  this  section  in  com- 
pany with  that  gentleman. 

A  A  3 


358  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XI Y. 

beds  begin  to  contain  land  plants,  which  augment  in  quantity  and  size 
in  the  overlying  or  younger  strata.  These  consist,  first  of  reddish  and 
grey,  and  then  of  greenish  shale,  of  considerable  thickness,  which  on 
the  right  bank  of  the  Saal  extend  from  the  cliffs  of  Bohlen  by  the 
Pfaffenberg  to  the  Kleitsch  Hill,  and  finally,  at  the  foot  of  the 
Rothenberg,  are  surmounted  by  brownish,  red,  micaceous  flagstones, 
containing  a  great  quantity  of  fossil  plants.  I  direct  particular 
notice  to  this  section,  because  it  exhibits,  more  clearly  than  any  other 
with  which  I  am  acquainted,  the  extent  to  which  the  land  vegetation 
augments  as  we  ascend  in  the  Devonian  rocks. 

The  lowest  plants,  as  discovered  by  M.  Richter  in  the  Cypridina 
schists,  consist,  according  to  Professor  linger,  to  whom  they  were 
referred,  of  many  species  of  Ferns,  of  new  or  undescribed  genera, 
and  even  of  new  families.  Some  of  them  are  considered  to  be  inter- 
mediate between  Ferns  and  Equisetaceae, — others  seem  to  be  primi- 
tive forms  of  Cycads  and  Conifers,  possessing  characters  of  which 
(says  the  Professor)  no  one  has  as  yet  had  an  idea;  and  some 
present  such  a  singular  organization,  that  he  terms  them  —  the  "pro- 
totype of  the  gymnosperms !  "  * 

This  section  is  still  further  interesting  in  demonstrating  a  passage 
upwards  into  other  and  overlying  beds  under  the  Kothenberg,  — viz. 
into  the  micaceous  sandstones  and  flagstones,  which,  from  the  plants 
they  contain,  must  be  classed  with  the  lower  car])oniferous  rocks. 
Such,  for  example,  are  Calamites  transitionis,  Gopp. ;  Megaphy- 
tum  (Eothenbergia)  Hollebenii,  Cotta;  with  Knorria,  &c.;  plants 
which  are  well  known  in  the  Rhenish  provinces  of  Prussia,  where 
they  invariably  occupy  the  lower  carboniferous  rocks,  and  never 
descend,  like  the  group  above-mentioned,  into  the  Devonian,  properly 
so  called.    Here,  then,  on  the  edge  of  the  Thiiringerwald,  M.  Richter 

*  Letter  from  Professor  Unger  to  M.  Richter.  In  some  of  the  Conifers  of  these 
upper  Devonian  plants,  the  resin  even  of  the  wood  has  been  preserved. 


Chap.  XIV.]        LOWER  CARBONIFEROUS  OF  THURINGIA.  359 

has  collected  data  to  prove,  by  plants  alone,  a  succession  from  the 
Devonian  to  the  Carboniferous  period. 

Having  called  the  attention  of  this  author,  on  the  spot,  to  the  im- 
portance of  applying  these  facts  respecting  the  distribution  of  the 
fossil  plants  to  the  tracts  between  Saalfeld  and  Schleitz,  in  parts 
of  which  such  remains  were  for  the  first  time  observed  in  a  recent 
excursion*,  I  now  learn  from  him,  that  he  has  considerably  extended 
the  area  which  is  occupied  by  the  Lower  Carboniferous  rocks  in 
that  country,  as  defined  by  its  plants. f 

These  plant-bearing  rocks  also  occupy  a  considerable  fringe  of 
elevated  country  at  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Thiiringerwald 
between  Sonneberg  and  Teushnitz ;  and  they  occur  in  abundance  in 
the  gorge  of  the  Steinach  river,  north  of  Koppelsdorf.  As  they 
offer  a  good  line  of  geological  demarcation,  I  also  strongly  urged  M. 
Credner  to  distinguish  this  ^Jungste  Grauwacke'  of  my  German 
friends  from  all  its  older  associates  which  bear  that  unmeaning  family 
name.  It  will,  of  course,  require  much  accuracy  of  local  observation 
to  draw  the  line  between  the  plant-bearing  rocks  of  Devonian,  and 
those  of  Carboniferous  age  ;  or  rather,  it  will  best  become  the  pro- 
gressive state  of  science,  not  to  attempt  to  mark  any  hard  and 
rigorous  line  between  them,  but  to  shade  off  on  a  map  the  colour 
of  one  rock  into  that  of  another;  thus  imitating  the  succession  of 
nature,  in  which  there  is  no  mistake.  | 

*  The  observation  was  made  by  M.  Richter  and  Baron  von  Baumbach,  in  com- 
pany with  Professor  Morris,  and  myself. 

f  The  ground  between  Saalfeld  and  Schleitz  is  all  laid  down  in  the  geological 
maps  of  Saxony  under  one  colour,  or  as  older  '  grauwacke  whereas  a  very  large 
portion  of  it  must  now  be  assigned  to  the  lower  carbo7iiferous  formation.  When 
will  my  valued  friends,  the  mineralogists  and  geologists  of  Germany,  abandon  a 
word  which  has  led  to  such  endless  confusion  ?  I  cannot  but  regret  that  a  work  of 
such  ability  as  that  recently  issued  by  Geinitz  should  bear  the  title  of  the  "Fossils  of 
the  *  Grauwacke  Formation,' "  under  which  name  he  treats  of  Silurian,  Devonian, 
and  Carboniferous  rocks. 

I  At  the  southern  end  of  the  Thiiringerwald,  Professor  Morris  and  myself 

A  A  4 


360 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


Such  is  a  meagre  outline  of  the  palaeozoic  succession  of  this 
diversified  region  of  Central  Germany,  the  complete  local  elabora- 
tion of  which  calls  for  the  full  employment  of  all  the  able  men 
who  are  occupied  in  working  out  its  highly  interesting  features. 

A  slight  allusion  only  has  been  made  to  the  south-eastern  flank 
of  the  great  undulating  trough  of  Plauen,  Schleitz,  and  Hof ;  for, 
although  Naumann  and  his  associates  have  shown  in  their  maps,  that 
older  and  more  crystalline  rocks  appear,  we  have  yet  to  learn  how 
much  of  their  primary  clayslate,  or  '  thon-schiefer,'  is  to  be  ab- 
stracted from  the  unfossiliferous  rocks,  and  grouped  with  the  lower 
members  of  the  series  we  have  been  considering.*     Other  enquirers 

partially  examined,  in  company  with  M.  Biittner  of  Kronach,  a  zone  of  coal 
measures  containing  some  irregular  seams  of  coal,  and  exhibiting  a  rich  fossil  flora, 
which,  flanking  the  loftier  so-called  'grauwacke'  chain  of  the  Thiiringerwald 
(Koppelsdorf,  &c.),  is  interposed  between  it  and  the  rothe-todte-liegende. 
This  coal  formation  rises  out  conformably  from  beneath  a  vast  mass  of  inclined 
beds  of  rothe-todte-liegende,  not  less  than  from  1500  to  2000  feet  thick 
(Stockheim,  Neuhaus,  &c.).  As  the  coal  and  rothe-todte-liegende  are  there, 
as  in  Gotba,  followed  by  copper  slate,  zechstein,  and  a  very  full  development  of 
the  Bunter  Sandstein  (which  at  Kronach  occupies  noble  escarpments,  and  is 
manifestly  divided  into  a  whitish  lower,  and  a  red  upper  sandstone),  this  district 
is  well  worthy  of  a  monograph  to  develop  the  features  of  the  Permian  group  with 
its  relations  to  the  coal  beneath,  and  to  the  lower  Bunter  Sandstein  above  it. 

The  general  relations  of  these  overlying  deposits  to  the  so-called  'grauwacke' 
rocks  of  the  Thuringian  mountains,  will  be  seen  in  the  forthcoming  southern 
sheet  of  a  geological  Map  of  the  Thiiringerwald  by  M.  Credner,  a  copy  of 
which  he  presented  to  me  after  I  had  examined  the  above-mentioned  coal 
tract.  In  classifying  the  igneous  rocks  of  the  Thiiringerwald,  M.  Credner 
believes  that  the  granites,  with  hypersthene  rocks,  &c.,  have  caused  the  great 
metamorphism  of  those  strata,  which  when  they  range  into  southern  Thuringia,  I 
have  described  as  Lower  Silurian,  &c.,  but  which,  in  the  northern  parts  of  the 
forest  where  granite  abounds,  become  mica  schists,  &c.  The  greenstones  and 
araygdaloids  of  the  tract  are  associated,  according  to  Credner,  with  carboni- 
ferous rocks ;  and  the  two  porphyries  of  the  region,  the  one  containing  quartz, 
and  the  other  without  it,  are  connected  by  that  good  practical  observer  with  the 
period  of  the  rothe-todte-liegende ;  the  former,  which  is  the  oldest,  being 
traversed  by  the  ^quartz freier''  porphyry. 

*  In  travelling  from  Plauen  to  Franzenbad  it  seemed  to  me  impracticable  to 


Chap.  XIV.]      SAXON  AND  THURINGIAN  ROCKS  —  RESUME.  361 

may  seek  to  ascertain  to  what  extent  many  of  these  ancient  schists 
and  slates,  evidently  of  sedimentary  origin,  have  been  converted  into 
mica  schists,  and  even  into  the  metalliferous  so-called  '  gneiss  '  amid 
which  the  illustrious  Werner  himself  taught  his  lesson  s*at  Freiberg. 

It  would  seem  presumptuous  that  a  passing  geologist  should 
hazard  any  opinion  on  such  a  point.  Still  I  venture  to  state,  that 
much  of  the  so-called  gneiss  in  the  plateaux  around  Freiberg,  is  a 
rock  very  different  in  age  from  the  antique  and  crystalline  gneiss 
of  Scotland  and  Scandinavia.  I  would  indeed  suggest,  that  those 
portions  of  it  which  are  separated  by  way-boards,  and  exhibit  several 
of  the  features  of  bedding  and  jointing  of  aqueous  deposits,  may 
prove  to  be  of  no  higher  antiquity  than  the  lower  members  of  the 
sedimentary  formations  under  review. 

In  the  mean  time,  if  we  reason  upon  the  fact,  that  this  region 
contains  no  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  we  may  surmise  that  it  was  raised 
above  the  waters,  and  constituted  dry  land  during  a  long  period, 
and  was  afterwards  depressed  to  great  depths,  to  receive  accumu- 
lations of  the  Devonian  era,  at  a  period  when  the  bottom  of  the  sea 
in  these  localities  was  pow^erfully  agitated  by  volcanic  action. 

This  same  country  also  contains  clear  evidences  of  a  phenomenon 
to  which  Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself  called  attention  in  1835, 
viz.,  —  that  whilst  the  older  ^grauwacke,'  now  known  to  be  Lower 
Silurian,  with  the  Devonian  and  Lower  Carboniferous  rocks,  have 
partaken  of  the  same  movements  of  elevation,  contortion,  and  dis- 
location, all  these  rocks  have  been  abruptly  separated  from  the  upper 
coal-fields  and  the  deposits  which  have  since  been  termed  Permian. 

separate  geologically  and  physically  the  '  thon-schiefer'  or  glossy  shillat  of  that  dis- 
trict from  the  contiguous  graptoUte  schist  of  Plauen.  In  fact,  the  rocks  on  either 
bank  of  the  Elster  are  mineralogically  the  same,  and  have  similar  bedding,  joints, 
and  cleavage ;  the  faces  of  the  last  plunging  to  the  north-west.  The  discovery  of 
any  Silurian  fossils  in  the  greywacke,  which  rises  into  the  hilly  tracts  on  the  flanks 
of  the  Erz-Gebirge,  would  remove  these  rocks  frcm  the  '  thon-schiefer.' 


362 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


This  feature  of  a  great  physical  rupture,  which  seems  to  have  per- 
vaded Germany  and  France,  and  has  been  duly  noticed  by  M,  Elie 
de  Beaumont,  has,  however,  its  well-defined  limits  even  in  Europe ; 
for,  grand  as  it  may  be,  the  phenomenon  is  local  only,  and  has  not 
extended  to  Russia  on  the  east,  or  Britain  on  the  west. 

PalcEOzoic  Rocks  of  the  HartZy  the  Rhenish  Provinces,  and  Belgium, 
— In  advancing  westwards  from  central  Germany  to  the  Hartz*,  and 
the  Rhenish  provinces  of  Prussia,  the  geologist  loses  nearly  all 
traces  of  the  Silurian  rocks  of  Bohemia,  Saxony,  and  the  Thiiringer- 
wald,  whilst  deposits  of  the  Devonian  and  Carboniferous  ages  become 
vastly  more  expanded. 

Yet,  with  this  absence  of  the  oldest  fossiliferous  deposits,  the 
regions  under  consideration  present  quite  as  venerable  an  exterior, 
and  contain  rocks  possessing  a  structure  quite  as  crystalline,  as  those 
of  which  we  have  just  taken  leave.  For,  if  we  first  glance  at  the 
range  of  the  Hartz  —  that  shrine  at  which  so  many  poets  have  wor- 

*  Not  having  visited  the  Hartz  since  my  second  survey  of  that  tract,  with  Prof. 
Sedgwick,  in  1839,  I  am  unable  to  do  justice  to  so  highly  interesting  a  subject, 
and  can  only  say  that  I  believe  our  general  order  as  given  to  the  public  was  sub- 
stantially correct, — subject,  always,  to  that  re/(;me<i  interpretation  of  the  exact 
relative  value  of  the  various  sedimentary  rocks  which  is  now  applied  to  the  Rhenish 
provinces,  and  also  to  the  lights  which  M.  Adolf  E,oemer  has  very  recently 
shed  upon  the  tract  in  which  he  resides.  In  referring  to  that  instructive  work, 
the  Palaeontographica  of  Dunker  and  Hermann  von  Meyer  (Band  2.  lief  2.),  the 
reader  will  perceive,  at  p.  71,  how  inverted  and  confused  the  order  of  succes- 
sion appears  in  a  section  which  is  there  offered.  The  feature,  however,  of  this 
work  which  most  concerns  the  observations  in  the  text,  is  the  publication  (1852) 
of  a  group  of  fossils  which,  according  to  Adolf  Roemer,  lie  in  "Upper  Silurian 
limestone."  I  must  leave  the  arbitration  of  this  point  in  the  hands  of  niy  palseon- 
tological  friends.  Unquestionably,  the  great  mass  of  the  greywacke  of  the  Hartz 
is  Devonian,  a  point  further  corroborated  by  M.  A.  Roemer's  discovery,  in  the 
heart  of  the  chain,  of  the  Coccosteus,  a  fish  of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone.  But  whether 
there  be  really  any  fossiliferous  rocks  of  older  date  in  the  Hartz  than  in  the 
Rhenish  provinces  of  Prussia,  must  yet  remain  in  doubt;  seeing  that  some  of 
the  forms  published  by  Adolf  Roemer  in  his  plate  of  the  so-called  Silurian  fossils, 
are  well-known  Devonian  species. 


Chap.xtv.]        devonian  kocks  of  the  hartz.  363 

shipped  Nature  in  her  wondrous  freaks,  and  where  the  German  geo- 
logist long  regarded  his  old  *  Grauwacke'  as  a  mass  whose  order  could 
never  be  defined,  and  whose  age  was  fathomless  —  its  chief  portions 
are  now  ascertained  to  be  of  no  more  remote  antiquity  than  the  De- 
vonian era.  The  Brocken  itself,  the  giant  of  the  chain,  so  sanc- 
tified in  many  a  legend,  was  preceded  in  this  very  district  by  sub- 
marine volcanic  eruptions,  which  disturbed  the  bottom  of  a  primeval 
sea.  It  is  composed  of  a  comparatively  modern  granite,  which,  having 
burst  forth  long  after  the  slaty  'Grauwacke'  had  been  accumulated, 
has  through  ages  of  decomposition  arranged  itself  into  those  chaotic 
piles  or  'felsen  meer,'  so  graphically  described  by  Leopold  von 
Buch.  Again,  subsequent  outbursts  of  porphyry  were  also  mani- 
festations of  the  subterranean  forces  which  produced  the  last  great 
elevation  of  the  Hartz,  and  gave  to  the  surrounding  masses  of 
the  secondary  formations  their  present  outline.  For,  unlike  the 
prevalent  north-east  and  south-west  alinement  of  the  older  rocks  in 
Britain,  Scandinavia,  Russia,  and  Germany,  the  geographical  di- 
rection of  the  Hartz  is  from  north-west  to  south-east ;  and  thus  its 
appearance  upon  a  map  is  not  derived  from  its  more  ancient  mineral 
nucleus,  but  from  the  unconformable  and  enveloping  younger  strata. 

As,  then,  the  great  masses  of  the  slaty  rocks  of  the  Hartz  which 
contain  fossils,  are  known  to  be  of  the  same  age  as  those  of  the 
Rhine,  and  like  them  are  also  flanked  by  lower  carboniferous  strata, 
we  may  now  pass  on,  referring  the  reader  by  the  way  to  the  works 
of  Hausmann,  Adolf  Roemer,  and  others ;  merely  adding,  that  in 
mineral  composition,  association  with  igneous  rocks,  and  the  inversion 
of  great  masses,  the  two  regions  are  also  alike.  In  truth,  through 
the  combination  of  many  disturbing  causes  in  this  one  district,  the 
chain  of  the  Hartz  has  literally  been  riven  into  detached  fragments, 
the  relative  age  of  which  cannot  be  proved  by  order  of  superposition, 
and  can  only  be  interpreted  through  an  examination  of  the  organic 
remains  of  each  mass.    In  the  Rhenish  provinces,  on  the  contrary. 


364  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

though  large  portions  of  their  strata  are  infinitely  contorted  and 
broken,  and  sometimes  also  inverted,  the  Northern  or  Westphalian 
frontier  exhibits  a  perfect  and  complete  succession  of  formations  in 
their  normal  ascending  order.  The  reader's  attention  will  therefore 
be  now  directed  to  that  region. 

The  convoluted  and  broken  rocks  presenting  such  an  antique 
slaty  aspect,  and  which,  crowned  with  castles,  form  the  chief 
features  of  the  gorges  of  the  Rhine  and  the  Moselle,  'exhibit  no- 
where any  fossiliferous  band  so  old  as  the  Upper  Silurian.  This  re- 
mark applies  to  all  the  territory  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Rhine, 
from  the  Taunus  mountains  on  the  south-east,  to  the  coalfields  east 
of  Dusseldorf  on  the  north-west.  This  vast  and  formerly  undivided 
^  Grauwacke  '  tract,  including  the  Duchy  of  Nassau,  and  having 
its  northern  frontier  in  Westphalia,  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  the 
secondary  rocks  of  Hessia,  which  range  southwards  by  Marburg  and 
Giessen  to  Frankfort.  On  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine,  the  same 
upward  succession  occurs  between  the  Lower  Devonian  rocks  of  the 
Hundsriick  on  the  south-east,  and  the  coal  tracts  of  Aix-la-Chapelle 
and  Belgium  on  the  north-west.  It  is  only  by  deflecting  westward 
into  the  mountainous  tract  of  the  Ardennes,  that  we  meet  with  older 
slaty  rocks,  rising  from  beneath  all  the  other  deposits. 

Althouo-h  this  view  of  the  ao^e  of  the  Rhenish  strata  has  for  some 
years  prevailed  among  scientific  men,  it  is  right  to  explain  how  it  has 
happened,  that  English  geologists*,  who  fourteen  years  ago  applied 
the  classification  they  had  worked  out  in  their  own  country  to  these 
Rhenish  rocks,  and  modified  the  views  of  their  precursors,  should  in 
their  turn  have  seen  reason  to  admit  the  value  of  certain  important 
corrections  made  by  their  successors. 

The  clear  general  views  of  that  Nestor  of  geologists,  D'Omalius 
d'Halloy,  the  remarkable  work  and  map  of  M.  Dumont,  as  well  as 


*  See  Sedgwick  and  Murchison,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  vi,  p.  211. 


Ohap.XIV.]       devonian  OF  THE  RHENISH  PROVINCES.  365 

the"  previous  labours  of  Prussian  geologists,  including  the  maps  of 
Leopold  von  Buch,  Hoffman,  von  Dechen,  and  Oynhausen,  unques- 
tionably led  the  way  in  the  succession  of  efforts,  through  which 
our  present  knowledge  has  been  obtained.  After  the  publication  of 
the  above  works,  Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself  endeavoured  to  show 
(1839)  that,  like  Devonshire  and  Cornwall,  the  Ehenish  provinces 
contained  a  great  mass  of  those  strata,  intermediate  between  the 
Silurian  and  Carboniferous  deposits,  which  we  had  called  Devonian  ; 
the  equivalent,  in  our  belief,  of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone  of  Scotland 
and  Herefordshire.  Our  contemporaries  have  admitted  that,  in  our 
excursion  of  one  long  summer  in  Germany,  we  succeeded  in  proving 
the  existence  of  such  an  intermediate  series  both  in  Prussia  and 
Belgium,  and  also  in  showing  how,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Rhine, 
the  uppermost  '  grauwacke '  was  divisible  into  lower  Carbonife- 
rous and  upper  Devonian  rocks.  Misled,  however,  by  an  erro- 
neous interpretation  of  some  of  the  fossils  (for  at  that  time  the 
Lower  Devonian  forms  had  been  little  developed),  we  adopted  the 
belief,  that  the  inferior  '  fossiliferous  grauwacke,'  or  that  which  has 
since  been  called  the  ^  Spirifer  Sandstein '  of  the  Rhine,  was  an 
equivalent  of  the  Upper  Silurian.  I  have  been  convinced,  through 
the  palasontological  labours  of  Ferdinand  Roemer  and  the  brothers 
Sandberger,  that  the  types  of  that  lower  Rhenish  subdivision  are 
distinct  from  the  Upper  Silurian,  and  in  harmony  with  the  lowest 
Devonian  group  of  other  countries.  And  for  some  years  I  have  been 
aware  that,  whilst  our  sections  representing  the  succession  of  the 
mineral  masses  were  correct,  the  interpretation  or  synonymy  to 
be  attached  to  the  lower  division  was  erroneous.  Again,  in  the 
superior  portions  of  the  group  now  recognized  as  Devonian,  the  geo- 
logists of  Prussia  and  Nassau  have  made  subdivisions,  both  minera- 
logical  and  zoological,  which  it  is  essential  to  notice. 

It  is,  however,  satisfactory  to  have  ascertained  in  a  recent  visit 
to  my  old  ground,  that  all  the  knowledge  acquired  in  the  fourteen 


366  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

years  which  have  elapsed  since  our  survey  was  made,  has  but  led  to  a 
much  more  complete  identification  of  the  E-henish  provinces  with 
Devonshire,  than  that  which  was  proposed  by  my  colleague  and  self. 
In  short,  it  now  appears  that  not  some  only,  as  we  thought,  but 
all  the  palaeozoic  strata  of  Devon  have  their  equivalents  on  the  banks 
of  the  Rhine.  So,  that,  starting  from  the  North  Foreland  of  the 
Bristol  Channel,  and  ascending  into  the  heart  of  the  culm-fields,  as 
described  p.  256.,  the  geologist  has  before  him  the  successive  repre- 
sentatives of  the  E-henish  deposits. 

Those  persons  who  may  refer  back  to  the  sixth  volume  of  the 
Geological  Transactions  of  London,  will,  therefore,  understand  that  all 
the  Rhenish  ground  which  is  described  or  coloured  in  the  map  and 
sections  as  Upper  Silurian,  is  now  embodied  in  the  Devonian  rocks ; 
whilst  to  their  admirable  description  of  the  fossils,  MM.  d'Archiac 
and  de  Verneuil  have  but  to  add  the  one  plate  of  the  few  so-called 
Silurian  fossils  (executed  in  England),  to  their  thirteen  plates  of 
true  Devonian  types,  and  all  the  general  features  of  our  labours 
will  be  in  harmony  with  subsequent  observations.  The  absence  of 
Upper  Silurian  rock  in  this  region  will  modify  to  a  very  small 
extent  the  reasoning  of  our  distinguished  French  colleagues,  as  to 
the  relative  distribution  of  the  different  classes  of  fossil  animals,  —  a 
point  already  well  known  to  those  who  follow  the  progress  of  palae- 
ontology. In  truth,  if  the  field  geologist  makes  his  survey  faith- 
fully, and  establishes  a  correct  order  of  superposition,  his  facts 
will  always  eventually  be  found  to  be  coincident  with  the  truths 
of  natural  history.  Of  this  the  Rhenish  provinces  and  Belgium  have 
afforded  the  best  illustrations ;  for  notwithstanding  the  opinion  of  a 
distinguished  contemporary  M.  Dumont,  who  has,  I  think,  too  much 
undervalued  the  weight  of  fossil  evidence,  it  is  essentially  the  study 
of  organic  remains  which  has  led  to  the  clear  subdivision  of  the  vast 
mass  of  older  rocks,  which  were  there  formerly  merged  under  the 
unmeaning  term  *  Grauwacke.' 


Chap.  XIV.]  ASCENDING  SERIES  ON  THE  RHINE.  367 

Ascending  Series  in  the  Rhenish  Provinces.  —  The  slaty  masses  of 
the  Ardennes,  or  the  oldest  rocks  of  the  region,  may  by  some  per- 
sons be  considered  Silurian,  from  certain  rare  trilobites,  orthoceratites, 
and  shells,  which  have  been  detected  in  them.  Forms  of  Homa- 
lonotus,  from  the  upper  part  of  the  slates,  which  I  examined  many 
years  ago  *,  seemed  to  me  to  be  of  that  age ;  and  many  better  speci- 
mens of  the  genus  having  been  found,  it  is  suggested,  that  the  species 
in  the  Ardennes  slates  are  different  from  those  of  the  Devonian 
rocks  of  the  Rhine.  It  has  even  been  surmised,  that  the  true  Upper 
Silurian  is  here  omitted,  as  in  Saxony  and  the  Thiiringerwald,  and 
that  some  of  the  oldest  slaty  rocks  of  this  region  are  Lower  Silurian. 

However  this  may  be,  neither  in  the  gorges  of  the  Rhine  between 
Bingen  and  the  mouth  of  the  Lahn,  where  the  rocks  have  been 
so  contorted  and  so  much  subjected  to  a  crystalline  slaty  cleavage, 
nor  in  the  quartzose  ranges  of  the  Taunus  and  the  Hundsriick,  has 
any  one  been  able  to  detect  typical  Silurian  fossils.  On  the  con- 
trary, the  recent  identification  of  the  limestone  of  Stromberg  on 
the  south  edge  of  the  Hundsriick  with  the  Eifel  limestone  and 
the  discovery  of  certain  fossils  by  Fridolin  Sandberger  (by  no  means 
lowest  Devonian  species)  along  the  edges  of  the  Taunus,  have 
substantiated  the  views  originally  embraced  by  Professor  Sedgwick 
and  myself,  that  those  mountains  were  simply  metamorphosed  masses 
of  the  same  age  as  the  chief  fossiliferous  '  Grauwacke'  of  the  Rhine. 
Passing,  however,  from  these  defaced  leaves  in  the  book  of  geolo- 
gical succession,  and  commencing  inquiry  where  the  order  of  super- 
position, aided  by  palaeontology,  diffuses  a  clear  light,  we  find  in  the 
Rhenish  countries  the  following  ascending  order  of  the  Devonian 
rocks  properly  so  called  :  — 

Lower  Devonian  or  *  Spirifer  Sandstein^  Wissenbach  Slates^  &c.  — 
Slaty  schists  (those  of  Caub,  for  example),  with  greywacke  sandstones 

*  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  vi.  p.  275.    They  are  not,  however,  the  H.  Knightii. 
t  MM.  F.  Roemer  and  Fridolin  Sandberger  agree  in  this  opinion. 


368 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


and  quartzose  rocks,  and  a  rare  trace  of  impure  limestone;  the  whole 
being  exhibited  between  Coblentz  and  Caub.  This  is  the  *  Aeltere  Rhei- 
nische  Grauwacke '  of  F.  Roeraer,  or  the  '  Spirifer  Sandstein '  of  Sand- 
berger.  It  contains  a  good  many  remarkable  fossils  ;  among  which  may  be 
noticed  the  large  and  broad-winged  Spirifers — S.  macropterus  and  S.  spe- 
ciosus,  Terebratula  Archiaci,  many  species  of  Pterinea,  some  Orthidae, 
especially  O.  circularis,  Leptaena  plicata,  Chonetes  semiradiatus,  Sow.  (C. 
sarcinulata  Schloth.  ?),  Pleurodictyum  problematicum,  Phacops  (Cryphoeus) 
laciniatus,  Phacops  latifrons,  and  both  smooth  and  spinose  species  of  Ho- 
malonotus, — H.  Ahrendi,  and  H.  armatus*,  &c. 

Looking  to  this  list,  and  the  plate  representing  some  of  these  oldest 
Rhenish  fossils,  as  given  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Geological  Society f,  it 
will  be  seen  that,  according  to  the  palasontological  knowledge  of  the  year 
1839,  it  was  very  natural  to  group  this  member  of  the  series  as  Upper 
Silurian.  In  fact,  it  was  not  then  known,  that  Homalonoti  were  ever 
found  in  Devonian  rocks ;  and  the  few  imperfect  casts  of  trilobites  (since 
ascertained  to  be  of  the  genus  Phacops)  were  then  supposed  to  belong  to 
Calymene,  a  genus  still  unknown  in  Devonian  rocks.  Again,  a  large  Pen - 
tamerus  from  Greifenstein  was  believed  to  be  the  Silurian  form  P.  Knightii ; 
and  though  not  identical,  the  distinction  is  but  slight.^ 

According  to  the  sections  made  by  my  colleague  and  self,  the  beds  which 
next  follow  in  this  disturbed  region,  are  the  slates  of  Wissenbach,  with  their 
numerous  small  pyritized  orthoceratites  and  goniatites.    This  order  is  also 


*  The  Homalonotus  Herschelii,  '  Sil.  Sjst.,'  a  fossil  formerly  sent  to  me  from  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope  by  Sir  John  Herschel,  and  all  the  spinose  forms  of  this 
genus,  are  now  believed  to  belong  to  Lower  Devonian,  and  not  to  Upper  Silurian 
rocks.    (M.  Sandberger  and  Mr.  Salter  are  of  the  same  opinion.) 

f  Trans.  Geol.  Soe.  2nd  series,  vol.  vi.  pi.  38. 

J  The  insulated  shelly  conglomerate  of  Greifenstein,  with  its  large  Pentameri, 
may  perhaps  still  be  held  in  doubt,  as  being  possibly  the  representative  of  an 
Upper  Silurian  rock  ?  The  Pentameri  occur  in  a  highly  dislocated  mass,  the 
relations  of  which  to  other  strata  are  not  seen ;  and  besides  these  fossils, 
Chonetes  lata  (?)  is  said  to  have  been  recently  found  in  it.  At  this  spot,  Greifen- 
stein, the  undulations  and  breaks  are  very  numerous,  so  as  to  destroy  all  sure 
indication  of  the  dip  of  the  quartzose  grits  in  which  the  fossil  shells  occur.  These 
sandy  strata  have  been,  in  great  part,  converted  into  quartz-rock,  and  are  pe- 
netrated by  basaltic  eruptions.  See  Sedgwick  and  Murchison,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc. 
vol.  vi  2nd  series,  p.  256. 


Chap.  XIV.] 


DEVONIAN  OF  THE  RHINE. 


369 


sustained  by  the  brothers  Sandberger,  who,  admitting  that  the  fauna  of 
this  band  is  rather  peculiar,  affirm  that  it  contains  from  eight  to  ten  species 
like  those  of  the  Spirifer  Sandstone :  among  which  are  Nucula  solenoides, 
Goldf ;  Phacops  laciniatus,  Roem. ;  and  P.  brevicauda,  Sandb.  Thus, 
through  their  imbedded  animal  remains,  a  natural  union  subsists  between 
these  two  rocks ;  which,  in  the  Rhine  country,  constitute  the  Lower 
Devonian.  * 

This  Lower  Devonian  mass  —  at  least,  all  that  portion  of  it  which  is 
characterized  by  broad-winged  Spirifers  —  was  long  ago  recognized  f  as 
extending  largely  over  the  Prussian  provinces  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
Rhine,  which  are  watered  by  the  Moselle  J,  the  Lieser,  and  the  Ahr  ;  and 
thence  by  the  flanks  of  the  Ardennes  into  Belgium,  where  its  position  was 
clearly  marked  by  M.  Dumont. 

Middle  Devonian  of  the  Rhine.  —  ('Agger  and  Lenne'  group  of  Dechen, 
or  Calceola  Schiefer,  followed  by  Stringocephalus  or  Eifel  limestone.) 
The  strata  which  succeed  to  the  Lower  Devonian  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
Rhine,  consist,  like  the  previous  beds,  of  schists  and  sandstones,  but  in 
which  lenticular-shaped  masses  of  limestone  prevail  at  intervals.  They 


*  In  the  Caub  slates,  which  are,  indeed,  quite  intercalated  in  the  lower  division, 
the  brothers  Sandberger  have  found  Phacops  laciniatus,  with  P.  latifrons,  Homa- 
lonotus  planus,  and  some  Orthoceratites. 

f  Sedgwick  and  Murchison,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  vi.  p.  280. 

%  A  work  has  recently  appeared  (1853),  entitled  *  Geognostische  Beschreibung 
der  Eifel,'  with  a  map  and  plates  of  fossils,  by  Professor  Steininger,  in  which  that 
author  endeavours  to  show,  that  the  whole  of  the  Eifel  region,  ranging  from  south- 
west to  north-east,  is  a  geological  trough,  supported  on  the  one  side  by  the  clay 
slate  and  quartzose  rocks  of  the  Ardennes,  and  on  the  other  by  rocks  on  the 
banks  of  the  Moselle,  which  he  conceives  to  be  of  similar  age.  This  latter  inference 
(my  respected  friend  M.  Steininger  must  forgive  me)  is  at  variance  with  the  belief 
of  other  geologists  who  have  explored  this  region,  and  who,  from  organic  remains, 
class  the  Moselle  slates  with  the  rocks  of  Coblentz  and  the  mouth  of  the  Lahn,  i.  e. 
the-Lower  Devonian  of  the  present  day.  Though  it  may  seem  ungrateful  in  me 
not  to  support  that  view  of  M.  Steininger,  which  refers  the  '  grauwacke '  under 
the  Eifel  limestone  to  the  Silurian  era,  I  am  bound  to  say  that  a  careful  revision 
of  all  the  fossil  evidences  collected  by  palaeontologists,  where  fossils  are  more  nu- 
merous and  perfect  than  those  to  which  the  learned  professor  of  Treves  appeals, 
compels  me  to  adhere  to  the  opinion  expressed  in  the  text.  A  reference  to  the 
plates  of  his  work  will,  indeed,  satisfy  naturahsts  that  most  of  the  figures  given  by 
M.  Steininger  belong,  not  to  the  Silurian,  but  to  the  Devonian  rocks. 

B  B 


370 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


there  occupy  a  wide  tract  which  is  watered  by  the  rivers  Agger,  Vohne, 
and  Lenne.  On  the  left  bank,  this  group  constitutes  the  greywacke  of  the 
banks  of  the  Ahr  or  Systeme  Ahrien  of  Dumont.  After  various  undula- 
tions and  the  protrusion  of  many  bosses  of  eruptive  igneous  rocks,  and 
the  diffusion  of  much  iron  ore,  these  strata  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Rhine, 
plunge  under  the  great  band  of  limestone  which,  ranging  by  Elberfeldt 
and  Schwelm  to  Iserlohn,  and  appearing  also  at  Paffrath  and  Refrath 
near  Cologne,  is  the  well-known  equivalent  of  the  Eifel  limestone.  Al- 
though my  colleague  and  self  thus  described  the  stratigraphical  position 
of  these  rocks,  we  did  not  attempt  to  separate  them  from  the  underlying 
Spirifer  Sandstone,  with  which  they  are  connected  closely  by  mineral  cha- 
racters, and  to  which  they  are  everywhere  conformable.  A  laborious 
examination  of  the  country,  such  as  native  geologists  alone  could  execute, 
has,  however,  led  to  the  separation  of  these  strata  from  the  lower  division 
or  the  *  Spirifer  Sandstein,'  and  has  shown,  that  whilst  they  are  united 
with  the  Stringocephalus  or  Eifel  limestone  which  covers  them,  they  are 
separated  from  the  subjacent  shelly  'grauwacke.'  It  has,  in  short,  been 
found  that,  whilst  they  contain  few  species  in  common  with  the  underlying 
rocks,  they  are  laden  with  fossils  that  occur  in  the  superior  limestone. 
Hence,  the  Prussian  geologists,  viz..  Von  Dechen,  F.  Roemer,  and  Girard, 
have  for  some  time  been  delineating  these  strata  separately  on  an  exquisitely 
finished  geological  map  of  the  Rhenish  provinces  of  Prussia,  the  result 
of  infinite  research,  and  they  apply  to  these  rocks  the  name  of  '  Agger  and 
Lenne'  group.*  This  subdivision  is  another  of  the  many  proofs  which 
patient  inquiry  has  brought  forth  to  demonstrate,  that  it  is  not  possible  to 
form  correct  geological  groups  by  appealing  to  mineral  characters  and 
superposition  only ;  for  these  were  precisely  the  grounds  on  which  the 
strata  in  question  were  closely  united  by  my  colleague  and  self,  with  the 
greywacke  of  Ems  and  Coblentz. 

It  is  now  believed  that  the  '  Agger  and  Lenne '  group  is  identical  with 
those  more  schistose  courses  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine,  which  also 
underlying  the  Stringocephalus  limestone  are  known  as  the  *  Calceola 
Schiefer.'  There  they  are  characterized  by  the  presence  of  the  Calceola 
sandalina,  Dalmania  (Cryphoeus)  punctata,  C.  stellifer,  Spirifer  cultri- 
jugatus,  S.  speciosus,  S.  heteroclytus,  and  many  other  fossils  which  are 


*  This  beautiful  Map  occupying  30  sheets,  "  Geognost.  Karte  der  Rhein-provinz 
und  Westphalen,"  will  be  one  of  the  noblest  memorials  of  the  school  of  Leopold 
von  Buck,  the  great  geological  cartographer  of  the  period. 


Chap.  XIV.] 


THE  EJFEL  LIMESTONE. 


371 


common  both  in  the  Eifel  country,  and  in  the  limestones  of  Devonshire. 
In  following  these  formations  into  Belgium,  the  same  physical  order  is 
known  to  prevail ;  and  I  learn  from  M.  de  Koninck,  that  a  band  containing 
the  same  lower  Eifelian  group  of  fossils  alluded  to,  is  clearly  exposed 
between  Couvin  and  Chimay. 

Stringocephalus  or  Eifel  Limestone. — This  is  the  great  central,  calcareous 
mass,  which  gives  to  the  Devonian  rocks  their  dominant  and  independent 
characters ;  for  if  the  Lower  Devonian  of  the  Rhine  exhibits,  in  some  of 
its  forms,  analogies  to  the  Upper  Silurian  type,  the  limestone  to  which  we 
have  now  ascended^  and  the  approach  to  which  is  clearly  indicated  by  its 
fossils  in  the  strata  that  preceded  it,  contains  a  fauna  which  is  unmistake- 
ably  peculiar,  and  wholly  unlike  that  of  the  Silurian  below  or  the  car- 
boniferous above  it.  Among  the  most  striking  Rhenish  types  of  this  rock 
are  Stringocephalus  Burtini,  Uncites  gryphus,  Davidsonia  Verneuilii, 
Spirifer  undiferus,  and  S.  l^evicosta,  Megalodon  cucuUatus,  Lucina  proavia, 
Murchisonia  bilineata,  and  the  corals,  Cyathophyllum  caespitosum,  Favosites 
polymorpha,  Heliolites  pyriformis,  &c. 

Laden  with  a  profusion  of  corals,  crinoids,  and  other  fossils,  many  of 
which  have  been  made  known  through  the  beautiful  works  of  Goldfuss,  it 
is  unnecessary  here  to  dilate  further  on  the  numerous  organic  remains  of 
this  rock,  very  many  of  which  are  common,  as  before  said,  in  Devon- 
shire. It  may,  however,  be  stated,  that  in  the  Eifel  country,  and  also  in 
the  Hartz,  the  Coccosteus  and  other  ichthyolites  have  been  detected,  which, 
as  in  Russia  (see  p.  328.),  identify  the  rock  as  a  member  of  the  Old  Red 
Sandstone  of  Britain.  Among  the  organic  remains  are  also  several  types, 
which  connect  this  band  with  the  subjacent  strata,  such  as  Phacops  latifrons, 
Bronn,  and  Pleuracanthus  punctatus,  Steininger ;  with  Spirifer  speciosus, 
Schloth.,  Spirifer  cultrijugatus,  Roem.  &c.* 

Upper  Devonian  of  the  Rhine  and  Belgium.  —  (Clymenia  and  Goniatite 
limestone,  Cypridina-Schiefer,  Sandb. ;  Kramenzel-stein,  F.  Roem.,  with 
schists  (Flint-schiefer,  and  sandstone,  &c.).)  Although  we  observed  and 
noted,  that  the  chief  masses  of  the  Devonian  limestone  in  the  Rhenish  pro- 
vinces were  frequently  followed  by  other  courses  of  impure  limestone, 
my  colleague  and  self  did  not  propose  that  separation  which  is  seen  in 


*  See  the  comparative  table  of  Fred.  Roeraer,  Geol.  Kenntn.  Nordw.  Harz- 
gebirges ;  Dunker  and  von  Meyer's  Palseontographica,  3  Band.,  p.  1.,  1850 ;  also 
the  memoirs  of  the  brothers  Sandberger,  Versteinerung,  Rhein.  Schichtensyst, 
Nassau,  1850;  and  Frid.  Sandberger,  Geol.  Verhaltn.  Nassau,  (with  map)  Wies- 
baden, 1847,  &c. 

B  B  2 


372 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XI 


Devonshire,  and  has  already  been  adverted  to  as  there  existing  between 
the  lower  or  Stringocephalus  limestone  and  the  superior  or  Clymenia 
limestone  of  Petherwin.    The  researches  of  the  able  palaeontologists  of 
the  Rhine,  to  whom  allusion  has  already  been  made,  and  those  of  M.  de 
Koninck  in  Belgium,  have,  however,  led  to  a  separation  which  more  clearly 
identifies  the  succession  of  these  foreign  tracts  with  that  of  Devonshire. 
M.  Ferdinand  Roemer,  for  example,  divides  this  upper  group  into  the 
following  ascending  series:  1.  Receptaculite  schists,  so  called  because  they 
are  charged  with  the  Receptaculites  Neptuni,  Defrance  ;  2.  limestone  cha- 
racterized by  Goniatites  auris,  and  other  species ;   3.  schists  with  many 
Goniatites,  Clymenise,  and  Cypridinas ;  4.  and  lastly,  schists  containing  Rhyn- 
chonella  cuboides  and  Productus  subaculeatus, —  beds  which  are  paralleled 
by  that  author  with  the  Upper  Devonian  strata  of  North  Devon.  Looking, 
however,  at  this  Upper  Devonian  division  in  a  broad  point  of  view,  as  it 
generally  appears  on  the  Continent,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  more  frequently 
characterized  by  the  small  crustacean  Cypridina  serrato-striata,  than  by  any 
other  fossil.    Where  the  calcareous  courses  thin  out,  and  Clymeniae  and 
Goniatites,  or  other  characteristic  shells,  are  not  frequent,  the  minute 
crustacean  is  almost  everywhere  present,  often  ranging  through  a  con- 
siderable succession  of  beds,  and  giving  to  them  their  prevailing  zoological 
character.    In  each  country,  however,  through  which  this  division  ranges, 
it  exhibits  some  peculiar  features,  though  in  most  tracts  it  is  chiefly  marked 
by  containing  Cypridinae,  Clymeniae,  and  certain  Goniatites.    The  name, 
therefore,  of  '  Cypridina  Schiefer,'  adopted  by  the  brothers  Sandberger, 
who  have  described  so  many  of  the  organic  remains  of  this  remarkable 
band  of  rocks,  is,  I  repeat^  highly  characteristic  of  it  as  a  whole. 

In  Nassau,  where  the  upper  limestone  is  in  some  places  very  little 
removed  from  the  lower  or  massive  limestone  (as  near  Weilburg),  it  has 
only  to  be  followed  a  short  distance  eastwards,  to  be  seen  divided  from  its 
neighbour  by  copious  strata  of  the  plutonic  rock  called  "  Schaalstein," 
which  was  formed  of  submarine  volcanic  ejections. 

But,  it  is  along  the  northern  frontier  of  the  Devonian  rocks  in 
Westphalia,  where  they  all  subside  conformably  beneath  the  overlying 
carboniferous  deposits,  that  they  assume  an  importance,  which  can  only  be 
well  understood  when  the  remarkable  map,  before  spoken  of,  shall  be  pub- 
lished. There,  the  group  above  the  Stringocephalus  limestone  exhibits, 
first,  slaty  schists  with  some  thin  layers  of  grey  and  black  limestone  con- 
taining Goniatites  retrorsus  ;  strata  which  at  Nuttlar  attain  the  great  thick- 
ness of  1000  feet  (Flint-schiefer  of  the  Prussian  geologists).    Next  follow 


Chap.  XIV.]  SUMMARY  OF  RHENISH  DEVONIAN. 


373 


micaceous  sandstones  often  running  into  concretionary  forms,  as  seen  at  the 

*  Rauhe  Hardt,'  near  Iserlohn.  Then  appear  the  Cypridina  schists  and  a 
nodular  limestone,  which,  from  the  cavities  it  weathers  into,  has  been  called 

*  Kramenzel- stein '  or  ant-stone*,  the  greatest  thickness  of  which  is  about 
200  feet. 

It  is  this  nodular  Kramenzel-stein,  and  the  associated  schists  and 
sandstone,  frequently  of  a  reddish  colour,  which  are  most  charged  with 
Cypridinae  and  Clymenias,  and  these  give  to  the  upper  group  its  chief 
character.  When  most  extended,  including  the  schists  called  '  Flint,'  the 
group  has  the  dimensions  of  upwards  of  1300  feet.  This  Upper  Devonian 
or  Cypridina  Schiefer,  as  before  explained,  is  much  developed  in  Saxony  and 
in  the  adjacent  tracts  of  Thuringia  and  Franconia.    (See  last  Chapter.) 

In  terminating  this  sketch  of  the  Devonian  rocks  of  the  Rhenish 
provinces,  it  may  be  observed,  that  notwithstanding  a  certain  general 
aspect,  and  the  occurrence  of  a  few  similar  species,  even  the  lowest 
Devonian  here  indicated  is  very  different  from  the  Upper  Silurian 
type  of  any  part  of  Europe;  whilst  the  middle  or  typical  Devonian  is 
completely  distinct.  Neither  of  these  rocks  contain,  for  example,  any 
Silurian  species  of  crustacean  or  cephalopod;  and  graptolites,  which 
occur  from  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  the  Silurian  rocks,  are  unknown 
in  them.  The  Devonian  and  Upper  Silurian  are,  therefore,  infinitely 
more  distinguished  from  each  other,  as  natural-history  groups,  than 
the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian,  which,  on  the  contrary,  are  intimately 
linked  together,  as  proved  in  the  earlier  chapters,  by  a  very  con- 
siderable number  of  the  same  species  of  crustaceans,  cephalopodous 
and  brachiopod  shells,  corals,  and  graptolites. 

In  following  these  Devonian  rocks  into  Belgium,  it  is  found  that, 
though  their  main  divisions  are  persistent,  their  details  differ  con- 
siderably from  those  of  Westphalia.  At  Aix  la  Chapelle,  where  the 
Belgian  type  may  be  said  to  begin,  all  the  members  of  the  series  are 
much  attenuated.  We  there  find  a  very  meagre  equivalent  only  of 
the  lower  shelly  greywacke ;  and  the  calcareous  representative  of 

*  The  cavities  are  frequently  filled  with  ants'  nests ;  hence  this  name,  given  by 
the  workmen. 

B  B  3 


374  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

the  Eifel  limestone  is  but  a  poor  coralline  rock,  in  parts  dolomitic, 
followed  only  by  certain  nodular  schists  charged  with  the  Recepta- 
culites  Neptuni  and  Spirifer  Verneuilii,  which  alone  represent  the 
copious  masses  of  Flint-schiefer,  Kramenzel-stein,  &c.,  of  the  pre- 
viously mentioned  tracts.  Again,  the  Belgian  succession,  properly 
so  called,  seems  to  be  deficient  in  the  equivalents  of  those  lower 
carboniferous  strata,  which  in  Prussia  are  intercalated  between 
the  Upper  Devonian  and  the  Carboniferous  limestone,  or  its 
equivalent  Kiesel  Schiefer,  &c.  ;  for  the  highest  Devonian  nodular 
schists,  with  Spirifer  Verneuilii,  are  at  once  surmounted  by  the 
limestone  with  great  Producti  (Carboniferous  Limestone).*  The 
mineral  character  of  these  various  rocks,  and  the  changes  they 
undergo,  must  be  studied  in  the  works  of  Dumont;  and  their  zoolo- 
gical distinctions,  in  those  of  de  Koninck,  &c.t 

According  to  de  Yerneuil,  the  Lower  Devonian  of  the  Ehine 
is  the  equivalent  of  the  Oriskany  sandstone  of  the  United  States. 
Other  analogies  have  been  indicated,  through  their  fossils,  between 
these  Continental  deposits  and  the  Marcellus  slates  and  Hamilton 
groups  of  North  America.  But,  for  the  present,  let  us  simply  bear  in 
mind  that,  whether  we  regard  the  physical  order  of  the  masses,  or 
their  imbedded  remains,  the  Rhenish  rocks,  which  have  afforded  more 
than  450  species  of  fossil  animals,  are  not  only  really  remarkable 
counterparts  to  the  succession  in  Devonshire,  but,  through  the  vigour 
of  their  explorers,  have  already  much  outnumbered  in  fossils  their 
British  equivalents. 

Carboniferous  Rocks  of  the  Rhenish  Provinces, — The  upward  succession 

*  I  owe  the  knowledge  of  these  facts  to  M.  Ferdinand  Roemer.  M.  de  Koninck, 
however,  tells  me  that  between  Couvin  and  Philippesville  he  has  observed  an  order 
like  that  of  the  Rhine. 

t  See  particularly  the  memoir  of  Mr.  D.  Sharpe,  comparing  the  palaeozoic 
formations  of  America  with  those  of  Europe.  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  iv. 
p.  145. 


Chap.  XIV.]  CAKBONTFEROUS  ROCKS  OF  THE  RHINE. 


375 


from  the  Devonian  rocks  into  the  Carboniferous  deposits  is  clear  on  both 
banks  of  the  Rhine  and  in  Belgium ;  and  if  in  the  latter  country  certain 
lower  carboniferous  schists  are  attenuated,  this  thinning  out  of  one  portion 
is  more  than  compensated  by  the  presence  of  noble  masses  of  carboniferous 
limestone.  The  carboniferous  limestone  of  Belgium  has  been  distinguished 
zoologically  by  de  Koninck  into  two  stages  ;  the  inferior  of  which,  as  in 
Russia  and  many  other  countries,  is  marked  by  the  presence  of  the  large 
Productus  giganteus  and  several  other  types  of  that  genus.  The  upper 
stage  contains  the  Spirifer  Mosquensis,  Fischer ;  Terebratula  Royssii, 
L'eveille  ;  and  Actinocrinus  stellaris,  Kon.* 

The  splendid  rocks  of  this  formation,  which  the  traveller  admires  as  he 
passes  along  the  railroad  from  Namur  to  Liege,  gradually  thin  out  as  they 
range  towards  the  Rhine.  They  make,  in  short,  their  last  appearance  as  a 
solid  limestone  at  Cromford  near  Ratingen,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Rhine  ; 
for  thence,  in  their  extension  to  the  east  and  north,  they  lose  their 
calcareous  character.  Instead  of  two  or  more  massive  divisions,  they 
dwindle  into  one  or  two  thin,  flat  beds  of  black  limestone,  very  much  like 
the  black  culm-stone  of  Devonshire,  which  there  in  like  manner  is  the  feeble 
representative  of  the  great  Carboniferous  or  Mountain  Limestone  of  other 
parts  of  England.  Like  the  Devonshire  rocks,  the  Westphalian  strata  are 
also  characterized  by  the  very  same  species,  the  Posidonomya  Becheri ; 
which  shell,  even  where  the  calcareous  matter  is  entirely  absent,  as  in 
the  schists  of  Herborn  and  other  places,  distinctly  marks  the  centre  of  the 
Lower  Carboniferous  rocks. 

In  the  German  Rhenish  provinces,  the  lower  member,  or  the  schists 


*  The  most  characteristic  fossils  of  the  two  stages  of  the  Carboniferous  Limestone  of  Belgium 
are  as  follows;  the  list  having  been  furnished,  at  my  request,  by  M.  de  Koninck.  See  also  his 
"Description  des  An.  Foss.  Carb.  de  Belgique."  Liege,  1842. 

Inferior  or  Vise  Limestone. — Cardiomorpha  oblonga.  Sow.,  sp. ;  Area  obtusa,  Phill. ;  Pinna 
flabelliformis,  Martin ;  Avicula  Dumontiana,  De  Kon. ;  Productus  giganteus,  Martin,  sp. ; 
P.  striatus,  Fischer,  sp. ;  P.  sublaevis,  De  Kon, ;  P.  undatus,  Defr. ;  P.  plicatilis.  Sow. ;  P.  pro- 
boscideus,  Vern. ;  Chonetes  comoides,  Sow.,  sp. ;  C.  papilionacea,  Phill.,  sp. ;  Spii-ifer  bisul- 
catus,  Sow. ;  S.  striatus,  Martin,  sp. ;  S.  crassus,  De  Kon. ;  S.  convolutus,  Phill. ;  Rhynconella 
acuminata  Martin,  sp. ;  R.  angulata.  Linn.,  sp. ;  Bellerophon  costatus,  Sow. ;  Euomphalus 
pugilis,  Phill. ;  Chemnitzia  constricta,  Martin,  sp. ;  Orthoceras  giganteum,  Sow. ;  Nautilus 
cyclostomus,  Phill. ;  N.  globatus.  Sow. ;  Goniatites  sphsericus,  Sow. ;  Psammodus  porosus, 
Agass. 

Superior  or  Tournay  Limestone. — Pentremites  caryophyllatus,  De  Kon.  and  Le  Hon. ;  Actino- 
crinus polydactylus,  Miller ;  A.  stellaris,  De  Kon.  and  Le  Hon. ;  Spirifer  Mosquensis,  Fischer ; 
S.  tricornis,  De  Kon.;  Terebratula  Royssii,  Leveille';  Chiton  priscus,  Miinster;  Euomphalus 
tabulatus,  Phill. ;  E.  tuberculatus,  De  Kon. ;  Gyroceras  aigoceros,  Munster,  sp. ;  Goniatites 
rotatorius,  De  Kon. 

B  B  4 


376 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XIV. 


below  the  limestone  (Lower  Sandstone  shale),  is  usually  very  silicious,  and 
is,  in  that  tract,  the  '  Kiesel  Schiefer '  of  the  Prussian  geologists,  which 
occasionally  expands  into  a  deposit  of  considerable  dimensions.  In  some 
districts  it  has  been  named  *Pon  Sandstein.'  The  limestone  which  reposes 
on  these  schists  and  sandstones  is  again  surmounted  by  a  copious  suc- 
cession of  sandstone,  mineralogically  not  very  unlike  many  of  the  inferior 
divisions  of  the  so-called  '  grauwacke,'  and  which  was  also  formerly  known 
under  the  name  of  '  Fletz-lehrer  Sandstein.'  Professor  Sedgwick  and 
myself  showed,  that  while  the  Posidonomya  beds  represented  the  '  culm,' 
or  true  Carboniferous  limestone,  this  *  Fletz-lehrer  Sandstein'  or  'jungste 
grauwacke '  was  simply  the  equivalent  of  our  British  millstone  grit,  and 
that,  as  in  England,  it  lay  immediately  beneath  the  most  productive  coal- 
fields. 

This  identification  was,  in  truth,  one  of  the  most  satisfactory  as- 
surances, that  the  principle  derived  from  the  collation  of  organic 
remains  with  physical  order,  had  led  us  to  a  correct  view  in  placing 
as  a  member  of  the  carboniferous  deposits,  strata  which  had  been 
previously  connected  with  much  more  ancient  greywacke  rocks. 

In  the  extensive  districts  of  Westphalia  which  he  has  surveyed  and 
mapped,  Dr.  Girard  has  still  more  clearly  delineated  the  distinctions 
between  those  bands  of  rock,  which  formerly  were  all  merged  under 
the  unmeaning  term  'grauwacke.'  Even  above  the  *  Kramenzel- 
stein,'  or  Clymenia  limestone,  there  are,  in  that  region,  two  superior 
sandstone  formations,  both  of  which,  as  well  as  the  inferior  rocks  and 
Spirifer  Sandstein,  were  included  in  the  Ehenish  '  grauwacke '  of 
old  authors.  The  sandstone  covering  the  '  Kramenzel-stein,'  locally 
called  '  Pon  sandstein,'  is  a  fine-grained,  micaceous  rock,  occa- 
sionally silicious,  in  which  no  fossils,  except  fragments  of  plants, 
have  been  detected.  This  sandstone  seems  to  occupy  the  place  of 
the  lower  shale  of  the  South  of  England,  of  the  yellow  sandstone 
of  Ireland,  and  of  the  lower  coaly  sandstone  of  Scotland ;  for,  like 
them,  it  is  immediately  covered  by  the  carboniferous  limestone  or  its 
equivalent,  often  in  a  state  of  chert  or  petro-silex,  with  Posidonomya 
Becheri  and  Goniatites  crenistria.    The  rock  which  next  succeeds 


Chap.  XIV.]  INVERSION  OF  FORMATIONS.  377 

is,  as  before  said,  the  distinct  equivalent  of  the  British  millstone 
grit,  like  which  it  underlies  the  great  productive  coalfields. 

Whilst  the  Devonian  rocks  of  the  Rhine,  unlike  those  of  Saalfeld 
(p.  358.),  have  afforded  few  traces  of  land  plants,  it  is  important  to 
observe,  that  it  is  specially  in  this  Lower  Carboniferous  group,  that 
nearly  all  the  so-called  transition  and  ^  grauwacke  '  fossil  vegetables 
of  various  German  authors  have  been  collected.  Seeing  that  this 
series,  in  the  Rhenish  provinces,  is  so  very  analogous  to  that  of 
Britain,  it  will  indeed  be  interesting  to  compare  the  plants  described 
by  Goppert,  linger,  and  others,  with  the  rich  Flora  of  the  same  age 
found  in  Northumberland*,  Scotland,  and  parts  of  Ireland. 

Inversions.  —  Inadequate  as  this  brief  sketch  may  be  to  convey  any 
just  idea  of  the  nature  and  contents  of  the  older  deposits  of  this 
interesting  region,  it  would  be  still  more  imperfect  if  a  reference, 
however  cursory,  were  not  made  to  the  phenomenon  of  the  inversion 
of  some  of  its  stratified  rocks.  Adopting  the  explanation  of  M. 
Dumont,  of  such  reversals  of  the  normal  order  in  Belgium,  Professor 
Sedgwick  and  myself  applied  it  to  account  for  the  position  of  certain 
masses  of  the  Eifel  country.  We  pointed  out  how,  near  Miinster 
Eifel,  the  overturning  of  the  beds  had  been  produced  by  movements 
which  acted  throughout  masses  of  sediment  several  thousand  feet  in 
thickness ;  the  phenomenon  being  illustrated  by  this  diagram. f 


Inversion  in  the  Eifel  explained. 
Weingarten.  Munster  Eifel. 


Strata  in  order.  Strata  bent  over  and  inverted. 

c.  Eifel  limestone  and  shale. 

a,  h.  Shelly  Devonian  greywacke. 


*  See  remarks,  by  Mr.  G.  Tate,  on  the  fossil  flora  of  the  coal  formation,  in  the 
*  Natural  History  of  the  Eastern  Borders,'  by  Dr.  Johnston,  1853. 
t  From  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  vi.  p.  277. 


378  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

In  this  case,  whether  by  following  the  strata  upon  their  strike,  or 
by  making  a  short  traverse  across  them,  as  in  the  preceding  section, 
the  true  order  was  soon  detected. 

Again,  on  the  northern  or  outer  frontier  of  the  Devonian  rocks  of 
Westphalia,  w^here  the  order  is  very  regular,  all  such  strata  being 
seen  to  plunge  under  the  Carboniferous,  as  before  explained,  the 
attention  of  the  observer  is  roused  when,  exploring  north-westwards 
to  Brilon,  he  finds  a  large  tract  of  country  (much  penetrated  by 
very  ancient  igneous  rocks)  which,  extending  towards  Berleburg, 
exhibits  everywhere  the  older  beds  overlying  the  younger.  This 
phenomenon,  long  ago  known  to  the  Prussian  geologists  von 
Dechen  and  Erbreich,  is  expressed  in  this  woodcut,  taken  from 
part  of  a  larger  section  published  by  my  colleague  and  self  in  the 
Geological  Transactions.  * 

Inverted  Strata  South  of  Brilon. 
N.N.\V.  S.S.E. 

Brilon. 


c.  Lower  Carboniferous  (Kiesel  and  Posidonomya  Schiefer). 
b.  Upper  Devonian  schist,  lime,  and  iron  ore }  pgyQ^j^n 
a.  Slaty  Devonian    -         -         -         -  i 
(*  Trap  and  igneous  rocks.) 

The  reader  will  see  that  the  lower  carboniferous  rocks  (c),  con- 
sisting of  the  'Kiesel'  or  *  Posidonomya  Schiefer  '  (Table,  p.  382.), 
which  in  their  true  positions  are  overlying,  here  dip  under  the  upper 
or  calcareous  Devonian  group  b ;  whilst  the  last  have  been  carried 
under  still  older  members  of  that  series  (a),  or  the  slaty  '  grauwacke ' 
of  this  region.  Nay  more,  he  perceives  that  igneous  rocks,  por- 
phyries, and  greenstones,  &c.,  some  of  which  were  formed  successively 
on  the  bottom  of  the  same  seas,  in  w^hich  the  Devonian  strata  (b) 

*  See  Sedgwick  and  Murchison,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lend.  vol.  vi.  p.  239.  The 
woodcut  in  the  Geological  Transactions  shows  the  coal  strata  to  the  north  covered 
by  cretaceous  rocks. 


Chap.  XIV.]  ALL  INVERSIONS  LOCAL.  379 

to  which  they  are  parallel,  were  accumulated,  have  also  been  over- 
thrown en  masse  with  all  the  other  rocks.  It  follows,  therefore, 
that  the  regular  order  in  which  these  formations  are  traceable  along 
so  wide  an  adjacent  region  is  here  completely  deranged,  and  that  all 
the  rocks  are  inverted,  the  older  being  incumbent  on  the  younger ! 
Now,  this  very  same  phenomenon  of  the  overturning  of  huge 
masses  of  the  solid  crust  of  the  earth  has  not  had  its  limit  in  the 
Rhenish  provinces,  but  has  extended  into  Belgium,  where  the  same 
strata,  as  described  by  M.  Dumont,  are  aiFected  along  a  band  quite 
parallel  to  those  great  folds  in  Westphalia  and  the  Eifel.*  They  are, 
therefore,  to  be  considered  as  great  parallel,  wave-like  undulations, 
similar  to  those  which  have  been  so  ably  explained  by  the  brothers 
Rogers  of  the  United  States,  and  which  will  be  adverted  to  hereafter. 

In  looking  back  to  p.  144.  we  see,  indeed,  that  in  Cornwall,  this 
great  European  inversion  has  proceeded  still  further  to  the  west,  and 
that  masses  of  an  antiquity  unknown  in  the  Rhenish  provinces  and 
Belgium  {i.e.,  the  Lower  Silurian)  overlie  Devonian  strata.  In 
that  example,  both  the  rocks  being  fossiliferous,  no  doubt  as  to  the 
intensity  of  the  overthrow  can  exist. 

In  the  earlier  part  of  this  Chapter  it  was  also  shown  that,  in 
one  district  of  Thuringia,  certain  plant  beds,  which  belong  to  the 
lower  carboniferous  division,  plunge  under  upper  Devonian  beds 
charged  with  Cypridinae  and  Clymenise,  and  that  near  Ober  Steinach, 
in  Meiningen,  these  Devonian  strata  are  apparently  surmounted  by 
true  Lower  Silurian ! 

If  a  young  geologist  had  detected,  for  the  first  time,  such  abnormal 
relations  in  a  country  like  the  Eifel,  where,  besides  igneous  erup- 
tions of  remote  periods  like  those  in  the  last  diagram,  the  strata  have 
been  pierced  by  volcanos  which  have  certainly  been  in  activity  under 
the  atmosphere,  he  might  for  a  moment  suppose,  that  such  modern 

*  See  the  very  remarkable  geological  map  of  all  the  volcanic  tracts  in  the  Rhenish 
Provinces,  by  M.  v.  Oynhausen. 


380  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XIV. 

eruptious,  exhibiting,  as  they  do.  many  craters  and  coulees,  must 
have  exercised  an  influence  analogous  to  the  causes  that  produced 
the  above-mentioned  inversions.  But  even  a  cursory  examination 
would  dispel  such  an  hypothesis  ;  for  we  see  that  these  sub-aerial 
volcanos,  with  their  scoriae,  pumice,  lava,  and  ashes,  are  nothing 
more  than  mere  superficial  pustules,  which  in  bursting  forth  have 
produced  no  sort  of  alteration  in  the  position  or  nature  of  the  rock 
masses,  but  have  merely  vomited  their  contents  into  depressions 
already  prepared  to  receive  them ;  thus  showing  us  that  when  these 
volcanos  at  length  appeared,  the  present  system  of  hills  and  valleys 
had  been  completed. 

Infinitely  more  intense,  therefore,  must  have  been  that  much 
deeper  seated  agency,  which  giving  rise  to  such  internal  writhings  of 
nature,  inverted  thousands  of  feet  of  strata  over  vast  areas,  and 
twisting  them  like  ropes,  coiled  them  over  the  rocks  which  lay 
above ;  thus  placing  them  over  deposits  formed  at  immeasurably  sub- 
sequent periods ! 

But,  striking  as  are  the  above-mentioned  features  of  inversion, 
still  grander  examples  will  be  adverted  to  in  the  sequel.  The 
reader  will,  however,  recollect  that,  after  all,  such  phenomena  are 
local  and  abnormal  only,  as  respects  the  surface  of  the  globe,  on 
which,  fortunately  for  science,  the  original  impress  of  order  is  visible 
over  by  far  the  greater  portion. 

In  revertino;  then  to  such  order,  I  annex  the  followinor  table  of 
the  divisions  of  the  older  Rhenish  rocks,  as  now  understood  by 
the  geologists  and  palaeontologists  who  have  been  cited  in  the 
preceding  pages,  and  whose  discoveries,  coupled  with  my  recent 
observations,  have  led  me  to  divide  the  Devonian  rocks  of  the 
region  into  three  parts.  By  having  alongside  of  this  table  the 
general  succession  of  the  same  rocks  as  classified  by  M.  Dumont*,  the 

*  See  Dumont,  Memoire  sur  les  Terrains  Ardennais  et  Rhenan,  in  Mem.  Acad. 
Bruxelles,  vol.  xx.    In  his  Introduction,  in  which  he  treats  of  the  invalidity  of 


Chap.  XIV.] 


EHENISH  SUCCESSION  COMPARED. 


381 


reader  will  at  once  see,  that  although  the  mineral  order  which  that 
author  indicates  is  doubtless  correct,  no  one  of  his  three  *  terrains 'is 
in  unison  with  a  classification  based  upon  the  distribution  of  organic 
remains. 

fossil  evidences,  the  author  is  mistaken  in  attributing  to  me  alone  the  establishment 
of  the  '  Devonian  System ;'  and  he  also  has  misunderstood  the  process  of  inquiry  by 
which  the  older  rocks  were  classified  in  England.  I  have  only  referred  slightly  in 
the  text,  to  the  terms  used  by  M.  Dumont  in  his  more  recent  classification  of  Belgian 
rocks,  illustrative  of  his  general  map,  because  his  distinctions  and  divisions,  as 
founded  on  the  mineral  features  of  the  successive  masses  of  rock,  do  not  coincide,  as 
above  stated,  with  what  geologists  know  to  be  their  natural  history  characters.  Ad- 
miring the  method  by  which,  after  a  laborious  survey,  this  able  geologist  and  sound 
mineralogist  reduced  to  order  the  complicated  and  often  inverted  ancient  strata 
of  his  native  country,  I  am  compelled  to  say  that  the  divisions  in  the  '  Tableau  des 
Terrains,'  which  he  has  published,  to  accompany  his  Map  of  Belgium,  is,  to  a  great 
extent,  at  variance  with  the  opinions  of  numerous  contemporaries,  as  well  as  myself, 
and  is  so  much  in  contradiction  to  the  classification  recorded  in  this  volume,  that 
I  beg  to  call  attention  to  the  annexed  table,  in  which  M.  Dumont's  chief  divisions 
are  paralleled  with  those  which  I  have  adopted.  Setting  aside  the  whole  of  his 
'  Terrain  Ardennais,'  or  lower  great  group,  in  which  few  or  no  fossils  are  known, 
it  will  be  seen  that  his  Terrain  Rhenan  embraces  not  only  all  that  is  here  shown  to 
be  Devonian,  i.  e.  Spirifer  Sandstein,  etc.,  (his  Systeme  Coblentzien,)  but  includes 
his  Systeme  Ahrien,  or  just  that  member  of  the  Devonian  which  the  geologists  of 
Prussia  and  Nassau  have  agreed  to  separate  from  the  rocks  of  Coblentz,  and  to 
group  with  the  Eifel  limestone,  but  which,  judging  from  mineral  characters  only, 
M.  Dumont  has  left  in  his  Terrain  Rhenan.  Again,  his  Systeme  Condrusien 
unites  what  is  here  termed  Upper  Devonian  and  Lower  Carboniferous,  including 
the  Clymenia,  and  carboniferous,  limestones ;  whilst  he  separates  the  latter  from 
the  coalfields,  of  which,  according  to  all  geologists,  it  forms  the  natural  base. 
Lastly,  if  the  Systeme  Gedinnien  (Dumont)  really  contains  some  Upper  Silurian 
forms,  as  suggested  by  Forbes  and  Sharpe,  then,  indeed,  each  of  the  great  Terrains 
of  M.  Dumont  is  still  more  antagonistic  to  a  classification  by  organic  remains. 
See  Mr.  D.  Sharpe's  Explanation  of  the  equivalents  of  M.  Dumont's  classification. 
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  ix.  p.  18. ;  also  Mr.  Austen's  view,  ib.  vol.  ix. 
p.  244. ;  and  compare  their  tables  with  that  which  is  here  given. 


382 


TABLE  OF  THE  RHENISH  ROCKS. 


[Chap.  XlVi^ 


•snoaajtuoqjBQ 


(■auoispuBS  pa^  pio) 
J      I      U      O      A  3 


i UB I jnns 


I,  :3- 

q;|-> 


is  =  3 


II  It 


bo 

.EC  13 

1^  I 


si 


.s'J 

cs  o 

Si 


IJI 

p  u  > 


u 

^     9)  • 

a> 

Sch 

ach- 

enb 

fer 
idb. 

UW£ 

in 

g  S  §  S  Si 

ill  il 


=  -  s  S  §  2 

u  —  _g  *j  ^  3 

o  «  °  "5  .c 

^  <«"  S  o  o  -C 

. i 


i^-^  'S  V  o 


2^  •= 
3-5  o 


—  o 


u  S  ct 

O  B  >. 

3  S 

M  O 


t2  u  2'J 


P3|  H 

OJ  ^  OJ 

~  ^  .2  .-^  -5  -a  oj 
■nils 


;  =  3  «-a 


j3  =C:E  =  5 


•qiBp 


•snoa.ij!UoqaB3 


•UBIU0A3Q 

jaddQ 


S  3  C 

o  §  P 

U  bo  ^  w 

g^  °a  §  ? 


.2  o' 


•UBUI0A3Q 
8|"PP!I\[ 


,01  nS  O 
'2.1-  e 


Sj=  p 


•UBIUOAaQ 


<u  g  S  2  c 

x:  5-  ^  c  e 

"  «  3  4)  <u 

^'  I  f. «  5  5  .S 

5  S  o  .S  o  S 


-3  m 

o 


I 


0)  <2i 


'0)  3 


§•3 


I 


ci  ;3  t4 
3-3 

a  c* 


3 

I  5, 

c4  O 
3  K 


2  <U 

£  > 


A    X      I     F  fe 


383 


CHAPTER  XV. 

SILURIAJf,  DEVONIAN,  AND  CARBONIFEROUS  ROCKS  OF  FRANCE,  SPAIN, 
PORTUGAL,  AND  SARDINIA. 

Although  the  palaeozoic  rocks*  occupy  considerable  spaces  in 
France,  it  is  not  possible  on  this  occasion  to  offer  more  than  a  slight 
sketch  of  their  chief  features  in  those  tracts  where  they  are  clearly 
exhibited.    In  Brittany,  where  they  appear  in  force,  the  authors  of 
the  geological  map  of  France  f  divide  them  into  two  principal  masses. 
The  inferior  is  composed  of,  1.  Glossy  schists  (schistes  satines  luisans) 
of  great  thickness,  in  w^hich  a  few  thin  courses  of  grit  and  shaly 
limestone  occur.    In  their  mineral  aspect,  and  in  their  entire  want  of 
fossils,  these  strata  remind  the  geologist  of  the  rocks  which  underlie 
the  lowest  fossiliferous  deposits  of  Bohemia,  and  they  may  not  unaptly 
be  compared  with  some  of  the  crystalHne  and  subcrystalline  rocks  of 
Anglesea  and  the  Longmynd,  or  hardest  bottom  rocks  of  the  Welsh 
and  English  series.    Their  mean  direction  in  Brittany  is,  like  that  of 
the  Longmynd,  from  east  20°  north,  to  west  20°  south,  and  they  were 
termed  Cambrian  by  E.  de  Beaumont  and  Dufrenoy.    2.  Under  the 
name  of  Silurian,  these  authors  include  a  series  of  thick  and  complex 
fossiliferous  strata,  which  they  have  again  divided  into  two  groups.  The 
lowest  of  these  they  thus  arrange  :  —  1st.  Conglomerates  and  silicious 
sandstones ;  2nd.  Bluish  schists,  which  at  Angers,  Poligny,  &c.,  fur- 
nish good  slates,  and  correspond  through  their  fossils  X  to  the  Llandeilo 
formation  of  Britain.    So  far,  the  succession  in  Brittany,  as  dependent 
on  organic  remains,  is  in  unison  with  that  of  Britain ;  but  the  chief 
portion  of  the  next  division,  consisting  of  compact  limestones  and 

*  Often,  however,  in  a  metamorpliic  state, 
•j"  MM.  Elie  de  Beaumont  and  Dufrenoy. 

X  Trinucleus  and  Ogygia,  with  Illasnus  giganteus,  &c.,  are  abundant. 


384  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XY. 

schists,  has  been  abstracted  by  de  Verneuil  from  the  Silurian,  and 
shown  to  belong  to  the  Devonian  system.  In  this  way  the  order  in 
Brittany  is  analogous  to  that  of  Cornwall  on  the  one  hand,  and  many 
parts  of  Grermany  on  the  other,  in  both  of  which  tracts,  as  already 
shown,  there  is  an  equally  sudden  transition  from  Lower  Silurian  to 
Devonian. 

The  second  group  of  the  authors  of  that  magnificent  work  the  geolo- 
gical map  of  France,  is  made  up,  first,  of  silicious  conglomerates,  coarse 
grits,  and  argillaceous  schists,  which  many  persons  would  term  grey- 
wacke,  then  of  beds  with  coal,  and,  lastly,  of  a  limestone  specially  charac- 
terized by  the  presence  of  Amplexus  and  Productus.  Now  d'Archiac 
and  de  Yerneuil  have  demonstrated,  that  this  last  and  highest  group 
is  neither  Silurian  nor  Devonian,  but  a  true  member  of  the  Carbo- 
niferous rocks.  It  is,  in  fact,  identical,  through  its  fossils,  with  the 
carboniferous  limestones  of  many  regions. 

All  these  fossiliferous  deposits,  whether  Lower  Silurian,  Devonian, 
or  Carboniferous,  are  conformably  inclined,  whatever  may  be  the 
inclination  of  the  beds;  and  striking  from  east  15° south,  to  west  15° 
north,  they  are  transgressive  to  the  older  unfossiliferous  rocks  on 
which  they  repose.  It  was  the  concordance  in  their  direction  and 
inclination  which  naturally  led  Elie  de  Beaumont  and  Dufrenoy  to 
embrace,  in  the  first  instance,  all  these  fossiliferous  deposits  in  the 
Silurian  period.  But  in  the  interval  which  has  elapsed  since  that 
classification  was  proposed,  Brittany  has  been  examined  by  many 
geologists,  including  Frappoli,  de  Fourcy,  Durocher,  Blavier,  Rouault, 
as  well  as  by  de  Yerneuil  and  d'Archiac,  all  of  whom  agree  in 
adopting  the  order  and  nomenclature  here  announced.  The  eastern 
limits  of  the  province,  towards  the  departments  of  La  Mayenne  and  La 
Sarthe,  have  indeed  been  studied  in  the  greatest  detail  by  M.  Triger, 
to  whom  the  execution  of  the  geological  map  of  the  last-mentioned 
district  was  confided.  The  collection  of  fossils  made  in  the  palaeozoic 
rocks  around  Cherbourg,  by  my  late  old  and  indefatigable  corre- 


FRENCH  PALiEOZOIC  ORDER. 


385 


spondent  M.  de  Gerville,  has 
also  contributed  essentially  to 
clear  away  the  difficulties  at- 
tending a  right  classification  ; 
and  lastly,  the  Geological  So- 
ciety of  France  (during  its 
meeting  at  le  Mans,  1850) 
under  the  leadership  of  M. 
Triger,  made  an  admirable 
section  across  the  older  rocks 
to  the  north  of  Angers,  the 
resume  of  which  was  pub- 
lished by  de  Verneuil  and  de 
Loriere. 

This  diagram,  reduced  from 
their  publication,  exhibits  the 
principal  geological  features  of 
the  country  between  Sille  le 
Guillaume  and  Sable,  a  dis- 
tance of  about  twenty-five 
English  miles ;  and  it  clearly 
develops  a  succession  of  the 
palaeozoic  formations,  from  the 
Low  er  Silurian  to  the  Carbon- 
iferous rocks  inclusive. 

In  this  section,  the  lowest 
stratum  is  a  white  sandstone 
(1)  resting  on  porphyry.  The 
still  more  ancient  crystalline 
and  glossy  schists  of  Brittany 
are  here  wanting,  and  the 
lowest  beds  which  are  visible 


386  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XV. 

(1  to  6),  and  in  which  some  limestone  appears,  have  not  yet  aiforded 
any  fossils,  to  serve  as  equivalents  for  those  of  the  lower  zone  of 
Bohemia  and  Scandinavia,  or  the  Lingula  flags  of  Britain. 

The  great  schistose  and  slaty  mass  which  follows  (Ardoises  de 
Parennes,  or  7  of  the  diagram),  forms  the  inferior  limit  of  Silu- 
rian life,  as  known  in  France.  From  its  wide  extension,  and  its 
fossils,  this  formation  merits  great  attention  ;  for  it  is  doubtless,  as 
M.  de  Yerneuil  states,  the  representative  of  the  Llandeilo  and  Bala 
rocks  of  Britain,  of  the  second  zone  of  M.  Barrande  in  Bohemia,  and 
of  the  Orthoceratite  limestones  of  Scandinavia,  Russia,  and  North 
America.  It  is,  in  fiict,  the  dominant  member  of  the  Lower  Silurian 
rocks,  so  termed  by  all  the  authors  who  have  described  them  in  those 
countries. 

These  slaty  masses  of  Brittany  are  characterized,  like  their  equi- 
valents elsewhere,  by  a  profusion  of  Trilobites.  Unfortunately  these 
crustaceans  are,  for  the  most  part,  much  flattened  and  distorted ;  but 
the  following  species  have,  notwithstanding,  been  recognized,  some 
of  which  were  long  ago  figured  by  Guettard  and  Brongniart :  — 

Calymene  Tristani,  Brong. ;  C.  Arago,  Rouault;  C.  Yerneuili,  Rou- 
ault ;  Asaphus  Guettardi,  Brong.  ;  Ogygia  Desmaresti,  Brong. ;  Illcenus  gi- 
ganteus,  Burm.  (the  two  last  are  gigantic  species)  ;  111.  Beaumonti,  Rouault ; 
Acidaspis  Bachii,  Barr.  ;  Phacops  (Dalmannia)  socialis,  Barr. ;  P.  Dujardini, 
Rouault ;  Placoparia  Tournemini,  Rouault  ;  Cheirurus  claviger,  Beyr ; 
Lichas  Heberti,  Rouault ;  Trinucleus  Pongerardi,  Rouault,*  &c. 

Mollusks  are  scarcer  than  trilobites ;  the  well-known  British  spe- 
cies Bellerophon  bilobatus  (Sil.  Syst.)  is,  however,  not  unfrequent. 
But,  as  a  rule,  neither  the  species  of  Crustacea  nor  of  shells  are  the 
same  with  those  of  Britain,  while  there  are  many  identical  with  the 
fossils  of  Spain  and  of  Bohemia. 

These  Lower  Silurian  schists  traverse  an  extensive  tract,  as  may  l)e 
seen  by  referring  to  the  geological  map  of  France,  and  crop  out  near 

*  De  Verneuil  and  Rouault,  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  Fr.,  2d  ser.  vol.  iv.  p.  320. 


Chap.  XV.]  LOWER  SILURIAN. — FRANCE.  387 

the  harbour  of  Brest  and  Bay  of  Crozon,  where  De  Verneuil  has  de- 
tected in  them  Calymene  Tristani.  The  spot  where  the  deposit  affords 
the  best  roofing  slates  is  Angers,  where  the  quarries  are  300  to  400 
feet  deep.  There  the  lines  of  original  deposit  and  the  laminae  of 
cleavage  coincide.  In  fact,  the  remains  of  the  included  trilobites 
occur  along  the  divisions  by  which  the  highly  inclined  slates  are 
cleaved ;  a  phenomenon  sometimes  observed  in  Britain,  where  the 
cleavage  is,  however,  usually  transverse  to  the  bedding.  (See  p.  34.) 

The  peninsula  of  the  Cotentin  also  contains  these  trilobite  schists, 
near  Siouxville,  where  M.  de  Gerville  collected  the  Calymene 
Tristani.* 

The  lower  slaty  rocks  of  Llandeilo  age  are  succeeded  in  La  Sarthe 
by  an  arenaceous  group,  represented  by  the  8  and  9  of  the  previous 
woodcut.  In  general,  this  division  exhibits,  in  ascending  order, 
conglomerates,  white  and  reddish  silicious  sandstones,  with  some  sub- 
ordinate beds  of  '  ampelite '  schists  containing  graptolites,  chiefly  the 
G.  colonus  and  the  G.  testis  of  Barrande.  The  position  of  these 
beds  is  probably  the  same  as  that  of  the  graptolite  schists  of  Dale- 
carlia  and  parts  of  Sweden.  They  agree  also,  according  to  de  Verneuil, 
with  the  great  schistose  member  of  the  American  Silurians  called  the 
*  Hudson  river  group,'  which  is  equally  characterized  by  graptolites, 
and  which  overlies  the  Trenton  limestone  or  Llandeilo  flags,  the 
equivalents,  as  above  said,  of  the  slates  of  Angers.  As  to  the  sili- 
cious sandstones  in  which  the  schists  are  enveloped,  they  are  identical 
with  the  rocks  of  Jurques,  Gahard,  and  May  in  Normandy,  which 
have  been  placed  by  French  geologists  without  hesitation  on  the 
parallel  of  the  Caradoc  sandstone  of  Britain. 

In  some  districts  the  rock  is  so  ferruginous  as  to  be  the  ^eat  of  iron  mines, 
and  the  ore  in  parts  is  of  an  oolitic  structure  :  trilobites  are  found  in  it. 

The  sandstones  are  not  rich  in  fossils,  but  where  I  have  examined  them 
in  company  with  M.  de  Verneuil,  they  contain  the  British  species  Bellero- 


*  Crustaces  Fossiles.    Paris,  1822. 


388  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XV. 

phon  bilobatus,  with  Conularia  pyramidata,  some  species  of  Dalmannia, 
Homalonotus  Brongniarti,  and  H.  (Plesiocoma)  rara ;  the  last-mentioned 
fossil  occurs  also  in  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Bohemia  and  Spain. 

Like  the  lower  and  larger  portion  of  my  Caradoc  formation  in 
Britain,  this  group  of  sandstones  and  schists  is  distinctly  connected 
by  its  fossils  with  the  inferior  slates. 

Above  all  the  strata,  however,  which  have  been  mentioned,  there  is 
in  France,  an  upper  course  of  *  ampelite '  schist,  which,  though  often 
confounded  with  the  lower,  must  be  separated  from  it.  These  upper 
ampelitic  schists  (11  of  the  section),  which  are  black  and  occa- 
sionally bituminous,  have,  as  usual,  given  rise  to  wasteful  searches 
after  coal.  They  are  distinguishable  from  the  inferior  masses  by  con- 
taining concretions  of  black  limestone  with  a  brilliant  fracture,  and  are 
characterized  by  certain  imbedded  fossils.  The  most  characteristic  are 
Graptolithus  priodon,  Orthoceratites  and  Cardiola  interrupta.*  As  this 
last-mentioned  species  is  chiefly  an  Upper  Silurian  fossil  in  Britain, 
and  occurs  in  Bohemia  at  the  base  of  that  division,  it  would  seem 
fair,  in  the  first  instance,  to  consider  this  French  deposit  as  of  like 
age.  At  the  same  time  we  must  observe,  that  Cardiola  interrupta, 
on  whose  presence  the  comparison  was  drawn,  is  occasionally, 
though  rarely,  found  in  the  Lower  Silurian  both  of  Britain  and 
Bohemia.  Whilst,  therefore,  this  zone  is  clearly  recognized,  through 
extensive  districts  of  France,  as  the  highest  of  the  rocks  which  are 
referable  to  the  Silurian  epoch,  and  whilst  it  is  clearly  at  the  base  of 
the  Upper  Silurian,  it  is  by  no  means  an  equivalent  of  the  great  British 
formation  of  Wenlock,  and  still  less  has  it  any  reference  to  the  Ludlow 
Rocks.  We  must,  indeed,  recollect  that  in  Britain,  as  in  Bohemia 
and  Sweden,  such  schists,  with  Cardiola  interrupta  and  Graptolites, 
underlie  limestones  with  the  well-known  fossils  of  Wenlock,  Dudley, 
and  Gothland. 

*  See  an  account  of  the  extension  of  this  zone  of  ampelite  schists  and  its  inter- 
calated minerals,  by  M.  de  Boblaye,  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  1  ser.,  vol.  x.  p.  227. 


Chap.  XV.] 


LOWER  DEVONIAN.  FRANCE. 


389 


In  France,  therefore,  the  ascending  series  of  strata  is  very  different 
from  that  of  Britain.  The  Upper  Silurian  is  essentially  wanting ;  the 
succession  being  analogous,  I  repeat,  to  parts  of  Germany  where  the 
Lower  Silurian  is  succeeded  by  Devonian  rocks,  with  only  graptolitic 
schists  between  them.  (See  p.  354.) 

France  is  by  no  means  poor  in  Devonian  equivalents.  Numerous  species 
of  fossils  derived  from  the  strata  (12  and  13)  of  the  above  diagram  have 
been  compared  by  de  Verneuil  with  those  of  the  lower  shelly  greywacke  of 
the  Rhine  and  the  limestone  of  the  Eifel,  and  he  has  found  that  many  of  them 
are  identical.  Among  these,  the  broad-winged  Spirifer  macropterus,  the 
Terebratula  Archiaci,  Grammysia  Ilamiltonensis,  and  Pleurodictyum  pro^ 
blematicum,  are  striking  Devonian  forms,  unknown  in  any  true  Upper 
Silurian  rocks.  A  still  greater  number  of  species  in  the  Lower  Devonian 
limestones  of  La  Sarthe*,  and  Nehouf  in  Normandy,  are  identical  with 
those  of  the  Eifel. 

Having  established  the  identity  between  the  Devonian  rocks  of  the  West 
of  France  and  the  lower  portions  of  the  system  in  the  Rhenish  provinces, 
de  Verneuil  observes,  that  in  such  a  consecutive  development  we  might 
expect  to  meet  with  some  species,  which  on  the  continent  of  Europe  and  the 
British  Isles  are  considered  to  be  Silurian.  And  such  is  the  case.  Thus, 
Bronteus  Brongniarti,  Capulus  robustus,  Terebratula  eucharis,  T.  Haidin- 
geri,  Atrypa  reticularis,  Orthis  Gervillei,  Leptaena  Bouei,  L.  Bohemica, 
and  L.  Phillipsi,  are  found  in  the  Devonian  of  France,  and  also  in  the 
uppermost  Silurian  of  Bohemia.  And  Pentamerus  galeatus,  Atrypa  reticu- 
laris, with  the  corals  Heliolites  interstincta,  H.  Murchisoni,  Stenopora 
fibrosa,  and  Chonophyllum  perfoliatum,  are  common  to  the  Upper  Silurian 
of  England  or  Sweden,  and  the  Lower  Devonian  of  France. 

The  Devonian  group  of  Brittany  and  the  West  of  France  is  also 
usually  curtailed,  like  the  Silurian,  of  its  superior  members,  —  those 
which,  in  the  Bhenish  provinces,  are  so  fully  developed  between 

*  De  Verneuil  and  Rouault,  ante^  p.  386. 

t  At  this  locality  abundance  of  Devonian  fossils  were  obtained  by  M.  de  Ger- 
ville,  and  distributed  among  his  friends.  Both  trilobites  and  shells  are  found  there  ; 
and  among  the  latter  are  the  common  Devonian  species,  Spirifer  heteroclytu?, 
Athyris  concentrica,  and  Calceola  sandalina.  More  than  45  species  of  Brachio- 
poda  were  lately  found  here  by  Mr.  Davidson. 

c  c  3 


390 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XV. 


the  above-mentioned  rocks  and  the  base  of  the  Carboniferous 
system. 

In  the  *Bas  Boulonnais,'  however,  we  meet  with  a  fair  represen- 
tative of  the  Upper  Devonian,  rich  in  fossils,  and  on  which,  in 
1840*,  I  published  a  short  memoir.  This  member  of  the  system  is  there 
immediately  overlaid  by  the  carboniferous  limestone,  and  both  of  the 
formations  extend  into  Belgium  and  the  Rhenish  provinces,  occupying 
the  same  relative  position.!    This  Upper  Devonian  is  every  where 

*  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  vol.  xi.  p.  229.  At  that  time  tlie  full  relations  of  the 
strata  had  not  been  determined,  and  I  was  deceived  as  to  the  nature  of  a  small 
imperfect  body,  probably  a  coralline,  which  I  termed  a  graptolite,  a  fossil  unknown 
in  Devonian  rocks.  M.  Delanoue,  who  has  recently  published  a  small  geological 
map  on  this  country,  has  ascertained  by  sinkings,  that  the  Devonian  deposits  range 
underground  towards  Bethune  and  Arras.  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  2nd  series, 
vol.  ix.  p.  399. 

"j"  Mr.  Austen,  whose  former  labours  threw  so  much  light  on  the  real  nature  of 
the  limestones  of  Devonshire,  has  recently  surveyed  this  district  of  the  Boulonnais  in 
detail,  and  has  endeavoured  to  show  that  its  lowest  strata  (limestones,  dolomite  &c.) 
represent  the  rocks  of  the  Eifel,  and  are  charged  with  the  same  species  of  corals, 
and  many  of  the  same  moUusks,  which  are  so  well  known  in  Devonshire  and  on  the 
Continent.  The  overlying  calcareous  courses  with  shale  he  considers  to  be  equiva- 
lents of  the  Upper  Devonian  as  exhibited  at  Petherwin  (see  p.  256.  etseq.) ;  the  com- 
parison being  further  sustained  by  a  description  of  certain  flag-like,  light-coloured 
sandstones,  charged  with  plants,  and  the  same  species  of  Cucullsea — C.  trapezium 
and  C.  Hardingii,  Sow. — as  the  yellow  sandstones  of  Mar  wood  and  Baggy  Point  in 
North  Devon,  which  sandstones  constitute  one  of  the  upper  members  of  the  Devo- 
nian liocks.  Mr.  Austen's  section  does  not  descend  so  far  in  the  series  as  to  ex- 
hibit any  representative  of  the  Spirifer  Sandstein  or  bottom  fossil  rock  of  the  Rhine. 
But  the  rest  of  the  Devonian  rocks  of  the  Rhine  and  Belgium  have,  according  to 
his  view,  their  equivalents  in  the  north  of  France.  (Quart.  Jouru.  Geol.  Soc.  vol. 
ix.  p.  231.)  It  must,  however,  be  stated,  that  de  Verneuil,  and  others,  do  not  adopt 
this  opinion,  and  continue  to  view  the  chief  masses  of  the  Boulonnais  as  Upper 
Devonian ;  while  Sharpe  would  class  them  as  lower  carboniferous. 

Mr.  Austen  has  successfully  dwelt  upon  the  complete  conformity  and  passage  up- 
wards of  the^e  Devonian  rocks  of  the  North  of  France  into  the  lower  carboniferous 
strata  with  their  two  bands  of  limestone  and  interstratified  seams  of  coal,  and 
has  made  some  valuable  suggestions  respecting  the  probable  extension  westwards, 
pven  perhaps  to  England,  of  the  beds  of  coal  which  have  already  been  opened 
out  near  St.  Omer  beneath  the  cretaceous  deposits. 


Chap.  XV.]         CARBONIFEROUS  ROCKS. — FRANCE.  391 

recognized  by  the  abundance  of  its  smaller  Spirifers,  among  which 
Spirifer  disjunctus,  Sow.,  and  its  numerous  varieties,  are  the  most 
characteristic.  The  Productus  subaculeatus  and  Athyris  concentrica 
are  also  frequent  fossils.  The  limestone  recurs  in  different  bands 
with  dolomites,  sandstone,  and  scliist,  composing  a  group  which  has 
been  supposed  to  correspond  to  the  *  Etage  quartzo-schisteux  supe- 
rieur  du  terrain  anthraxifere^  of  the  classification  of  Dumont.  Like 
the  Lower  Devonian  of  Brittany,  the  rocks  in  the  '  Bas  Boulonnais ' 
have  a  strike  from  the  west-north- west  to  east-south-east,  but  are  soon 
overlapped,  first  by  the  carboniferous,  and  then  by  the  cretaceous  and 
younger  deposits. 

Though  the  Devonian  system  of  France  is  of  no  great  vertical 
dimensions,  and  not  comparable  in  thickness  to  the  deposits  of  like 
age  in  Scotland,  England,  or  the  Rhenish  provinces,  it  is  of  con- 
siderable economic  importance,  particularly  in  certain  schistose  and 
arenaceous  districts  which  it  traverses,  and  where  its  limestone  is  much 
used  in  agriculture.  At  the  extremity  of  the  peninsula  of  Brittany 
these  rocks  appear  in  the  Bay  of  Brest. 

In  this  work  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  convey  an  adequate  idea  of 
the  Carboniferous  system,  particularly  that  portion  of  it  which  is 
developed  in  the  extensive  upper  coal-fields  of  France.  The  follow- 
ing few  observations  relate,  therefore,  only  to  the  lower  and  calcareous 
members  of  the  system, 'which  immediately  succeed  to  the  subjacent 
rocks  ;  the  great  coal-fields  of  Valenciennes  in  the  north,  and  those  of 
Lyons  and  Auzun  in  the  south,  are  therefore  unnoticed.  In  the  Bas 
Boulonnais  there  is  no  gap  nor  omission,  as  above  stated,  in  this 
portion  of  the  series ;  for  the  Upper  Devonian  is  at  once  followed 
by  the  Carboniferous  Limestone,  with  many  of  its  large  Producti,  and 
other  typical  fossils.  But  in  Brittany  and  the  West  of  France,  the 
lower  carboniferous  deposits  rest  at  once  upon  the  Lower  Devonian  ; 
as  is  seen  between  Sable  and  Juigne  (p.  385.),  and  at  the  coal  pits  of 
Ferce.    The  anthracitic  group  of  the  department  of  the  Sarthe  (the 

C  C  4 


392 


SlLURIA, 


[Chap.  XV. 


14,  15,  16,  of  the  preceding  section)  is  composed  of  conglomerates, 
sandstones,  shale,  coal,  and  limestone,  all  which  unquestionably 
belong  to  the  Carboniferous  system,  of  which  they  constitute  a  lower 
member, — a  rock  which  in  Central  and  Southern  France  is  always 
unconformable  to  the  coal-fields  above  them, 

A  like  physical  arrangement  has  been  alluded  to  as  occurring  near 
Hof,  in  Bavaria,  where  true  carboniferous  limestone,  with  large  Pro- 
ducti,  was  described  by  Professor  Sedgwick  and  myself,  in  the  year 
1839  *,  and  where  that  rock  is  inclined  conformably  with  the  Devonian, 
on  which  it  rests,  and  is  unconformable,  as  before  stated,  to  the  hori- 
zontal coal-fields  of  Bohemia.  It  was  this  unconformity  which  led 
E.  de  Beaumont  to  group  the  inferior  carboniferous  member  with  the 
lower  palaeozoic  rock  to  which  it  is  conformable,  though  their  re- 
spective organic  remains  refer  them  to  different  formations.  The 
geologist,  who  combines  stratigraphical  with  zoological  evidences,  is 
therefore  bound  to  state,  that  the  dislocations  of  the  older  rocks  on 
the  Continent  have  occurred  at  periods  different  from  those  of  the 
same  age  in  Britain  and  America,  in  both  of  which  countries  the 
great  superjacent  coal-fields  have  partaken  of  the  movements  which 
affected  the  limestones  on  which  they  rest.  And  thus  we  are  more 
than  ever  confirmed  in  the  belief,  that  all  fractures  of  the  crust  of  the 
earth  are  local  phenomena  only. 

As  the  strata  containing  large  Producti  ( Sable,  Ferce,  Juigne,  LaBazouge, 
&c.),  were  shown  to  be  truly  of  carboniferous  age,  their  fossils  being  ab- 
solutely those  of  the  mountain  limestone  of  England,  it  followed  that  many 
other  rocks  in  the  east  of  France,  which  had  been  considerably  metamor- 
phosed, but  in  which  such  fossils  were  detected,  must  also  be  referred  to 
the  same  era  of  formation.  Thus  de  Verneuil  and  Jourdan  have  proved, 
that  the  schists,  slates,  and  quartz  rocks  of  Central  and  Eastern  France, 
particularly  in  the  department  of  the  Haute  Loire,  (Roanne  to  Lyon  ) 
which,  from  their  crystalline  aspect,  had  been  grouped  with  those  of  a  much 
older  epoch,  are  clearly  to  be  classed  with  the  Carboniferous  system.  Though 


*  Trans,  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  2nd  series,  vol.  vi.  p.  298.    PI.  23.  f.  15. 


Chap.  XV.] 


PARTIAL  ANOMALY.  NEFFIEZ. 


393 


in  parts  highly  altered,  and  having  a  very  antique  and  crystalline  aspect, 
they  have  been  found  to  contain  well  knoAvn  fossils  of  the  Coal  period, 
such  as  Productus  Cora,  Chonetes  papilionacea,  Spirifer  bisulcatus,  Orthis 
crenistria,  Goniatites  diadema,  &c. 

It  was  in  the  northern  extension  of  this  chain  of  hills  from  Thiers  to 
Cusset  near  Vichy,  where  the  schists  have  a  still  more  ancient  character 
and  are  pierced  by  numerous  porphyries  and  syenitic  rocks,  that  by  the  help 
of  a  few  fossils,  I  was  enabled  to  satisfy  myself,  that  the  slaty  rocks  on  the 
banks  of  the  Sichon  belonged  to  the  Carboniferous  era.* 

The  Permian  Rocks  of  France  may  be  disposed  of  in  a  phrase  : 
for,  in  truth,  they  are  very  inadequate  representatives  of  the  diversified 
and  complex  assemblage  of  strata  which  constitute '  the  Permian  of 
Russia,  Germany,  and  Britain.  The  lower  portion  of  a  series  of 
red  rocks  in  the  Yosges  Mountains,  usually  known  as  the  *  Gres  des 
Vosges,'  is  considered  by  E.  de  Beaumont  and  myself  to  be  of  this 
age,  and  it  has  also  been  shown  how  other  red  sandstones,  near 
Lodeve  in  the  south  of  France,  may  from  their  plants  be  classed 
as  Permian.  But  nowhere  within  the  limits  of  the  country  is 
there  any  limestone  to  represent  the  great  calcareous  centre  or 
Zechstein,  and  the  group  is  wanting  in  those  animal  remains  which 
constitute  its  essential  distinctions. 

In  the  hard  and  subcrystalline  rocks  of  the  south  of  France,  which 
lie  to  the  south  of  the  great  granitic  plateau  of  that  region,  (Lodeve, 
Pezenas,  Beziers,)  no  clear  succession  of  the  older  rocks  has  been 
determined,  and  until  very  recently  they  were  considered,  to  a  great 
extent,  unfossiliferous. 

Within  these  few  years,  however,  MM.  Fournet  and  Graflf  discovered 
at  Neffiez  near  Pezenas  f  a  very  singular  small  oasis,  not  an  English  mile 
in  length,  in  which  some  beds  with  several  characteristic  Lower  Silurian 
fossils,  and  others  containing  Cardiola  interrupta  and  graptolites  occur,  also 
red  limestones  charged  with  unequivocal  Upper  Devonian  types,  as  re- 
cognized by  de  Verneuil.     These  are  Goniatites  amblylobus  and  Car- 

*  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  vii.  p.  13. 
t  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  France,  2nd  series,  vol.  viii.  p.  44. 


394 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XV. 


dium  palmatum  of  Westphalia,  Nassau,  and  the  Eifel.  This  rock  is  also 
identical  with  tlie  '  marbre  griotte '  of  the  Pyrenees,  which  the  lamented 
Leopold  von  Buch  classed  as  Devonian.  Again,  we  have  also  in  this  one 
little  spot,  true  carboniferous  deposits ;  for  though  there  are  only  a  few 
beds  of  their  lower  members,  their  fossils  are  unequivocal ;  viz.  Productus 
gigas,  P.  semi-reticulatus,  Euomphalus  acutus,  Caninia  gigantea,  &c.  The 
series  is  even  terminated  by  some  workable  beds  of  coal. 

Such,  says  de  Verneuil,  is  the  palaeontological  order  of  the  strata,  if  we 
look  only  to  the  fossils,  and  compare  them  with  those  of  all  other  known 
countries  in  the  world.  But  whilst  this  is  the  universal  and  normal  order 
in  America,  Asia,  and  Europe,  these  members  of  the  series,  so  distinct 
elsewhere,  seem  to  be  physically  intermixed  at  this  little  anomalous  spot  of 
Neffiez.  In  short,  the  schists,  with  Graptolites  and  Cardiola  interrupta, 
appear  to  be  interposed  in  the  middle  of  the  carboniferous  group,  or 
placed  between  the  Productus  limestone  and  the  coal ! 

The  tract  of  Neffiez  has,  however,  manifestly  been  subjected  to 
violent  dislocations,  and  I  therefore  believe,  with  my  associate  de 
Verneuil,  that  the  apparent  anomaly  is  due  to  one  of  those  inver- 
sions or  reversals  known  in  the  Alps  and  in  America,  and  to  which  I 
have  called  attention  in  my  remarks  on  Germany  (p.  377.). 

The  paliEozoic  formations  again  protrude  to  the  surface  in  the 
Corbieres  to  the  south  of  the  plains  of  Languedoc,  and  rising  from 
beneath  the  younger  deposits  they  also,  as  has  been  long  known, 
form  a  central  portion  of  the  Pyrenees.  In  that  chain,  the  altered 
limestones,  or  *  Marbres  Griottes,'*  which  occur  as  concretionary 
masses  in  the  schists,  and  are  charged  with  Goniatites,  are  unquestion- 
ably Devonian.  The  schists  of  Gedre,  between  St.  Sauveur  and 
Gavarnie,  contain  other  fossils  of  the  same  age. 

Just  as  in  the  Eastern  Alps,  the  Ural,  and  many  other  mountain 
chains  which  have  undergone  much  metamorphism,  the  observer  fails 
to  detect  here  the  equivalents  of  the  Lower  Silurian  Rocks. f  But 

*  This  '  Marbre  griotte '  of  the  valley  of  Campan  Is  well  described  by  M.  Du- 
frenoy. 

t  Bull.  See.  Geol.  Fiance,  2nd  series,  vol.  i.  p.  137. 


Chap.  XV.] 


PALEOZOIC  KOCKS. —  SPAIN,  ETC. 


395 


in  certain  spots,  though  at  very  rare  intervals,  the  Pyrenees  afford 
traces  of  one  member  of  the  system,  as  characterized  by  Graptolites, 
Cardiola  interrupta,  and  the  Orthoceratites,  0.  Bohemicum  and  O. 
gregarium  ;  —  fossils  which  have  already  been  spoken  of  as  probably 
representing  the  base  of  the  Upper  Silurian  division. 

Palaeozoic  Rocks  in  Spain,  Portugal,  and  Sardinia.  —  To  the  south 
of  the  great  chain  of  the  Pyrenees,  where  several  of  their  members 
occur  in  a  more  or  less  crystalline  state,  the  Lower  Palaeozoic  rocks 
have  much  the  same  development  as  in  France.  Our  acquaintance 
with  the  order  of  these  rocks  in  Spain,  is  chiefly  due  to  the  re- 
searches, during  the  last  five  years,  of  my  colleague  de  Yerneuil. 
For,  whilst  it  is  true  that  living  Spanish  and  French  geologists 
and  mineralogists  of  ability,  such  as  Casiano  de  Prado,  Schultz,  and 
Paillette,  had  made  themselves  well  acquainted  with  the  physical  and 
lithological  features  of  many  tracts  in  which  the  older  rocks  prevail, 
and  that  an  eminent  French  mining  engineer,  Le  Play,  had  pub- 
lished a  mineral  sketch  of  the  Sierra  Morena,  it  was  only  by  an 
examination  of  the  imbedded  fossils  of  the  strata  in  each  chain,  that 

the  relative  ao;e  of  the  rocks  was  at  leno-th  fixed,  and  correct  com- 
es o  ^ 

parisons  established.* 

*  This  observation  has  reference  only  to  the  order  and  classification  of  the 
stratified  rocks ;  fiar  in  reference  to  mineralogy  and  other  departments  of  geolo- 
gical science,  a  vast  number  of  works  and  memoirs  have  been  written  in  the 
last  century,  by  native  and  foreign  authors.  See  de  Verneuil  and  Collorab, 
Coup  d'CEil  sur  la  Constitution  Geologique  de  quelques  Provinces  de  I'Espagne. 
Appendice  Bibliographique.  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  Fr.,  vol.  x.  p.  138.,  where  a  very 
copious  list  of  authors  is  given,  comprising  upwards  of  160  publications  in  the  last 
hundred  years.  At  the  meeting  of  the  British  Association  for  the  advancement  of 
Science  in  1850,  I  presented,  on  the  part  of  M.  de  Verneuil,  what  I  believed  to  be 
the  first  geological  map  of  the  whole  peninsula,  accompanied  by  a  short  notice. 
Since  that  time  my  colleague  has  twice  revisited  Spain.  The  high  antiquity  of  the 
crystalline  rocks  of  Gallicia,  is  affirmed  on  the  authority  of  M.  Schultz,  who 
has  made  a  geological  map  of  that  province,  and  is  completing  a  beautiful  map 
of  the  Asturias.  The  tracing  of  Silurian  rocks  into  the  Toledo  mountains,  is  due 
to  the  zealous  researches  of  M.  Casiano  de  Prado,  to  whom  we  also  owe  the  proofs 


396  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XV. 

A  glance  at  the  map  shows  that  the  Peninsula  is  marked  by 
dominant  chains  of  mountains  more  or  less  parallel,  which,  trending 
from  west-south-west  to  east-north-east,  are  separated  from  each 
other  chiefly  by  enormous  basins  of  tertiary  age  that  lie  at  much 
lower  levels.  Let  us  first  say  a  few  words  on  the  Guadarama,  the 
chief  central  ridge  of  the  kingdom,  which  passes  to  the  north  of 
Madrid.  Casiano  de  Prado,  the  zealous  Spanish  geologist,  who  is 
charged  with  the  execution  of  the  geological  map  of  the  province  of 
Madrid,  has  shown  that  the  gneiss  and  other  crystalline  schists  witli 
subordinate  limestones,  are  pierced  by  granites,  and  being  much 
altered,  rise  to  heights  exceeding  7000  feet.  These  are  flanked  by 
schists  and  silicious  sandstones,  which  this  author  refers  to  a  Lower 
Silurian  age,  because  they  contain  a  fucoid,  Cruziana  or  Bilobites, 
like  that  which  occurs  in  rocks  of  this  age  in  France  and  Britain. 

True  Silurian  rocks  of  the  lower  division,  and  more  clearly  deter- 
minable as  such  by  their  fossils,  occur  in  the  Sierra  Morena,  and 
partially  in  the  mountains  of  Toledo  and  those  of  Arragon.  In  cross- 
ing the  Sierra  Morena  from  Almaden  on  the  south  to  Cordova  on 
the  north,  M.  de  Verneuil  recognized  an  ascending  order.  The 
inferior  strata  consist  of  schists  and  some  intercalated  dark  lime- 
stones, with  quartzose  sandstones ;  the  latter  not  unlike  the  British 
Stiper  Stones.  (See  p.  36.)  These,  being  the  hardest  and  least 
decomposable  portion  of  the  strata,  form  the  summits  or  peaks  of  the 
low  ridges,  and  clearly  exhibit  the  strike  or  range  of  the  masses, 
which  is  from  east  by  north,  and  to  west  by  south.     The  cele- 

that  the  quicksilver  mines  of  Almaden  are  in  Lower  Silurian  rocks.  Many  of  the 
fossils  (chiefly  Devonian)  from  the  North  of  Spain  were  first  found  by  M.  Paillette, 
whose  description  of  the  rocks  is  given  in  the  Bullet.  Geol.  Soc.  France,  vol.  ii. 
p.  439.  A  sketch  of  a  geological  map  of  Spain  was  also  published  by  M.  Esquerra 
del  Bayo  in  Leonhard  and  Bronn's  Jahrbucb,  1851.  In  his  last  excursion  M.  de 
Verneuil  was  accompanied  by  M.  Collomb,  who  has  also  given  a  sketch  of  the 
general  views  they  then  acquired  of  the  structure  of  tbe  peninsula,  in  the 
Bibliotheque  Universelle  de  Geneve. 


Chap.  XV.]  SILURIAN  ROCKS  OF  SPAIN.  397 

brated  mines  of  quicksilver  of  Almaden  occur  at  the  foot  of  one 
of  the  quartzose  ridges  of  this  age,  as  determined  by  M.  Casiano  de 
Prado.*  The  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  the  Sierra  Morena  range 
eastwards  into  Murcia,  where  they  occupy  the  largest  portion  of  the 
mountainous  tracts  of  that  province.  They  have  recently  been  de- 
scribed by  M.  Pellico,  who  states  that  they  are  much  metamorphosed, 
and  are  only  recognizable  through  their  large  ill-preserved  Ortho- 
ceratites  and  certain  corals.  There,  the  Lower  Silurian  limestones 
are  the  sites  of  some  of  the  richest  mines,  particularly  near  Cartha- 
gena,  and  also  in  the  Sierra  Almagrera,  so  famous  for  its  ores  of  lead 
and  silver,  f 

The  fossils  found  in  the  Sierra  Morena  and  the  Toledo  Mountains 
occur  usually  in  black  shivery  schist,  with  occasional  graptolites  of 
species  well  known  in  Brittany,  Normandy,  and  Bohemia,  The  most 
prevalent  fossil  is  perhaps  the  Calymene  Tristani ;  but  recently  many 
other  well-known  French  forms  of  trilobites  have  been  detected  J, 
including  Illsenus  Lusitanicus  ?  or  I.  Salteri ;  Asaphus  nobilis  ;  Caly- 
mene Tristani ;  C.  Arago ;  Dalmannia  socialis,  and  D.  Phillipsi,  Barr. ; 
Trinucleus  Goldfussi,  Barr. ;  Homalonotus  (Plesiocoma)  rara;  Placo- 
paria  Tournemini ;  Orthoceras  duplex ;  Bellerophon  bilobatus ;  Re- 
donia  Deshayesiana ;  &c. 

Now,  whilst  nearly  all  these  species  are  also  found,  as  has  been 
stated,  in  the  slaty  schists  of  Angers  and  Vitre,  in  France,  which 
the  French  geologists  have  named  and  mapped  as  Lower  Silurian, 

*  The  mercury  of  Almaden  is  said  not  to  occur  in  veins,  but  to  have  impreg- 
nated the  vertical  strata  of  quartzose  sandstone  associated  with  carbonaceous 
slates.  The  association  of  mercury  with  such  rocks  is  still  more  remarkable  in  the 
Asturias,  where  mines  of  mercury  are  worked  in  coal  strata. 

f  It  is  most  probable,  that  the  still  more  metamorphosed  rocks  of  the  Sierra  di 
Gador  and  Sierra  Nevada,  with  their  limestones  and  rich  lead  mines,  are  of  the 
same  age. 

I  In  an  examination  by  Casiano  de  Prado,  Eusebio  Sanchez,  and  E.  de  Ver- 
neuil. 


398  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XV. 

several  are  identical  with  Bohemian  species,  published  as  of  the  same 
age  by  Barrande.  It  is  also  well  worthy  of  notice,  since  the  general 
type  of  the  fossils  is  so  iimch  that  of  central  Europe,  that  the  very 
common  British  species  Bellerophon  bilobatus,  and  the  remarkable 
cephalopod  Orthoceras  duplex  (so  characteristic  of  the  Lower  Silurian 
fauna  of  Scandinavia  and  the  North  of  Europe)  should  also  be  found, 
as  M.  de  Verneiiil  remarks,  in  this  southern  parallel.  Some  of  these 
Silurian  fossils  were  first  discovered  by  M.  Casiano  de  Prado,  near 
Molina,  in  Arragon.  They  have  subsequently  been  there  traced  by 
M.  de  Yerneuil,  and  also  along  the  eastern  borders  of  New  Castile, 
where  they  occur  in  black  graptolite  schists,  which  jut  out  from  be- 
neath the  secondary  deposits.  These  Silurian  schists  have  further 
been  followed  by  the  same  author  in  the  mountains  of  Checa,  Horca, 
Origuela,  and  Monterde. 

If  any  Upper  Silurian  rocks  can  be  said  to  exist  in  Spain,  they 
are  only,  as  in  France,  thin  courses  of  black  schist,  with  spheroidal, 
calcareous  concretions  in  which  Graptolltes  occur,  together  with  the 
Orthoceras  Bohemicum  and  O.  styloideum  of  Barrande,  and  the 
British  species  Cardiola  interrupta.  Such  rocks,  which  are  feebly 
exhibited  in  parts  of  the  Sierra  Morena,  are  also  seen  on  the  south 
flank  of  the  Pyrenees,  near  Ogasa  and  St.  Juan  de  las  Abadesas, 
where  they  are  recognized*  by  the  presence  of  Cardiola  interrupta 
and  Orthoceratites.  It  is  also  supposed  that  a  band  of  silicious  lime- 
stone pierced  by  elvans,  or  granitic  dykes,  and  which  extends  along 
the  south  side  of  the  chain  from  Gerona,  by  Hostalrich,  to  Barcelona, 
may  be  referred  to  the  same  age,  Orthoceratites  having  been  found 
in  it  near  the  last-mentioned  city,  f 

*  By  M.  de  Verneuil  and  M.  de  Loriere.  The  fossils  near  San  .Juan  de  las  Aba- 
desas were  discovered  by  M.  Amalio  Maestre ;  they  have  been  quoted  by  Prof. 
Leymerie,  from  ne£ir  St.  Beat  on  the  north  side  of  the  Pyrenees,  and  exist  also  in 
Sardinia. 

t  By  i\Ir.  Pratt,  F.1\.S.,  who  has  successfully  explored  large  tracts  in  Spain, 


Chap.  XV.]  DEVONIAN  ROCKS  IN  SPAIN.  399 

Devonian  Rocks  in  Spain.  —  Devonian  rocks  are  developed  in  the 
Sierra  Morena  north  and  south  of  Almaden,  occurring  in  several 
repetitions  troughed  by  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  the  fossils  lying  gene- 
rally in  sandstones,  or  in  small  bands  of  impure  limestone.  The  most 
characteristic  species  are,  Productus  subaculeatus  ;  Leptaena  Duter- 
trii;  Spirifer  Verneuili ;  S.  Archiaci ;  S.  Bouchardi;  Orthis  stria- 
tula  ;  Terebratula  reticularis  ;  T.  Orbignyana  ;  T.  concentrica ;  Pha- 
cops  latifrons ;  &c.  AH  but  one  (Terebrat.  Orbignyana)  of  these  are 
common  fossils  at  Boulogne  ;  and  there  are  many  others  which  are  well 
known  in  French  and  German  localities,  besides  some  species  peculiar 
to  Spain.  In  the  southern  parts  of  Cuenca,  near  Hinarejos,  de  Ver- 
neuil  and  Collomb  also  detected  deposits  containing  Devonian  fossils, 
including  the  broad-winged  Spirifer  of  the  lower  beds  of  the  Khine*  : 
and,  last  summer,  these  authors  discovered  the  same  deposits  at  the 
eastern  extremity  of  the  Guadarama  range  between  Senianza  and 
Atienza. 

Whilst  the  eastern  part  of  the  Sierra  Cantabrica,  extending  west- 
wards from  the  high  road  from  Leon  to  Oviedo,  is  composed  of  quart- 
zose  and  schistose  rocks  supposed  to  be  of  Silurian  age  (though  no 
fossils  have  been  detected),  the  medial  part  of  this  chain  presents  a 
very  rich  development  of  Devonian  deposits.  These  rocks  consist 
of  red  sandstone,  shale,  and  grey  limestones,  which,  owing  to  power- 
ful dislocations,  assume  bold  and  peaked  forms,  which  are  visible 

chiefly  in  the  Asturias,  the  Pyrenees,  and  Catalonia.  For  his  notice  of  the  Ortho- 
ceratites,  see  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  viii.  p.  270. 

*  M.  de  Yerneull  has  identified  nearly  80  Devonian  species,  from  Sabero  in 
Leon,  and  from  Ferrones,  and  Aviles,  in  the  Asturias,  which  ought,  he  says,  to  be 
places  of  pilgrimage  for  all  collectors.  Of  the  works  on  this  region,  see,  1st, 
"  Resena  geognostica  de  principado  del  Asturias,  vistazo  geolog.  sobre  Cantabria," 
per  G.  Schulze,  Insp.  Gen.  de  Minas.  2nd.  "Recherches  sur  quelqu'unes  des 
roches  des  Asturies,  et  les  Fossiles  qu'elles  contiennent,"  par  Paillette,  De  Vern. 
et  D'Archiac.  Bull.  S.  G.  Fr.,  2nd  series,  vol.  ii.  p.  439.  "  Sur  les  Env.  de 
Sabero  (Leon),"  par  Casiano  de  Prado  et  de  Verneuil.  Bull.  S.  G.  Fr.,  2nd 
ser.  vol.  vii.  p.  137. 


400  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XV. 

at  great  distances  from  the  plains  of  Castile.  They  are  as  prolific  in 
mineral  wealth  as  in  organic  remains ;  the  iron  of  Mieres  and  Sa- 
bero  being  extracted  from  them.*  Thanks  to  the  labours  of  Schultz, 
Casiano  de  Prado,  Paillette,  de  Verneuil,  and  d'Archiac,  the  re- 
spective formations  of  these  countries  are  now  becoming  much  better 
known. 

Carboniferous  Rocks  of  Spain.  —  Proceeding  to  the  east,  the  Devo-- 
nian  rocks  of  the  Sierra  Cantabrica  are  succeeded  in  the  Asturias  by 
the  richest  coal-field  in  Spain.  Its  lower  beds  consist  of  massive  lime- 
stones, so  resembling  the  Devonian  rocks  on  which  they  lie,  that  except 
for  their  respective  fossils  they  could  with  difficulty  be  separated. 
The  fossils  are,  however,  decisive  of  the  superior  rock,  for  among 
them  are  several  well-known  British  species  of  Productus,  such  as 
P.  semi-reticulatus,  together  with  Spirifer  Mosquensis,  and  even  Fu- 
sulina  cylindrica,  the  foraminiferous  shell  so  characteristic  of  the 
carboniferous  limestone  of  Russia.  Above  these  masses,  beds  of 
coal  first  begin  to  alternate  with  other  and  smaller  courses  of  lime- 
stone ;  so  that  here,  again,  as  in  Scotland  and  Pussia,  the  carbona- 
ceous portion  is  subordinate  to  the  lower  members  of  the  group. 
Then  follow  conglomerates  and  sandstone  with  fossil  plants,  which 
are  said  to  have  a  thickness  of  ten  thousand  feet,  and  which,  pro- 
bably representing  the  millstone  grit  of  Britain,  are  here  copiously 
charged  with  coal.  About  eighty  beds  of  coal  have,  in  fact,  been 
recognised  in  strata  for  the  most  part  vertical. 

The  limestones  that  form  the  inferior  limit  of  these  carbon- 
iferous deposits,  truly  vindicate  the  propriety  of  the  old  Eng- 
lish name  Mountain  Limestone;  for  they  rise  to  the  highest 
points  of  the  Cantabrian  chain,  and  constitute  the  mountains  of 
Cabrales  and  Cobadonga,  as  well  as  the  peaks  of  Europa.  They 

*  Thougli  the  coal  of  Sabero  is  apparently  included  in  Devonian  rocks,  M. 
Casiano  de  Prado  thinks  that  this  appearance  may  be  due  to  inverted  folds  of  the 
strata ;  so  much  has  this  tract  been  convulsed. 


Chap.  XV.]  CARBONIFEEOUS  ROCKS.  —  SPAIN.  40i 

also  advance  to  the  sea  near  Ribadesella,  and  penetrate  on  the  east 
into  the  provinces  of  Santander  and  Palencia.* 

The  carboniferous  deposits  of  the  Sierra  Morena  range  along  the 
southern  part  of  that  chain.  Like  similar  formations  in  the  north  of 
Spain,  their  lower  beds  generally  contain  limestones,  in  which  occur 
the  same  species  of  Productus  and  other  marine  fossils  that  are 
known  in  many  other  regions.  The  coal  is  chiefly  associated  with 
overlying  conglomerates  and  sandstones :  some  of  it,  however,  as  in  the 
Asturias,  is  in  the  calcareous  series.  The  best  coal-fields  of  this 
southern  region  are  near  Seville,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Belmez, 
between  Almaden  and  Cordova :  the  strata  are  highly  inclined. 

On  the  flanks  of  the  crystalline  schists,  probably  metamorphic, 
which  form  the  Sierras  east  of  Burgos,  towards  Escaray  and  the 
Moncayo,  there  are  also  masses  of  sandstone  and  shale,  with  im- 
pressions of  coal  plants  and  traces  of  coal,  associated,  as  in  the  other 
Spanish  coal-fields,  with  a  few  marine  fossils.  These  rocks  are 
only  mentioned  to  show,  how  generally  the  same  palseozoic  succes- 
sion has  prevailed  all  over  the  peninsula,  before  the  country  was 
thrown  up  into  those  ridges  which  now  form  the  lines  of  separation 
between  its  different  provinces. 

Whatever  be  their  direction  or  inclination,  the  Silurian,  Devonian, 
and  Lower  Carboniferous  rocks  of  Spain  have  all  been  conformably, 
and  apparently  simultaneously  elevated,  as  in  France. 

The  existence  of  Permian  rocks  in  Spain  is  very  doubtful;  no 
fossils  of  that  age  having  yet  been  found.  Led,  however,  by  the 
analogy  of  rocks  and  stratigraphical  indications.  Professor  Naranjo  y 
Garza  has  referred  to  that  formation  the  red  magnesian  limestone  and 
the  gypsiferous  marls  of  Montiel  and  of  the  lakes  of  Ruidera,  the 

*  During  the  summer  of  1852,  MM.  de  Verneuil,  Casiano  de  Prado,  and  Loriere 
ascended  one  of  the  highest  of  these  peaks  of  Mountain  Limestone,  and  found,  by 
barometrical  observation,  that  it  was  2500  metres,  or  about  7750  English  feet, 
above  the  sea.    It  was  covered  with  snow  on  the  1st  August. 

T>  D 


402  SILUEIA.  [Chap.  XV. 

soarces  of  the  river  Guadiana.  In  the  same  group  this  author  in- 
cludes the  famous  cave  of  Montesinos  in  La  Mancha,  which,  in 
Cervantes'  immortal  work,  Don  Quixote  is  made  to  explore. 

Siluriafi  and  Carboniferous  Deposits  in  Portugal.  —  Geologists  are 
indebted  to  jMr.  Daniel  Sharpe  for  nearly  all  that  they  know  of  the 
real  structure  and  succession  of  the  sedimentary  rocks  of  the  kingdom 
of  Portugal,  whether  of  palaeozoic  or  secondary  age.* 

Of  the  former,  the  only  examples  pointed  out  in  previous  years, 
— though  probably  many  more  will  be  detected,  in  addition  to  another 
case  to  be  presently  noticed, — occur  at  Yallongo,  in  the  immediate 
environs  of  Oporto.  There,  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  precisely  of 
the  same  mineral  type  as  those  of  France  and  Spain,  and  including 
the  same  fossils,  together  with  two  or  three  British  forms  and  some 
new  species,  rise  up  in  highly  inclined  and  vertical  strata ;  and,  as  at 
Angers  and  other  places,  are  quarried  for  roofing  slates. 

An  anomalous  arrangement  of  the  lower  and  higher  deposits,  is, 
however,  there  apparent,  which  is  at  variance  with  the  facts  observed 
in  other  parts  of  the  world.  The  coal-field  of  Vallongo,  which  has 
supplied  a  considerable  portion  of  the  city  of  Oporto  with  coal,  and 
in  which  are  certain  plants  not  distinguishable  from  those  of  the 
Carboniferous  era,  dips  under  the  Lower  Silurian  schists  with  their 
characteristic  trHobites  I  Xow,  if  this  had  been  really  the  normal 
position  of  the  plant-bearing  strata,  we  should  have  to  believe  in  the 
existence  of  a  terrestrial  flora  before  the  Lower  Silurian  formations 
were  accumulated, — a  flora  composed  of  the  same  vegetation  as  that 
which,  in  other  regions,  we  find  only  when  we  reach  the  Upper 
Devonian  deposits,  and  approach  to  the  horizon  of  the  great  coal- 
fields. Believing  fuUy  in  the  accuracy  of  !Mr.  Sharpe's  sections,  I 
think  that,  however,  from  his  own  good  description  of  this  district 
and  the  adjacent  tract,  we  may  without  difficulty  surmise  how  this 
apparent  anomaly  has  been  brought  about.  The  Lower  SUurian 
rocks  and  the  contiguous  coal  strata  (for  the  coal  is  not  found  within 
*  See  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc-  London,  vol.  v.  p.  142. 


Chap.  XV.]  PALEOZOIC  BOCKS.  —  PORTUGAL.  403 

the  body  of  the  lower  slates)  are  both  situated  between  two  ranges 
of  eruptive  rocks ;  the  one  on  which  Oporto  stands  being  of  granite, 
and  the  other,  to  the  east,  of  syenite.  On  the  flanks  of  the  granite 
of  Oporto,  micaceous  schists  abound,  which,  if  metamorphic,  may  be 
of  any  age.  But,  even  if  these  be  of  ante-Silurian  date,  we  have 
simply  to  imagine  a  trough  of  coal,  of  the  true  carboniferous  date, 
placed  between  these  schists,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  clay-slates 
with  Lower  Silurian  fossils,  on  the  other,  and  then  by  a  movement, 
of  which  we  have  many  well  authenticated  examples  both  in  Europe 
and  America,  this  trough  has  been  placed  in  an  inverted  and  dis- 
located position. 

The  enormous  length  of  time  which  must  have  elapsed  between 
the  accumulation  of  the  Lower  Silurian  and  the  formation  of  the 
Devonian  rocks,  and  during  which  interval  we  have  no  trace  of 
land  plants  having  appeared,  forbids  us,  indeed,  to  adopt  the  view 
of  an  infra- Silurian  coal-field,  until  we  have  exhausted  every  other 
means  of  explaining  the  anomaly. 

Thus,  the  plications  of  the  strata  in  Belgium,  as  delineated  by  M. 
Dumont,  those  in  Westphalia  mentioned  in  this  volume,  or  those  in 
North  America,  described  by  the  Professors  Rogers,  explain  how 
strata  really  inverted  in  one  place,  may  be  followed  until  they  resume 
their  regular  order.  Wedged  in  as  these  Silurian  and  Carboniferous 
masses  of  Portugal  are,  between  two  flanking  parallel  ridges  of 
eruptive  rock,  it  was  no  doubt  diflScult  to  detect  their  regular  order ; 
though,  even  in  describing  a  transverse  section  from  Oporto  to 
Aveiro,  Mr.  Sharpe  himself  states,  that  clay  slates  lying  on  gneissose 
and  micaceous  schists,  are  surmounted  by  carbonaceous  shale  and  red 
sandstone.  This  is,  I  conceive,  the  natural  order:  because  even 
in  the  adjacent  districts  of  the  north  of  Spain,  to  which  the  author 
first  pointed  attention,  as  being  likely  to  contain  Silurian  rocks, 
there  are  no  traces  whatever  of  anthracitic  coal-fields  beneath  or  as- 
sociated with  such  ancient  rocks ;  all  the  carboniferous  deposits  of 


404  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XV. 

that  region  being,  as  previously  stated,  in  their  usual  and  normal 
position. 

Again,  after  these  pages  were  written,  Mr.  Sharpe  himself  com- 
municated to  the  Geological  Society  of  London*  the  discovery  of 
fossils  and  other  important  observations  made  by  M.  Carlos  Ribeiro, 
which  show  the  prolongation  of  the  same  axis  of  Silurian  rocks 
from  north-north- west  to  south- south-east,  far  beyond  the  Douro. 
The  rocks  in  question  form,  in  fact,  the  crest  of  the  Serra  de  Busaco, 
on  which  Wellington  and  Massena  first  tried  their  strength,  and 
thence  extend  to  the  south-south-east  beyond  the  river  Mondego  f 
into  the  Serra  de  Mucella.  During  the  greater  part  of  their  course, 
these  Silurian  rocks  are  surrounded  or  flanked  by  older  unfossiliferous 
masses,  consisting  of  mica  and  chlorite  schists  with  clay  slate,  &c. 
These  crystalline  rocks  are  at  once  followed  by  dark  brown  indu- 
rated shales,  somewhat  slaty,  which  abound  in  Lower  Silurian  fossils, 
among  which  Mr.  Sharpe  has  recognized  numerous  species  of 
Leptaena  and  Orthis,  with  trilobites,  many  of  them  previously  un- 
described.  This  author  has,  however,  identified  the  most  charac- 
teristic of  the  trilobites  with  species  well  known  elsewhere ;  Trinu- 
cleus  Pongerardi,  Rou.,  Calymene  Tristani,  and  C.  Arago  of  Brittany, 
and  Phacops  socialis  of  Bohemia ;  so  that  this  lower  fossil  rock  of 
Busaco  is,  obviously,  in  Portugal,  as  it  is  in  France  and  Spain,  the 
oldest  zone  with  fossil  remains,  and  the  same  which  Mr.  Sharpe 
described  at  Vallongo  near  Oporto.  It  is  surmounted,  and  chiefly 
along  the  middle  of  the  ridge  of  Busaco,  by  a  band  of  hard 
ochreous  shale,  frequently  altered  by  eruptive  masses  of  greenstone 
trap,  and  generally  breaking  up  into  prisms,  the  bedding  being 
scarcely  distinguishable.    It  is  probably  equivalent  to  the  sandstone 

*  Quart.  Geol.  Journ.  vol.  ix.  p.  13o. 

t  At  the  mouth  of  this  river,  and  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  the  author  of  this  work, 
then  an  Ensign  in  the  36th  regiment,  disembarked  (August  1st,  1808)  "from  a  boat 
alongside  of  that  which  conveyed  Sir  Arthur  TVellesley,  the  future  illustrious 
Wellington. 


Chap.  XV.  J  PALAEOZOIC  KOCKS. — SAEDINIA.  405 

of  May  in  Normandy.  This  rock  is  full  of  small  corals,  such  as 
Favosites  fibrosa,  besides  species  of  Keteporee,  also  many  species  of 
the  simple  plaited  Orthides,  and  some  species  of  trilobites  common  to 
the  subjacent  deposit ;  the  whole  of  the  evidence  proving  clearly, 
that  it  is  simply  a  superior  member  of  the  Lower  Silurian  group. 
Again,  the  uppermost  of  these  Silurian  rocks  in  Portugal  is  pre- 
cisely what  we  have  been  considering  in  Spain  and  France ;  viz. 
a  blueish  shale  or  argillaceous  schist,  containing  the  well-known 
British  species  Cardiola  interrupta  and  Graptoiites  Ludensis,  with 
numerous  crushed  specimens  of  orthoceratites  and  other  mollusks; 
fossils  which,  according  to  Mr.  Sharpe,  are  referable  to  the  Wenlock 
shale  or  inferior  portion  of  the  Upper  Silurians. 

Now,  all  these  Silurian  rocks  are  overlaid  unconformably  by  a  de- 
posit of  true  carboniferous  age,  the  shales  and  sandstones  of  which 
are  full  of  ferns  and  other  plants,  of  species  common  in  the  coal 
deposits  of  France  and  Germany.  Thus,  when  traced  out,  the  true 
order  of  the  north  of  Portuo-al  is  the  same  as  that  of  other  regions. 

Sardinia, — Extending  our  inquiry  eastwards  from  Northern  Por- 
tugal and  Central  Spain,  to  like  parallels  of  latitude  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Mediterranean,  we  again  meet  in  Sardinia  with  a  similar 
succession  of  palaeozoic  deposits.  Geologists  owe  this  determination 
to  the  researches  of  General  Albert  della  Marmora,  so  long  favourably 
known  to  geographers  for  his  beautiful  topographical  map  of  that 
island.  Judging  from  certain  Orthidae  and  Orthoceratites,  which 
this  author  sent  to  me  in  the  year  1848,  I  have  for  some  years 
had  no  doubt  that  Silurian  rocks  existed  in  Sardinia,  as  laid  down 
by  Collegno,  in  his  geological  map  of  Italy.  I  have  since  been  in- 
formed by  M.  Barrande,  who  has  personally  inspected  the  rocks  and 
fossils  in  the  southern  part  of  the  island,  near  Flumini  Maggiore, 
that  in  his  opinion  both  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  are  there  present. 

In  anticipation  of  a  work  by  General  della  Marmora  which  is  about 
to  appear,  accompanied  by  an  elaborate  map,  it  may  be  stated,  that 


406 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XV. 


some  of  the  fossils  collected  by  him  and  his  assistant  M.  Vecchi, 
which  were  submitted  to  Professor  Meneghini  of  Pisa,  have  been 
identified  with  well-known  Lower  Silurian  forms;  such  as  Orthis 
Lusitanica,  Sharpe ;  0.  testudinaria  and  0.  vespertilio,  Sil.  Syst.  &c. 
Other  fossils  are,  on  the  contrary,  Upper  Silurian  types,  such  as 
Orthoceratites  ibex,  O.  gregarium,  Sil.  Syst.  (?),  and  several  others, 
besides  Cardiola  and  Avicula.* 

General  della  Marmora  has  informed  me,  that  all  these  rocks  and 
the  metamorphic  masses  with  which  they  are  associated,  are  distinctly 
surmounted  by  strata  containing  anthracitic  coal,  charged  with  many 
of  the  same  species  of  fossil  plants  which  prevail  in  the  old  coal 
deposits  of  other  regions.  Thus,  among  the  plants  from  Seni  and 
Sculo,  Professor  Meneghini  has  recognized  Pecopteris  arborescens ; 
P.  dentata;  P.  unita;  P.  polymorpha;  P.  hemiteloides,  and  several 
others ;  with  species  of  the  genera  Odontopteris,  Neuropteris,  Sphe- 
nophyllum,  Annularia,  Asterophyllia,  Sigillaria,  Syringodendron,  and 
an  abundance  of  the  well-known  Cakmites  Suckowii. 

In  fact,  the  strata  in  which  these  coal  plants  occur,  and  which 
terminate  downwards  in  conglomerates  t>  rest  in  completely  discordant 
positions  on  the  older  rocks,  and  in  this  highly  altered  tract  are 
covered  by  dolomites  of  the  Jurassic  age.  The  order  of  the  inferior 
strata  in  Sardinia  is,  therefore,  the  same  as  elsewhere,  and  is  quite 
subversive  of  the  idea  that  any  true  old  coal  plants  existed  during 
the  Silurian  or  lower  palseozoic  era. 

*  It  is  right  to  state  that  whilst  he  has  seen  unquestionable  upper  Silurian  fossils 
from  Sardinia,  which  on  the  part  of  General  della  Marmora  I  submitted  to  him, 
M.  de  Verneuil  is  of  opinion,  that  some  of  the  fossils  (of  which,  however,  he  only 
saw  drawings)  are  of  Devonian  age.  It  is,  indeed,  probable  that  the  succession 
will  eventually  be  found  to  be  similar  to  that  of  Spain. 

+  See  my  Memoir  on  the  Alps,  Apennines,  and  Carpathians.  Quart.  Journ. 
Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  v.  p.  157.,  and  particularly  its  translation  into  Italian  by 
Professors  P.  Savi  and  Meneghini,  entitled  "  Struttura  Geologia  delle  Alpi,  degli 
Apennini  e  dei  Carpazi,"  followed  by  their  "  Considerazioni  sulla  geologia  della 
Toscana"  (Firenze,  1850),  in  which  these  distinguished  Italian  geologists  announce 
the  important  discovery  of  old  Carboniferous  formations  in  the  hills  near  Volterra. 


Chap.  XV.]         PALAEOZOIC  OF  ALPS  AND  APENNINES.  407 

Schists  and  conglomerates,  though  not  so  carbonaceous,  but  con- 
taining similar  plants  with  those  of  Sardinia,  have  indeed  been  de- 
scribed by  Professors  Meneghini  and  Savi,  in  the  older  rocks  of 
Tuscany.*  This  fact,  which  was  unknown  when  I  published  upon  the 
Alps  and  Apennines,  is  most  important,  and  leads  us  to  infer,  that  the 
traces  of  coal  which  are  associated  with  certain  land  plants  in  parts 
of  the  Western  Alps,  are  also  of  the  old  Carboniferous  age.  For,  the 
conglomerates  and  schists  with  which  such  plants  are  associated  in 
the  Alps  are  precisely  the  same  rocks  as  the  ^verrucano'  and  schists 
of  Sardinia  and  Northern  Italy,  which  lie  beneath  all  strata  of  Tri- 
assic,  Liassic  and  Jurassic  age. 

'  It  has,  indeed,  been  already  stated,  that  rocks  containing  fossils 
which  are  truly  of  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  species, 
occur  in  the  Austrian  or  Eastern  Alps.  With  this  fact  before 
us,  and  looking  to  the  prodigious  amount  of  metamorphism,  dis- 
location, and  convolution  to  which  the  component  parts  of  that 
chain  have  been  subjected,  particularly  in  their  extension  to  the  west, 
we  can  have  little  difficulty  in  imagining  how  the  Silurian  and 
Devonian  strata  have  there  passed  into  a  crystalline  state  ;  while  the 
sole  remnants  of  the  carboniferous  rocks,  identifiable  through  their 
organic  remains,  are  the  plant-bearing  conglomerates  and  schists  of 
the  Valorsine  and  of  the  tracts  around  Mont  Blanc. 

*  As  long  as  the  question  seemed  to  me  doubtful,  it  was  my  duty  to  state,  after 
my  own  survey,  that  the  apparent  intercalation  of  the  coal  plants  in  the  Tarentaise, 
among  beds  containing  belemnites,  was  so  striking,  that  M.  Elie  de  Beaumont 
was  fully  justified  in  his  original  conclusion.  When  that  eminent  geologist 
reasoned  on  this  apparent  intermixture  of  old  coal  plants  with  Jurassic  belem- 
nites, the  phenomena  of  the  rapid  interplication  of  strata  of  very  dissimilar  ages,  and 
the  entire  reversal  of  order  in  certain  tracts,  had  not  been  sufficiently  delineated. 
I  cannot  now  admit,  that  there  is  any  evidence  to  disprove  the  inference  that  the 
old  Carboniferous  Flora,  which  began  to  prevail  in  the  Devonian  period,  expired 
at  the  close  of  the  Permian  deposits.  The  fauna  and  flora  of  the  palaeozoic  rocks 
are,  therefore,  entirely  in  harmony. 

D  D  4 


408 


CHAPTER  XVL 

SUCCESSION  OF  PRIMEVAL  ROCKS  IN  AMERICA. 

ORDER  OF  THE  PALEOZOIC  STRATA  IN  SOUTH  AMERICA,  THE  UNITED  STATES, 
AND  BRITISH  NORTH  AMERICA. 

All  the  evidences  which  the  researches  of  geologists  have  brought  to 
light,  indicate  a  wide  diffusion  of  similar  groups  of  animals  over  the 
globe  during  the  primeval  periods.  A  striking  proof  of  this  lies  in 
the  fact,  that  the  palaeozoic  fossils  which  we  have  followed  over 
the  various  countries  of  Europe,  are  found  to  have  their  exact 
equivalents  in  the  continent  of  America. 

Although  the  science  of  the  United  States  has  afforded  the  chief 
means  by  which  this  parallelism  has  been  worked  out,  I  cannot 
commence  even  this  slight  sketch  of  the  older  transatlantic  rocks, 
without  first  alluding  to  that  masterpiece  of  natural  history,  the 
work  of  Humboldt,  wherein  he  gave  to  mankind  a  comprehensive 
view  of  the  structure  of  the  chain  of  the  Andes, — the  main  axis  of 
the  western  continent. 

The  oldest  of  those  slaty  and  quartzose  formations,  so  eloquently 
described  by  the  illustrious  traveller,  have  subsequently  been  re- 
ferred, through  their  organic  remains,  to  the  Silurian  rocks.  Follow- 
ing up  the  inquiries  of  his  precursor,  M.  Alcide  d'Orbigny  has 
shown,  in  maps  and  sections,  as  well  as  by  elaborate  descriptions*, 

*  See  Voyage  dans  TAmerique  Meridionale,  tome  3me,  Partie  Geologique, 
Paris,  1842.  In  justice  to  my  friend,  Mr.Pentland,  so  well  known  to  geographers 
by  his  measurements  of  the  high  peaks  of  the  Peruvian  Andes,  around  the  lofty 
lake  of  Titicaca,  let  me  say  that  he  was  the  first  person  who  made  me  acquainted 
with  the  occurrence  of  Silurian  trilobites  in  the  slaty  rocks  of  this  chain. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


SUCCESSION  IN  AMERICA. 


409 


that  these  slaty  rocks  contain  the  fossil  sea-weed  Cruziana  (or  Bilo- 
bites),  with  Graptolites,  Lingulas,  Orthidae,  and  trilobites  of  the 
genera  Asaphus  and  Phacops  (Calymene).  He  has  further  pointed 
out,  that  these  Silurian  masses  are  succeeded  by  sandstones  and 
silicious  strata  of  Devonian  age,  and  these  by  limestones  and  other 
rocks,  charged  with  fossils  of  the  Carboniferous  era. 

The  Silurian  slates  and  schists  form  enormous  bands ;  and  examples  of 
them  may  be  well  seen  on  the  declivities  of  the  plateau  of  Bolivia,  as  well 
as  on  the  flanks  of  the  Cordillera,  extending  from  Sorata  to  Illimanni. 
They  are,  in  most  parts  of  their  range,  in  a  metamorphic  state ;  and  in  this 
form  extend  from  Chili,  on  the  south  *,  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  and  the 
Sierra  Nevada  on  the  north.  Even  in  Texas  they  have  been  recognized 
by  F.  Roemer.f  Including  the  quartz  rocks  which  are  associated  with 
them,  they  constitute  the  chief  matrix  of  the  gold  and  other  metals, 
so.  extensively  worked  along  this  great  chain.  (See  next  Chapter.) 
It  has  been  suggested,  that  the  huge  bands  of  stratified  quartz  rocks 
described  by  Humboldt  may  be  the  equivalents  of  the  sandstones  termed 
Devonian  by  D'OrbignyJ,  and  in  which  that  author  detected  various 
characteristic  fossil  shells.  But,  whilst  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  proof, 
doubts  may  be  entertained  as  to  whether  these  sandstones  and  quartz  rocks 
of  the  Andes  may  be  of  Upper  Silurian  rather  than  of  Devonian  age,  there 
can  be  no  hesitation  in  referring  the  next  deposits  in  ascending  order  to 
the  Carboniferous  or  true  Upper  Palaeozoic  group.  At  numberless  places, 
limestones  have  been  observed  charged  with  well-known  carboniferous 
types.  Several  of  these,  such  as  Productus  Cora ;  Spirifer  striatus  ;  Athyris 
Roissyi,  &c.,  are  specifically  identical  with  forms  that  characterize  the 
strata  of  this  era  in  Europe  and  other  parts  of  the  globe.  And  as  these 
rocks  are  associated  with,  or  followed  by,  accumulations  of  coal,  the  general 
relations  of  the  series  are  clearly  similar  to  those  of  other  countries. 

*  In  the  admirable  work  on  "South  America,"  by  Mr.  Charles  Darwin  (1846), 
the  only  palEeozoic  fossils  alluded  to  are  those  of  the  Falkland  Islands  (Silurian  ? 
and  Devonian),  though  it  is  probable  that  some  of  the  clay-slates,  &c.  in  the  chain 
of  the  Chilian  Andes,  to  which  he  adverts,  are  also  of  similar  age. 

f  Koemer.    Texas,  und  die  physischen,  &c.  1849. 

J  See  Cordier.  "  Rapport  a  TAcademie  Royale  des  Sciences  sur  les  resultats 
scientifiques  du  Voyage  de  M.  Alcide  D'Orbigny  dans  I'Amerique  du  sud,  pendant 
les  8  annees  depuis  1826  jusqua  1833."  1842. 


410  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

We  now  know,  therefore,  (and  the  recent  explorations  in  Cali- 
fornia, Oregon,  &c.,  have  confirmed  the  view,)  that  sedimentary- 
deposits  of  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  age  constitute  the 
loftiest  ranges  and  metalliferous  plateaux  of  the  American  continent. 
These  were,  in  ancient  times,  perforated  by  granites,  porphyries, 
trachytes,  and  other  eruptive  matters ;  and  in  the  modern  era  are  in 
some  localities  the  seat  of  active  volcanic  forces. 

To  bring,  however,  the  older  formations  of  America  into  an  accu- 
rate parallel  with  those  of  Europe,  we  must  quit  the  chain  of  the 
Andes,  and  the  high  grounds  of  Mexico,  and  turn  to  the  eastern  side 
of  North  America.  In  that  region  the  older  strata  have  been  com- 
paratively exempted  from  igneous  disturbances,  and  as  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  strata  is  symmetrical,  men  of  science  have  been  able  to 
demonstrate  the  order  of  succession  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  which 
numerous  proofs  have  been  recited  in  the  preceding  pages. 

Many  of  the  crystalline  rocks  of  North  America,  composed  of 
granites,  porphyries,  and  other  igneous  masses,  or  of  stratified  gneiss, 
mica,  and  chlorite  schists,  and  marbles,  are  unquestionably  more 
ancient  than  the  oldest  rock  to  which  the  term  Lower  Silurian  can 
be  applied.  For  such  rocks  are  seen  in  Upper  Canada  (just  as  in 
Scandinavia)  to  be  the  base  on  which  the  oldest  of  the  fossiliferous 
formations  rest — a  subject  to  which  we  shall  return  in  the  sequel. 

A  glance  at  the  geological  map  of  North  America  by  Lyell,  as 
deduced  from  the  various  works  of  the  United  States'  geologists,  or 
at  the  map  of  Marcou  which  has  just  been  issued,  will  show  to 
what  extent  these  ancient  crystalline  rocks  are  spread  out  along  the 
eastern  side  of  the  continent.  They  there  range  from  S.  W.  to  N.  E. 
along  the  flanks  of  the  Apalachian  and  Alleghany  chain  ;  i.  e.  from 
South  Carolina  to  Massachusetts,  New  Hampshire,  and  Maine :  they 
also  occupy  large  spaces,  chiefly  along  the  eastern  sides,  of  the  British 
colonies  of  Nova  Scotia,  Newfoundland*,  and  New  Brunswick. 

*  See  Jukes's  General  Report  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Newfoundland,  in  1839  and  1840, 
with  map  and  sections. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


SUCCESSION  IN  NORTH  AMERICA. 


411 


Similar  granitic  rocks,  and  on  an  equally  grand  scale,  trend  from 
Lower  Canada  on  the  east,  to  Lakes  Superior  and  Winnipeg  on  the 
west,  forming  a  broad  low  watershed  recently  termed  the  Lawrentine 
Mountains.*  It  is  on  the  western  flank  of  the  Apalachian  chain, 
and  to  the  south,  north,  and  west  of  the  Lawrentine  Mountains, 
that  the  palaeozoic  formations  are  exhibited.  They  consist  of  Lower 
and  Upper  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  rocks,  and  are 
repeated  in  broad  undulations,  forming  basins  of  a  grandeur  in  extent 
unknown,  as  yet,  in  any  other  part  of  the  world  excepting  Russia. 
In  this  way  they  occupy  large  portions  of  the  southern  and  western 
states  of  Alabama,  Tennessee,  Arkansas,  Missouri,  Illinois,  Indiana, 
&c.,  as  well  as  the  newly  settled  territories  of  Iowa,  Minnesota,  and 
Wisconsin.  Such  deposits  range,  too,  along  the  southern  side  of 
the  great  chain  of  lakes,  and  are  spread  over  large  tracts  of  New 
York,  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  Virginia,  where  their  stratigra- 
phical  features  have  been  ably  and  elaborately  worked  out,  and  their 
organic  remains  described,  by  American  geologists. 

These  native  authorities  have  honoured  my  labours  by  assimilating 
their  lower  fossiliferous  rocks  to  my  Silurian  System  ;  whilst  all  my 
contemporaries  t  who  have  gone  from  Europe  to  explore  the  United 

*  See  History  of  Canada,  by  Mr.  Fox  Garneau. 

t  See  Bigsby,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lend.  2  ser.  vol.  i.,  and  Quart.  Journal  Geol.  Soc,  vol.  viii. 
p.  400. ;  Featherstonhaugb,  Reports  on  the  Countries  between  the  Missouri  and  Red  Rivers,  and 
of  Wisconsin,  &c.  Washington,  1835-6  [My  old  friend  Mr,  F.  first  made  known  to  me  the 
existence  of  the  Silurian  series  in  the  United  States]  ;  Lyell,  Travels  in  North  America,  with 
general  map,  1841-42,  London,  1843 ;  Lyell's  Geological  Manual,  3d  ed.  p.  351. ;  Castelnau,  Syst^me 
Silurien  de  I'Amerique  Septentrionale,  Paris,  1843 ;  De  Verneuil,  Bulletin  de  la  Socie'te  G^o- 
logique  de  France,  26  series,  vol.  iv.  Paris,  1847 ;  Richardson,  Narrative  of  an  Arctic  Searching 
Expedition,  2  vols.  London,  1851 ;  Logan,  Geological  Survey  of  Canada ;  Reports  to  Legislative 
Assembly,  and  maps ;  Logan  with  Salter  on  the  Rocks  of  Lower  Canada,  Brit.  Assoc.  Rep.  1852, 
p.  59.;  Quart.  Joum.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  2d  ser.  vol.  ix. ;  Ferdinand  Roemer,  Texas  und  die 
physischen  verhaltnisse  des  landes,  Bonn,  1849,  with  geological  map ;  Desor,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc. 
Fr.  2d  ser.  vol.  ix.  p.  342. ;  and  lastly,  M.  Jules  Marcou,  "  Geological  Map  and  Description  of 
the  United  States  and  British  North  America,"  Boston,  1853.  This  last-mentioned  author,  a 
Swiss  by  birth,  has  condensed  the  results  of  the  labours  of  the  numerous  American  geologists, 
and  has  dedicated  this  work  to  his  friend  Agassiz,  who  has  thrown  so  much  new  light  on  the 
natural  history  of  his  adopted  country.   After  a  joint  personal  survey,  they  have  followed  a 


412  SILUKIA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

States,  or  the  adjacent  territories,  have  recognized  Silurian  rocks, 
both  Lower  and  Upper,  followed  by  deposits  of  Devonian  and  Car- 
boniferous age.  In  the  Canadas,  where  Bigsby  and  others  were 
his  precursors,  Logan,  the  director  of  the  geological  survey,  has 
mapped  enormous  tracts  both  of  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian  rocks ; 
whilst  K-ichardson,  triumphing  over  all  the  obstacles  of  the  incle- 
ment north,  has  followed  Silurian  limestones  along  the  western  flank 
of  the  granitic  chain  from  Lake  Winnipeg  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Mackenzie  river.  He  has  also  shown  to  how  great  an  extent  they 
wrap  round  the  huge  granitic  nucleus  of  North  America,  and  form 
the  edges  of  the  continent  towards  the  Arctic  Sea.  In  many  of  the 
polar  islands,  too,  Silurian  fossils  have  been  detected  by  the  skilful 
navigators  who  have  sailed  in  search  of  Franklin. 

I  shall  cull,  in  the  sequel,  a  few  data  from  some  of  these 
British  authorities ;  but  let  me  first  allude  to  those  tracts  which, 
through  the  labours  of  American  geologists,  have  been  rendered 
classical  in  our  science,  and  where  the  types  of  comparison  have  been 
the  most  sedulously  and  accurately  described.*    The  state  of  New 

classification  which  is  in  harmony  with  the  published  opinions  of  the  above-mentioned  writers 
and  of  the  native  geologists.  The  small  book  and  map  of  Marcou  embraces  too  the  facts 
derived  from  the  extensive  new  surveys  of  Dale  Owen,  Logan,  and  others.  The  work  also 
contains  a  list  of  all  the  writers  on  American  geology,  together  with  general  transverse  sections, 
and  plates  of  the  fossils  of  each  group,  from  the  Lower  Silurian  or  oldest,  to  the  Tertiary  or 
youngest  division.    It  will  prove,  I  doubt  not,  of  great  use  to  all  travellers. 

*  My  contemporaries  in  America,  whose  labours  I  so  highly  estimate,  will  readily  under- 
stand that  in  a  work  which  is  limited  to  the  general  history  of  the  palaeozoic  rocks,  and  spe- 
cially to  those  of  Europe,  I  have  no  space  to  render  justice  to  the  numerous  able  writings  which 
treat  of  those  tracts  of  the  United  States  or  the  British  Colonies,  where  such  palaeozoic  rocks  are 
not  developed.  Thus,  the  works  of  Hitchcock,  whose  description  of  the  structure  of  his  native 
state,  Massachusetts,  and  the  accompanying  map,  are  models  of  geological  monography,  —  of 
Dana,  whose  insight  into  the  natural  history  of  zoophytes,  and  whose  philosophic  reflections  on 
the  outlines  of  the  earth,  have  secured  for  him  a  wide  reputation,  —  and  the  various  contri- 
butions to  the  excellent  volumes  of  my  friend  Professor  Silliman,  —  must  now  be  passed  over ; 
although,  if  general  geology  were  my  object,  they  would  be  eagerly  appealed  to.  Nor  will  the 
reader  find  in  the  text,  any  allusion  to  the  labours  of  some  authors  who  have  been  highh'  useful 
in  building  up  the  now  well-established  series  of  the  older  formations ;  such  as  Maclure,  Eaton, 
Troost,  Emmons,  Perceval,  Vanuxem,  Conrad,  Jackson,  Foster,  Dawson,  Thompson,  Whitney, 


Chap.  XVI.]  ORDER  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES.  413 

York,  for  example,  presents  a  noble  series  of  palaeozoic  deposits,  laid 
open  on  the  banks  of  the  several  rivers  which  there  flow  from  west 
to  east.  Examining  these  river  banks,  the  geologists  of  that  state 
have  been  enabled  to  describe  a  detailed  order,  which  is  remarkable 
for  its  symmetry  and  unbroken  condition  from  the  base  of  the  Lower 
Silurian  to  the  coal  measures  included ;  the  whole  being  arranged  in 
slightly  inclined  and  conformable  strata. 

It  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  work  to  endeavour  to  compare  with 
European  deposits  all  the  local  subdivisions  (about  eighteen  in 
number,  and  of  very  unequal  dimensions)  of  which  the  Silurian 
system,  as  described  by  Mr.  James  Hall,  is  composed  in  the  state  of 
New  York.  Independent  of  these  numerous  subdivisions,  the  lower 
portion  of  the  series  is  admitted  by  the  American  authorities  to  be 
divisible,  as  in  Europe,  into  two  groups,  each  of  which  is  charac- 
terized by  peculiar  fossils.  Thus,  from  the  "  Potsdam  Sandstone," 
or  base  of  the  whole  fossiliferous  series,  up  to  the  slates  and  are- 
naceous schists  overlying  the  Trenton  limestone,  the  group  so 
composed  represents  the  Lower  Silurian.  In  this  view,  Lyell, 
de  Verneuil,  and  Sharpe  agree  with  the  United  States'  geologists. 
In  the  lowest  of  these  deposits,  at  Potsdam,  a  small  Lingula  (L. 
antiqua.  Hall)  was,  for  a  long  time,  the  only  fossil  known,  except 
fucoids,  and  abundant  traces  of  marine  worms  (Scolithus  linearis). 
Subsequently,  foot-prints  of  a  large  nondescript  animal  were  dis- 
covered in  rocks  of  a  similar  age  in  Upper  Canada,  on  the  north 
bank  of  Lake  Ontario.  In  the  first  instance,  those  markings  were 
supposed  to  have  been  made  by  the  feet  of  a  chelonian  reptile.  But 
a  further  examination  of  numerous  casts  taken  from  the  footmarks, 
and  brought  to  England  by  the  zeal  of  their  discoverer  Logan, 
induced  Professor  Owen  to  refer  them  to  crustaceans,  —  the  class  of 

and  others.  The  few  works  above  referred  to  are  necessarily  those  in  which  the  authors  have 
dilated  on  the  subjects  which  are  specially  treated  of  in  this  volume,  i.  e.  comparative  views  of 
palaeozoic  geology. 


414  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

animals  which  is  most  commonly  met  with  in  rocks  of  this  age. 
This  view  being  now  adopted,  we  have  evidence  of  a  gigantic 
protozoic  crustacean,  probably  allied  to  the  Limulus  or  king  crab. 

The  great  mineral  distinction  between  the  rocks  which  imme- 
diately lie  upon  this  true  Silurian  base,  as  compared  with  those 
of  like  age  in  Britain,  is  the  much  greater  prevalence  of  limestone. 
A  calcareous  sandstone,  called  the  "calciferous  sand-rock,"  is  suc- 
ceeded by  the  Chazy,  Bird's  eye,  and  Black  River  limestones,  and 
these  are  at  once  followed  by  the  great  Trenton  limestone  with  its 
associated  schists  (Utica  slate  and  the  Hudson  River  group).  In 
the  lowest  of  these  calcareous  masses  —  the  Chazy  limestone,  the 
peculiar  genus  Maclurea  (see  the  figure,  p.  193.)  is  found,  together 
with  some  corals,  Bryozoa,  and  a  few  Trilobites  (Illaenus,  Asaphus, 
&;c.) ;  and  the  limestones  which  succeed,  and  are  more  or  less  con- 
nected with  it  by  their  organic  remains,  contain  many  enormous 
Orthoceratites,  the  singular  cephalopod  genus  Gonioceras  of  Hall, 
several  univalve  shells  (Murchisonia,  Scalites,  &c.),  besides  some 
OrthidaB,  and  other  brachiopods. 

The  deposit  above  these,  or  the  Trenton  limestone,  has  been  fairly 
paralleled  with  the  Llandeilo  limestone ;  and,  as  in  that  British 
formation,  the  number  of  trilobites,  gasteropods,  and  brachiopods 
increases  vastly  when  compared  with  the  inferior  deposits.  Besides 
the  large  Asaphus  (Isotelus)  gigas,  the  characteristic  fossil  of  the 
stratum,  Trinucleus  concentricus  occurs,  with  the  genera  Cheirurus, 
Lichas,  Phacops,  and  Calymene.  Among  the  shells,  Orthis  striatula 
(foss.  19.  f.  3.  p.  185.),  Orthis  biforatus  or  lynx  {ib.  f.  4.),  0.  porcata 
(ib.  f.  5.)  (occidentalis.  Hall),  and  Bellerophon  bilobatus  (PI.  10 
f.  8.),  are  all  Lower  Silurian  fossils,  and  characteristic  of  the  same 
rocks  in  Britain,  Scandinavia,  and  Russia.  The  Lower  Silurian 
character  of  this  limestone  is  maintained,  too,  by  the  presence  of 
numerous  species  of  Lituites,  Orthoceratites,  and  large  plaited 
Orthides,  which  are  like  those  of  Europe,  without  being  identical. 


Chap.  XVL] 


ORDER  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES. 


415 


The  Trenton  limestone  is  overlaid,  throughout  a  considerable  tract 
in  North  America,  by  the  Utica  slates,  which  are  full  of  their  cha- 
racteristic trilobite  Triarthrus  Beckii ;  and  these  are  covered  by  a 
greywacke  schist  (the  Hudson  Eiver  group)  containing  many  grap- 
tolites  and  most  of  the  fossils  of  the  Trenton  rock,  with  some  new 
species. 

M.  de  Yerneuil,  who  has  closely  examined  the  collections  and 
visited  the  localities  of  the  American  fossils,  has  compared  them  * 
with  those  of  Europe.  He  considers  the  above-mentioned  formations, 
which  constitute  the  major  part  of  the  "  Champlain  division"  of  the 
United  States'  geologists,  to  be  equivalents  of  the  Lower  Silurian 
group  f ;  and  that  the  graptolite  schists  of  the  Hudson  Kiver,  above 
which  the  fossil  types  of  the  older  era  disappear,  form  the  limit 
between  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian.  He  therefore  connects  the 
conglomerates  and  sandstones  of  Oneida  and  Medina  with  the  Upper 
Silurian,  of  which  they  form  the  base.  Conrad  would  include  a 
part  of  this  series  —  the  Medina  sandstone  —  in  the  lower  division,  to 
which  it  has  a  great  resemblance  in  lithological  character;  while 
Hall  and  most  other  American  authors  are  very  distinctly  of  opinion 
that  the  "  Clinton  group"  forms  the  base  of  the  upper  division  in  the 
United  States.  It  is  characterized,  nevertheless,  by  the  typical  Pen- 
tamerus  oblongus,  which  is  never  found  in  any  of  the  succeeding 
strata.  His  figures,  lately  published,  show  that  this  persistent  fossil 
attained  dimensions  quite  as  grand  in  the  old  seas  of  America  as  in 
our  own  country.  (See  Preface,  and  pp.  98,  99.) 

The  chief  or  central  mass  of  Upper  Silurian  limestone  in  North 

*  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  Fr.  2d  ser.  vol.  iv.  p.  646. ;  a  most  instructive  memoir. 

f  Out  of  45  fossil  mollusca,  chiefly  brachiopods,  brought  home  by  Sir  C.  Lyell 
from  the  Lower  Silurian  of  North  America,  14,  or  about  30  per  cent.,  were  identi- 
fied by  Mr.  D.  Sharpe  as  species  common  to  Europe  and  America.  Among  these 
are  the  common  British  types,  Leptasna  sericea,  Orthis  biforata,  O.  parva  (ele- 
gantula),  Bellerophon  bilobatus,  &c.  See  Sharpe  on  the  Palaeozoic  Rocks  of 
North  America,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  vol.  iv.  p.  151. 


416  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

America  is  that  of  Niagara,  which,  unquestionably,  is  of  the  same 
age  as  that  of  Wenlock  and  Dudley  in  England,  or  of  Gothland 
in  the  Baltic.  This  rock  appears  to  contain  a  greater  number, 
than  the  Lower  Silurian  strata,  of  fossils  identical  with  those  of 
Europe.  Among  these  are  such  forms  as  Calymene  Blumenbachii, 
Homalonotus  delphinocephalus,  Bumastus  Barriensis,  Rhynchonella 
cuneata,  R.  Wilsoni,  Pentamerus  galeatus,  Orthis  elegantula,  0.  hy- 
brida,  Orthoceras  annulatum,  Hypanthocrinus  decor  us  Bellerophon 
dilatatus.  (See  chaps.  8  and  9.)  Some  of  the  same  large  corals, 
also,  prevail,  as  in  Europe, — those  wjiich  may  have  been  capable  of 
forming  reefs,  such  as  Favosites  Gothlandica,  F.  alveolaris,  and  the 
chain-coral.    There  are  also  many  peculiar  species. 

The  lower  formations  of  the  next  overlying  or  Helderberg  division, 
up  to  the  higher  Pentamerus  limestone  inclusive  *,  constitute  (accord- 
ing to  M.  de  Yerneuil)  the  probable  equivalents  of  the  Ludlow 
rocks.  But  the  line  of  demarcation  between  these  deposits  and 
those  beneath  them  is  also  drawn  with  difficulty ;  as  must,  indeed,  be 
the  case  in  countries  where  the  succession  is  symmetrical  and  undis- 
turbed. Again,  the  much  greater  abundance  of  calcareous  matter  in 
this  division  than  exists  in  our  own  Ludlow  rocks,  and  the  absence 
of  that  muddy  and  sandy  matrix  which  characterizes  those  strata  in 
Britain,  have  necessarily  given  to  the  whole  group  more  the  character 
of  the  Wenlock  formation —  a  feature  which,  as  we  have  already  seen, 
is  dominant  in  Gothland,  Bussia,  Bohemia,  &c. 

Devonian  Rocks.  —  The  base  of  the  Devonian  rocks  of  the  United 
States  has  recently  been  placed  lower  than  it  was  in  the  earlier  com- 
parisons with  European  deposits.  Seeing  that  a  mass  of  sandstones 
and  conglomerates  had  there  been  called  "  Old  Red  Sandstone,"  it 
was  natural,  in  the  first  instance,  for  geologists  to  suppose,  that  the 

*  These  consist  in  ascending  order  of  the  Onondaga  Salt  group,  the  Water- 
Lime  group,  Pentamerus  limestone,  Delthyris  shaly  limestone,  Encrinal  limestone, 
and  Upper  Pentamerus  limestone. 


Chap.  XVI.]        DEVONIAN  ROCKS. — UNITED  STATES.  417 

Devonian  series  in  North  America  did  not  descend  far  beneath 
this  rock.  But  judging  from  the  included  fossils,  such  as  goniatites, 
identical  with  those  of  the  duchy  of  Nassau  in  Germany,  with 
Murchisonia  bilineata,  Productus  subaculeatus,  Athyris  concentrica, 
and  other  fossils,  M.  de  Verneuil  has  included  in  this  group  the 
Chemung  rocks,  the  Hamilton  and  Marcellus  shales,  and  the  CUff 
limestone  of  Ohio  and  Indiana  (Corniferous  and  Onondaga  limestones). 
The  last-mentioned  contain  fossil  fishes  analogous  to  those  of 
Scotland,  besides  some  characteristic  Devonian  shells.  Again,  the 
occurrence  of  an  ichthyolite  of  the  genus  Asterolepis  in  the  Schoharrie 
grit  of  New  York,  necessarily  placed  that  rock  also  in  the  Devonian 
series;  and,  finally,  Mr.  J.  Hall  agreed  with  M.  de  Yerneuil  by 
even  including  in  the  same  group,  the  Oriskany  sandstone  with  its 
large  Spirifers,  analogous  to  those  of  the  Rhine  —  fossils  almost  un- 
known in  true  Silurian  rocks.  The  Devonian  base  in  America  is, 
therefore,  similar  to  that  of  the  Rhenish  provinces  (p.  367.). 

As  fossil  fishes  have  everywhere  proved  the  most  exact  chrono- 
meters of  the  age  of  rocks,  the  occurrence  of  Asterolepis,  a  genus 
common  in  the  lower  beds  of  this  epoch  in  Scotland,  and  the  inter- 
mixture of  other  ichthyoHtes,  identical  with  those  of  Scotland,  with 
shells  of  the.  Eifel  and  of  Devonshire,  are  to  me  the  most  convincing 
proofs  that  these  diversified  deposits  in  North  America  (like  those  of 
Russia,  the  Rhenish  provinces,  and  Devonshire)  are  simply  equivalents, 
in  time,  of  the  very  grand  British  deposits  called  Old  Red  Sandstone. 
For  it  must  be  recollected,  that  under  this  term,  and  particularly 
in  Scotland,  are  included  conglomerates,  sandstones,  grey  schists, 
limestones,  and  flagstones,  as  well  as  sandstones  of  both  red  and 
whitish-yellow  colours;  in  all,  many  thousand  feet  thick.  (Seep. 
246.,  et  seq.)  A  further  reason  for  placing  the  Oriskany  sandstone 
at  the  base  of  the  Devonian  rocks  of  New  York  consists  in  the 
clear  indications  of  its  having  been  deposited  in  excavations  of  the  in- 
ferior stratum,  as  explained  by  Mr.  J.  Hall.   This  phenomenon  marks- 

E  E 


418  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

£^  previous  denudation,  and  the  commencement  of  a  new  series. 
M.  de  Yerneuil  further  reminds  us,  that  the  Pterinaea  fasciculata, 
Spirlfer  macropterus,  and  Pleurodictyum  problematicum  of  America, 
are  fossils  typical  of  the  bottom  Devonian  beds  of  the  Rhine. 

In  one  portion  of  theCanadas,  Mr.  Logan  has  estimated  the  Devonian 
rocks  to  have  a  thickness  of  7000  feet ;  and  in  the  state  of  New  York 
they  occupy  a  space  more  considerable  than  the  Silurian.  But  this 
Devonian  series  of  micaceous  sandstones  and  schists  thins  out,  as 
it  passes  westwards  into  the  states  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  and  Ken- 
tucky, and  disappears  entirely  on  the  Mississippi,  where  the  carbo- 
niferous strata  repose  at  once  on  those  of  Silurian  age. 

Carboniferous  Rocks,  —  The  Carboniferous  rocks  are,  as  is  now 
well  known,  developed  in  the  United  States,  in  basins  of  vaster 
dimensions  than  in  any  part  of  Europe.  Through  their  included 
fossils,  both  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms,  the  American 
strata  are  absolutely  identified  with  the  deposits  of  like  age  in 
Europe.  Great  masses  of  sandstone  and  schists,  once  considered  to 
be  Devonian,  and  so  coloured  in  early  geological  maps  of  the 
United  States,  have  been  shown  by  M.  de  Yerneuil  to  be,  from  their 
imbedded  fossils,  of  Carboniferous  age.  These  masses,  which  are  of 
considerable  thickness,  form  the  true  base  of  the  carboniferous  rocks 
of  North  America,  and  are  probably  the  equivalents  of  much  of  the 
yellow  sandstone  of  Ireland,  as  well  as  of  certain  rocks  in  "West- 
phalia, which  were  formerly  classed  with  the  '  Grauwacke,'  but  are 
now  known  to  be  the  inferior  carboniferous  beds  of  the  Rhenish  pro- 
vinces. (See  p.  376.) 

Next  follows  the  limestone  (Mountain  limestone  of  the  early  English 
geologists),  including  many  varieties  of  Productus ;  viz.  P.  semireti- 
culatus,  P.  Cora,  P..  punctatus,  &c.,  with  species  of  Bellerophon, 
Goniatites,  Spirlfer,  and  Terebratula,  known  not  only  in  Britain,  and 
in  many  parts  of  the  continents  of  Europe  and  Asia,  but  also  in  lati- 
tudes extending  from  the  polar  regions  far  to  the  south  of  the  equator. 


Chap.  XVI.]  CARBONIFEROUS  ROCKS. — UNITED  STATES.  419 

The  same  may  be  said  with  regard  to  the  Foraminifera,  a  group 
of  which  few  traces  occur  in  the  lower  palseozoic  strata ;  for  the  very- 
same  species  (Fusulina  cylindrica),  which  so  abounds  in  Southern 
Russia,  is  also  found  in  the  carboniferous  rocks  of  N.  America. 

The  lamelliferous  corals  (Zaphrentis,  Lithostrotion,  Lonsdaleia,  &c.) 
are  not  absent ;  but  they  are  chiefly  of  species  distinct  from  those  of 
Europe ;  and  some  of  the  forms  of  this  group  most  characteristic  of 
the  old  continent  (Syringopora,  Amplexus,  &c.)  appear  to  be  absent 
from  those  of  the  new. 

It  is  unnecessary  here  to  dilate  upon  the  vast  overlying  productive 
coal  fields,  which  occupying  distinct  basins  of  stupendous  dimensions, 
have  been  described  by  numerous  native  authors,  and  have  been  so 
well  depicted  to  us  by  Lyell  and  Dawson.  But  I  must  advert 
to  the  great  similarity  —  nay,  identity  —  between  the  plants  of 
these  vast  coal  deposits  and  those  of  Europe.  It  is  truly  a  feature 
highly  worthy  of  the  special  notice  of  geologists,  that  at  this  early 
period  the  same  species  of  gigantic  plants  were  spread  over  an  enor- 
mous area  of  the  earth's  surface,  which,  from  the  nature  of  its  vege- 
tation must,  therefore,  have  been  under  the  same  conditions  of 
atmosphere  and  climate,  if  not  of  physical  outline. 

This  short  notice  of  the  development  of  the  earlier  fossiliferous 
rocks  in  the  United  States,  cannot  be  concluded  without  a  special 
allusion  to  some  recently  made  important  additions  to  our  knowledge. 
The  researches  of  Mr.  James  Hall,  as  recorded  in  his  work  on  the 
palaeontology  of  the  state  of  New  York*,  have  shown  that,  with 
increased  observation,  the  diflficulty  is  great  (except  for  short  dis- 
tances and  in  limited  tracts),  in  drawing  an  arbitrary  line  between 
the  lower  and  upper  divisions  of  the  Silurian  System.  The  thin- 
ning out  or  thickening  of  the  subdivisions  termed  Medina  sandstone, 
and  the  Clinton  and  Niagara  groups,  are  accompanied  by  just 
the  same  kind  of  interlacing  and  overlapping  of  the  fossil  types, 

*  Part  VI.  vol.  ii.  1852,  p.  3. 
E  E  2 


420  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

which  has  been  observed,  to  a  greater  extent,  in  the  British  Isles. 
Several  species,  says  Mr.  Hall,  known  before  only  in  the  lower 
division  are  now  found  at  the  base  of  the  higher  group.  But, 
before  we  can  speak  of  the  number  of  species  which  range  from 
the  Lower  into  the  Upper  Silurian,  all  the  older  fossils  of  North 
America  must  have  been  examined  and  compared,  as  those  of  our 
own  country  have  been.  Even,  however,  in  the  one  state  of  New 
York  we  learn,  that  Bellerophon  bilobatus,  Orthis  lynx,  Stropho- 
mena  (Leptasna)  alternata,  and  some  other  forms  which  are  common 
to  Europe  and  America,  and  are  abundant  shells  in  the  Lower  Silurian, 
are  found  in  the  higher  part  of  the  Medina  sandstone,  which  in  that 
country  is  intimately  united  with  the  upper  division. 

The  same  elaborate  work  of  Mr.  Hall  must  be  consulted  for  the 
figures  of  many  species  of  fucoids  common  to  the  Medina  sandstone 
last  noticed,  and  the  associated  Clinton  group.  Numerous  tracks  or 
trails  of  gasteropods  and  Crustacea  also  occur,  indicating  that  the 
sediment  so  marked  was  accumulated  in  shallow  water,  or  under 
ebbing  and  flowing  tides,  and  on  sloping  shores.  To  the  considera- 
tion of  these  data  we  shall  return  in  the  last  chapter,  in  explaining 
the  conditions  under  which  some  of  the  oldest  marine  deposits  were 
formed. 

In  the  mean  time,  I  may  be  permitted  to  doubt  one  only  of  the 
many  valuable  inferences  of  Mr.  J.  Hall,  —  viz.  that  any  fossil  fishes 
have  yet  been  discovered  in  the  lower  members  of  the  Upper  Silurian 
rocks,  or  the  Clinton  and  Niagara  limestones  of  the  United  States. 
The  supposed  fragments  of  bones  or  fish  defences  *  in  the  Clinton 
deposit  are  manifestly  much  too  imperfect  and  too  void  of  structure 

*  Pal.,  New  York,  PI.  31.  figs.  6  and  7.  In  speaking  of  the  presence  of  fi^Ii 
remains  in  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Britain,  Mr.  J.  Hall  has,  it  would  appear,  beon 
misled  by  what  is  now  known  to  be  an  erroneous  statement.  (See  p.  320.)  It  has 
been  ascertained,  that  the  supposed  fish  of  the  Llandeilo  or  Bala  rocks  is  a 
zoophyte.  No  trace  of  a  vertebrated  animal,  I  repeat,  has  yet  been  found  in  any 
deposit  beneath  the  upper  Ludlow  rocks.  (See  p.  205,  ante.) 


CiiAP.XVL]  SILUKIAN. — WISCONSm,  IOWA,  MINNESOTA. 


421 


and  form  to  be  so  considered.  And,  in  reference  to  the  more  perfect 
specimens  from  the  Niagara  group  (Onchus  Dewii  *),  the  author  must 
forgive  me  if  I  suggest,  that  it  presents  good  evidence  of  having  belonged 
to  a  crustacean,  and  is  very  like  those  so-called  fish-defences  of  the 
Ludlow  rock,  which  Professor  M'Coy  has  removed  to  the  crusta- 
cean genus  Leptocheles.  (See  p.  236.) f 

Particular  notice  must  here  also  be  taken  of  the  survey  of  the 
extensive  territories  of  Wisconsin,  Iowa,  and  Minnesota,  which, 
ably  conducted  as  it  has  been  by  Dr.  Dale  Owen,  has  extended 
true  palaeozoic  classification  on  a  broad  scale.  The  area  examined 
by  this  author  and  his  associates  Drs.  Norwood  and  Shurman,  is 
much  larger  than  Great  Britain ;  and  by  far  the  greater  portion  of 
its  subsoil  is  referred  by  them  to  the  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Car- 
boniferous rocks.  I  This  magnificent  region  is  traversed  by  the  Mis- 
sissippi in  its  descent  from  the  boundaries  of  British  America  and 
Lake  Superior,  and  is  included  between  that  mighty  river  and  its 
huge  afiluent  the  Missouri.  Surrounding  and  supporting  an  enor- 
mous carboniferous  tract,  the  older  primeval  rocks  rise  out  successively 
in  almost  horizontal  positions.  The  results  of  all  others  which  have 
most  interested  me,  as  proceeding  from  this  grand  survey,  are,  first,  the 

*  Pal,  New  York,  PI.  71. 

t  Having  requested  Mr.  Salter  to  give  me  his  opinion  on  this  subject,  I  subjoin  an  extract 
from  his  letter  to  me :  — 

*  The  specimens  figured  by  Mr.  James  Hall,  and  referred  by  him  to  the  defences  of  fishes, 
seem  at  least  equivocal.  The  fragment  figured  as  such  from  the  '  Clinton  group,'  as  well  as 
that  doubtfully  called  '  the  rib  of  a  vertebrate  animal  ? '  are  in  all  probability  tubes  ofSerpulina 
' —  the  latter  certainly  is  so.  The  Onchus  Dewii,  Hall,  from  the  *  Niagara '  group,  is  undoubt- 
edly one  of  the  hollow  crustacean  spines,  such  as  were  figured  in  the  Silurian  System  as 
Onchus  Murchisoni,  and  which  Professor  M'Coy  endeavoured  to  show  was  a  part  of  the  pincers 
of  some  Limuloid  crustacean.  The  more  perfect  evidence,  however,  which  M.  de  Barrande 
possesses,  and  which  he  has  lately  put  forth,  convinces  me  that  they  are  the  tail-spines  of 
large  Phyllopods,  somewhat  like  Dithyrocaris.  We  are  still,  therefore,  without  evidence  of 
any  fish  below  the  horizon  of  the  Ludlow  rocks.' 

J  This  work,  following  so  many  other  valuable  publications,  is  a  proof  that  the 
senate,  as  well  as  the  state  governments,  have  justly  appreciated  the  value  of 
the  application  of  geological  science  as  a  prelude  to  the  settlement  of  a  new 
country. 

E  E  3 


422 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XVI. 


discovery  of  two  bands,  containing  trilobites,  in  the  lowest  Silurian 
sandstone,  and  next  that  the  organic  forms  of  these  beds  are  considered 
to  be  referable  to  the  primordial  zone  (Barrande),  such  as  it  exists  in 
Bohemia  and  Scandinavia,  or  in  the  '  Lingula  flags'  of  Britain. 
(See  p.  343.)  For,  we  thus  obtain  proofs,  that  the  Potsdam  sandstone, 
in  its  extended  form,  and  as  exhibited  in  these  western  territories  of 
the  United  States,  does  really  contain  the  first  recognizable  group  of 
fossil  animals.* 

The  Lower  Silurian,  so  termed  and  laid  down  on  the  map  by  these 
authors,  consists  in  its  lowest  parts  of  pebble-beds,  grits,  and  sand- 
stone of  red  and  greenish  colours,  which  begin  to  alternate  upwards 
with  magnesian  limestone.  Then,  in  ascending  order,  the  magnesian 
limestones  with  green  grains  (resembling  some  of  the  Russian  Lower 
Silurian)  predominate,  and  are  in  parts  oolitic,  in  other  parts  quart- 
zose  and  cherty.  Again,  sandstones,  usually  white,  recur,  and  are 
surmounted  by  shelly  beds,  which,  in  Iowa  and  Wisconsin,  represent 
the  Trenton  limestone  of  New  York,  or  the  Llandeilo  formation  of 
Britain. 

The  Upper  Silurian  rocks  are  poorly  represented,  in  these  un- 
trodden tracts,  by  what  Dr.  Dale  Owen  terms  the  Upper  Magne- 
sian Limestone,  consisting  of  beds  with  corals  and  Pentameri;  all 
traces  of  the  equivalents  of  the  Ludlow  rocks  being  absent.  The 
Devonian  period  is,  however,  clearly  defined,  particularly  by  its 
broad" winged  Spirifers ;  whilst  the  carboniferous  limestone  is  so 

*  The  Trilobltes  of  this,  the  lowest  fossiliferous  stratum  in  America  (the  Pots- 
dam sandstone),  are  termed  by  Dr.  Owen,— Dikelocephalus,  Lonchocephalus,  &c 
Judging  from  the  drawings,  these  genera  seem  to  be  referable  to  the  same  group 
as  Paradoxides.  They  are  associated  with  Fucoids  and  Lingulae.  M.  Barrande 
informs  me  that,  after  studying  the  work  of  Dr.  Dale  Owen,  he  is  convinced,  that 
the  author  has  established  in  the  New  World  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  the 
primordial  zone  of  Bohemia  and  Sweden,  and  the  same  order  of  succession  upwards 
from  it  into  the  mass  of  the  Silurian  strata,  as  in  Europe.  In  this  view  M.  de 
.Verneuil  and  Mr.  Salter  also  coincide. 


Chap.  XVI.]    SILURIAN  ROCKS  OF  BRITISH  N.  AMERICA.  423 

expanded,  as  to  be  distinctly  referred  to  the  Yoredale  series  of  Phil- 
lips, in  Yorkshire.  The  western  explorations  of  Captain  Stansbury 
to  the  Mormon  territory  and  the  Salt  Lake  of  Utah,  to  which  an 
early  allusion  was  made  (p.  18.),  have  further  shown  us  how  strata, 
charged  with  Devonian  and  Carboniferous  fossils,  extend  to  the  edge 
of  the  Kocky  Mountains,  those  great  northern  limbs  of  the  Andes. 

Silurian  and  other  Palcsozoic  Rocks  of  British  North  America. — 
Old  sedimentary  rocks,  similar  to  those  of  the  United  States,  range 
into  the  British  provinces  of  North  America,  where,  after  a  long  and 
able  survey,  Mr.  Logan  has  shown  that  they  follow  precisely  the 
same  symmetrical  and  unbroken  order,  along  the  northern  shores  of 
the  Lakes  Superior  and  Huron,  as  in  the  contiguous  western  coun- 
tries of  the  United  States.  They  have,  also,  in  their  eastern  divi- 
sion, been  thrown  into  the  same  contorted  and  occasionally  inverted 
order,  as  had  been  indicated  by  the  Professors  H.  &  W.  Rogers,  along 
this  line,  in  more  southern  latitudes.  In  the  opinion  of  those  geologists, 
the  causes  of  the  rapid  curvatures  and  partial  inversions,  by  which 
younger  strata  have  been  so  folded,  as  to  pass  under  those  beds  which 
were  formed  before  them,  were  grand  and  paroxysmal  earthquakes, 
the  greatest  intensity  of  which  has  been  exhibited  where  the  folds 
are  most  rapid  and  numerous.  As  the  intensity  of  the  shock  dimi- 
nished, the  strata  are  supposed  to  have  rolled  on  in  broad  and  regular 
undulations,  thus  resembling  the  waves  of  the  sea  at  a  distance  from 
the  area  of  strongest  vibration.  Although  I  can  here  simply  advert 
to  this  ingenious  explanation,  it  is  satisfactory  to  me,  as  an  historian 
of  the  older  geological  series,  to  find  that,  by  whatever  agency  such 
grand  contortions  were  produced,  these  inverted  strata  of  North 
America,  like  those  of  Europe  already  spoken  of  (p.  377.),  can  be 
followed,  until  they  fold  out  from  their  overturned  positions  and 
regain  their  natural  order.  This  is  explained  in  the  uppermost  of  the 
two  following  sections. 


424  •  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVI. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


N.  AMERICAN  SECTIONS. 


425 


In  Lower  Canada  a  great  dismemberment  is  seen  to  have  taken 
place  between  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  «,  and  the  Upper  Silurian,  h ; 
the  latter  being  conformably  succeeded  by  the  Devonian  and 
Carboniferous  strata.  As  in  Britain  and  other  countries,  this  uncon- 
formity is,  however,  a  local  phenomenon ;  for  Mr.  Logan  himself 
assures  us,  that  in  another  part  of  this  region,  just  as  in  the  west  of 
the  United.  States,  all  the  palasozoic  rocks,  from  the  Potsdam  sand- 
stone or  Silurian  base  to  the  coal  inclusive,  are  strictly  conformable. 
The  only  great  break  in  that  territory,  i.e.  along  the  Lakes  Huron 
and  Superior,  is  between  the  Potsdam  or  lowest  fossil  rock  and  the 
great  wwfossiliferous  and  inferior  mass  of  bluish  shales  with  sand- 
stones, chert,  and  limestones,  which  are  estimated  at  a  thickness  of 
about  12,000  feet.  These,  again,  are  seen,  by  following  them  in 
that  tract  in  a  descending  order,  to  have  been  unconformably  depo- 
sited on  still  older  rocks,  consisting  of  micaceous  and  chloritic  schists, 
gneiss,  and  granitic  rocks.* 

The  oldest  of  these  masses  have  little  connection  with  any  rocks 
which  have  been  spoken  of,  except  in  the  first  chapter  of  this  work ; 
but  the  next  in  ascending  order,  or  the  copper-slates  and  sandstones 
of  the  great  lakes,  have,  to  a  great  extent,  the  same  structure  as 
the  Longmynd  or  ^  bottom  rocks'  of  England.  They  are,  in  truth, 
defined  as  such  by  Mr.  Logan,  being  termed  by  him  the  equivalents 
of  the  Cambrian  of  De  la  Beche,  Kamsay,  and  the  British  Govern- 

*  Mr.  Logan,  who  has  laid  down  a  most  elaborate  and  valuable  geological  map 
of  the  Canadas,  has  pointed  out  some  of  the  chief  incidents  in  the  geology  of  these 
regions  in  his  Reports  of  Progress  to  the  Provincial  Government.  He  also  pub- 
lished a  succinct  view  of  the  whole  ascending  order  in  Upper  Canada.  There,  the 
Lowest  Silurian  rock  does  not  repose  at  once  on  gneiss  and  granite,  as  in  the  above 
section  across  Lower  Canada,  but  is  separated  from  such  rocks  by  the  unfossiliferous 
or  bottom  slaty  rocks  above  noted.  In  the  same  memoir  Mr.  Salter  confirmed 
the  views  of  Mr.  Logan  with  regard  to  the  age  of  the  strata  in  Lower  Canada,  and 
identified  many  fossils  as  equivalents  of  the  New  York  series.  See  Trans. 
Brit.  Ass.  Adv.  of  Science,  1852,  p.  59.,  and  also  Quart.  Geol.  Journ.  vol.  viii. 
p.  199. 


426 


SILURTA. 


[Chap.  XVI. 


ment  Surveyors.  In  England  and  North  Wales  these  old  slaty  rocks 
contain  no  limestone,  but  in  North  America  they  are  interlaced  with  it. 

Again,  whilst  in  Great  Britain  and  Germany  these  bottom  rocks  are 
succeeded  conformably  by  the  Lower  Silurian,  they  have  been  severed 
therefrom  in  America,  as  in  France  and  Ireland,  by  a  grand  disloca- 
tion.* In  thus  appealing  to  the  conditions  in  different  countries,  we 
learn  the  impracticability  of  classifying  sedimentary  deposits  by  the 
lines  of  fracture  and  dismemberment  alone.  But  in  stating  these  facts, 
I  beg  not  to  prejudge  the  question,  so  ingeniously  developed  by  my 
eminent  friend,  M.  Elie  de  Beaumont,  concerning  the  parallel  and 
discordant  directions  of  mountain  chains,  as  typical  of  certain  epochs. 
The  discussion  of  this  topic  would  require  many  chapters,  and  lead 
me  away  from  the  special  objects  of  this  work. 

In  Nova  Scotia  the  older  palaeozoic  rocks  have  not  been  traced,  but 
the  productive  coal  formation  is  there  magnificently  developed,  f 

In  taking  a  general  view  of  the  physical  structure  of  the  northern- 
most portion  of  America,  Richardson  the  great  Arctic  traveller,  con- 
siders that,  on  the  whole,  the  granitic  and  crystalline  rocks  of  the 
central  and  eastern  countries  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  territories  are  sur- 
mounted by  few  other  deposits  on  the  west  and  north,  except  by  masses 
of  Silurian  age,  and  very  young  tertiary  strata.  In  his  graphic 
description  of  the  structure  of  Canada,  Lyell  expresses  the  same 
opinion.  ^  I  seemed,'  says  he,  '  to  have  got  back  to  Norway  and 
Sweden,  where,  as  in  Canada,  gneiss  and  mica  schist,  and  occasionally 

*  M,  Jules  Marcou  speaks  of  various  dislocations,  one  of  the  most  violent  of 
which,  in  the  States,  has  taken  place  between  the  Potsdam  sandstone  and  the 
Trenton  limestone,  a  feature  never  seen  in  the  regions  examined  by  Mr.  Logan. 
The  above  mentioned  Irish  unconformity,  between  Cambrian  and  Lower  Silurian, 
has  just  been  discovered. — March  1854. 

t  For  full  descriptions  of  these  rocks,  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  memoirs 
in  the  Journal  of  the  Geological  Society,  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  Mr.  Dawson,  and 
Mr.  Logan.  I  would  refer  specially  to  the  interesting  fact  dwelt  upon  by  Lyell 
—  the  occurrence  of  a  Batrachian  reptile  (Dendrerpeton  Acadianum,  Owen)  in 
the  erect  stump  of  a  fossil  tree;  and  to  Mr.  Dawson's  last  memoir. — Q.  Journ. 
Geol.  Soc.  vol.  X.  p.  1. 


Chap.  XVI.]  BRITISH  NORTH  AMERICA.  427 

granite,  prevail  over  wide  areas,  while  the  fossiliferous  rocks  belong, 
either  to  the  most  ancient  or  to  the  very  newest  —  to  the  Silurian  or 
to  deposits  so  modern  as  to  contain  exclusively  shells  of  recent 
species.'*  From  the  western  shore  of  Lake  Winnipeg,  a  limestone 
with  gigantic  Orthoceratites  (probably  of  the  age  of  those  described  by 
Dr.  Bigsby  and  Mr.  Stokes  f,  from  the  Upper  Silurian  of  Drummond 
Island),  and  the  strange  fossil  Receptaculites,  was  traced  in  hori- 
zontal sheets  stretching  westwards  over  four  or  five  degrees  of  longi- 
tude. Though  this  plateau  of  limestone  is  separated  from  the  Rocky 
Mountains  by  a  broad  belt  of  the  prairies  of  the  Sasketchewan,  the 
bed  of  that  river  is  full  of  limestone  blocks  which  indicate  the  per- 
sistence of  the  rock.  After  crossing  Me  thy  Portage,  in  lat.  56|, 
Richardson  again  met  with  extensive  limestone  deposits.  The  fossils 
which  were  gathered  from  this  tract  (Productus,  Orthis,  Spirifer, 
&c.)  seem,  however,  to  indicate  an  ascending  order  into  beds  of 
Devonian  and  Carboniferous  age  J,  particularly  in  the  wide  spread  of 
calcareous  matter  along  the  Elk  and  Slave  rivers,  and  upon  the  banks 
of  the  Mackenzie.  Where  the  last-mentioned  river  skirts  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  the  limestones,  more  disturbed  than  in  the  Winnipeg 
basin,  occupy,  says  Richardson,  inclined  and  elevated  ridges,  the 
chief  of  which  he  considers  to  be  Silurian ;  — ridges  which,  on  the 
Great  Bear  Lake  and  the  Coppermine  River,  abut  against  granite. 
In  a  letter  to  myself,  he  adds,  '  I  believe  the  strata  of  sandstone 
and  limestone  on  the  north  coast  of  America  to  be  wholly  Silurian, 
though  fossils  are  scarce.  Towards  the  mouth  of  the  Coppermine 
River  there  are  besides  magnificent  ranges  of  trap  with  ores  of  lead 
and  copper,  including  much  malachite.' 

*  Travels  in  N.  America,  vol.  ii.  p.  124. 

"j*  Bigsby  and  Stokes,  Geol.  Trans.  2nd  ser.  vol.  i.  pi.  25,  &c.  Similar  Orthoce- 
ratites were  found  by  Mr.  Logan  further  to  the  east,  in  rocks  of  Upper  Silurian  age. 

I  A  few  specimens  of  the  fossils  of  these  rocks  are  in  the  British  Museum  ; 
they  are  Upper  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous.  Unluckily  numerous 
fossils  brought  home  by  Sir  John  Richardson  in  1826  have  been  mislaid. 


428 


SILURIA. 


[Chaf.  XVI. 


To  whatever  extent  it  may  be  found  possible  to  separate  the  Silu- 
rian rocks  which  range  along  the  Rocky  Mountains  into  a  Lower  and 
an  Upper  group,  it  would  at  least  appear,  from  the  specimens  which 
have  been  brought  home  by  our  naval  explorers  employed  in  the 
Arctic  expeditions,  that  the  great  mass  of  the  most  northern  rocks 
belong  to  the  Upper  Silurian  group.  This  is  certainly  the  case,  if 
we  judge  from  the  collections  made  during  the  voyages  of  Parry, 
Franklin,  Koss,  Back,  Austin,  and  Oramanney,  and  the  private  ex- 
peditions of  Lady  Franklin,  particularly  those  of  Penny  and  Ingle- 
field.  -The  fossils  brought  home  by  these  commanders,  and  the 
officers  and  gentlemen  accompanying  them,  have  been  examined 
and  described*  by  Mr.  Salter;  and  from  his  scrutiny  it  results, 
that  the  Crustacea  and  mollusca  are  very  similar  to,  and  some  of 
them  identical  with,  those  of  Dudley  or  Gothland.  Among  these 
occur  Encrinurus  laevis,  Angelin ;  Leperditia  Baltica,  His. ;  Penta- 
merus  conchidium,  Dalm. ;  Chonetes  (Leptaena)  lata  ?  V.  Buch ; 
with  Upper  Silurian  forms  of  Orthoceras,  Murchisonia,  Strophomena, 
Orthis,  Rhynconella,  &c.,  besides  Encrinites,  and  very  numerous 
corals,  including  the  chain-coral,  the  Favosites  Gothlandica,  and  some 
other  species  characteristic  of  this  division  of  the  Silurian  system. 

The  same  inference  has  been  drawn  by  the  geologists  who  have 
surveyed  the  rocks,  and  the  naturalists  who  have  examined  the  fossils, 
of  the  northern  edge  of  the  great  granitic  region  of  the  Lawrentine 

*  Appendix  to  Dr.  Sutherland's  Journal  of  Captain  Penny's  Voyage  in  1850-51. 
London,  1852,  vol.  ii.  with  plates  ;  see  also  Quart.  Journ.  Geol,  Soc.,  vol.  ix.  p,  313, 
1853.  The  extent  to  which  the  limestones  of  the  Arctic  regions  are  charged  with 
Silurian  fossils,  was  shown  last  year  by  my  requesting  Mr.  Wy ville  T.  C.  Thomson 
(now  Professor  in  the  Queen's  College,  Cork)  to  break  up  and  examine  the  common 
ballast  brought  home  to  Aberdeen  in  the  Prince  Albert,  one  of  the  private  exploring 
ships  of  Lady  Franklin.  For,  although  these  fragments  of  limestone  were  taken 
without  the  slightest  reference  to  their  organic  contents,  they  were  found  by  that 
naturalist  to  contain  the  following  fossils  :  Rhynconella  Phoca,  Salter  ;  Leperditia 
Baltica,  His. ;  Murchisonia,  2  species ;  Atrypa  reticularis ;  with  fragments  of  other 
genera  and  species  of  shells  and  trilobites. 


Chap.  XVI.]  ARCTIC  SILURIAN  FOSSILS.  429 

or  Canadian  Mountains.  Their  conclusion  is,  that  whilst  on  the 
south  side  there  is  an  inferior  succession  through  crystalline  and 
metamorphic  strata  into  a  copious  and  diversified  Lower  Silurian,  as 
above  explained,  the  northern  or  Hudson's  Bay  territory  is  chiefly 
occupied  by  Upper  Silurian  limestones.  *  This  inference  is  based  on 
the  occurrence,  at  the  base  of  the  whole  fossiliferous  series  in  that 
district,  of  a  profusion  of  corals,  several  of  which  are  characteristic 
of  the  Niagara  and  Onondaga  limestones  (Wenlock  or  Dudley), 
together  with  the  trilobite  Encrinurus  punctatus,  the  shells  Atrypa 
reticularis  and  Pentamerus  oblongus,  and  forms  of  Ormoceras,  and 
several  other  mollusca,  indicative  of  the  lower  portion  of  the  Upper 
Silurian  group. 

Looking,  indeed,  to  that  vast  Arctic  region,  so  little  accessible 
to  any  man  of  science,  the  geologist  has  good  reason  to  be  thankful 
for  the  knowledge  already  obtained,  which  has  enabled  him  to  classify 
the  older  sedimentary  rocks  of  icy  regions,  never  trodden  by  civilized 
man  before  the  present  century. 

In  terminating  this  outline  of  the  succession  of  the  older  fossili- 
ferous rocks  of  America,  let  me  remind  the  reader  of  the  vast  extent 
to  which  this  continent  is  composed  of  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Car- 
boniferous rocks.  In  the  Western  hemisphere,  as  in  Europe,  the 
first  clear  signs  of  life  are  met  with  at  the  same  low  horizon  in  the 
crust  of  the  earth ;  and  the  same  great  groups  are  clearly  distinguish- 
able. We  also  observe,  that  fishes,  which  were  only  called  into  ex- 
istence at  the  end  of  the  Silurian  period,  and  were  of  such  peculiar 
forms  in  the  Devonian  epoch,  become  conspicuous  in  the  carboniferous 
deposits  of  America,  and  exhibit  many  new  types,  including  the  re- 
markable large  sauroid  fishes  of  Agasslz.  Again,  whilst  one  small,  air- 
breathing  reptile  has  alone  been  found  in  the  uppermost  band  of  the 

*  Mr.  Logan  has  found  that  these  limestones  at  the  head  of  Lake  Temiscamang 
include  enormous  blocks  of  the  sandstone  on  which  they  rest ;  so  that,  in  all  pro- 
bability, they  are  littoral  deposits. 


430  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVI. 

Devonian  or  Old  Red  rocks  of  Britain,  the  Carboniferous  rocks  of 
America,  as  well  as  those  of  Europe,  contain  larger  animals  of  this 
class.  ThB  only  essential  difference  between  the  elder  rocks  of  the  two 
hemispheres  is,  that  in  America  no  geologist  has  yet  met  with  any 
indication  of  that  termination  of  palaeozoic  life,  which  in  Europe  is 
marked  by  the  Permian  deposits.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  the 
early  sediments  of  the  West,  having  been  raised  into  the  atmosphere, 
remained  for  a  long  time  in  that  condition ;  whilst  in  our  countries 
the  same  strata  continued  beneath  the  waters  which  sustained  the 
last  remnants  of  primeval  beings. 


431 


CHAPTEK  XVIL 

ON  THE  ORIGINAL  FORMATION  OF  GOLD,  AND  ITS  SUBSEQUENT 
DISTRIBUTION  IN  DEBRIS  OVER  PARTS  OP  THE  EARTH's 
SURFACE. 

Considering  the  great  quantity  of  gold  which  has  recently  been 
found  in  distant  regions,  it  may  be  expected  that  an  author,  who 
during  the  last  ten  years  has  borne  a  part  in  the  discussions  relative  to 
this  phenomenon*,  should  here  devote  a  few  pages  to  so  engrossing  a 
topic.  Avoiding  altogether,  for  the  present,  the  question,  as  to  the 
effect  which  a  great  abundance  of  the  precious  metal  may  exercise 
over  the  destinies  of  mankind,  the  views  now  put  forth  will  chiefly 
relate  to  the  geological  and  mineralogical  conditions  under  which  it 
has  occurred*  As  a  clear  understanding  of  this  point  may  tend,  in 
some  measure,  to  allay  the  fears  of  those  who  think  that  gold  may  be 
discovered  over  regions  vastly  more  enormous  than  the  tracts  to 
which  it  is  restricted,  certain  data  and  arguments  that  I  have  be- 
fore advanced  in  detail,  are  here  brought  together. 

Let  us  first  reflect  upon  the  general  fact,  that  whilst  all  the 
stratified  formations  are  composed  either  of  crystalline  and  palaeozoic 
rocks,  or  of  secondary  and  tertiary  deposits,  gold  has  never  been 

*  See  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  pp.  437.,  et  seq.  Trans.  R.  Geogr.  Soc.  Pre- 
sident's Discourses,  vol.  xiv.,  1844, 1845,  in  the  first  of  which  the  Australian  rocks  were  compared 
\vith  those  of  the  Ural.  Trans.  Royal  Geological  Society,  Cornwall,  1846,  p.  324.,  et  seq.,  in 
which  Cornish  tin  miners  were  incited  to  emigrate  and  work  for  gold  in  Australia.  Report  of 
the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  1849  (Trans,  of  Sections,  p.  60.). 
Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Institution,  March,  1850.  Quarterly  Review,  1850,  vol.  Ixxxvii.,  Article 

Siberia  and  California,"  p.  39.  Quart.  Journ.  Geo.  Soc.  Lond.,  vol.  viii.  p.  134.  And  lastly, 
"  Further  Papers  on  the  Recent  Discovery  of  Gold  in  Australia,"  presented  to  Parliament 
Aug.  16.  1853,  p.  43. ;  including  my  correspondence,  in  1848,  with  Her  Majesty's  Secretary  for 
the  Colonies,  on  Australian  gold. 


432  SILtJRIA.  Chap.  XVII.] 

found  in  any  appreciable  quantity  in  either  of  the  two  last-mentioned 
classes  of  strata.  The  vast  areas,  therefore,  which  are  covered  by  all 
the  formations  younger  than  those  whose  relations  we  have  been 
considering,  are  excluded  from  the  application  of  our  reasoning  ;  and 
every  one  who  lives  amid  such  rocks  may  at  once  be  assured,  that 
he  can  never  profitably  extract  gold  from  them. 

Having  thus  cleared  the  ground,  we  may  first  proceed  to  consider 
the  nature  and  limits  of  the  rich  gold-bearing  rocks,  and  then  oflPer 
proofs,  that  the  chief  auriferous  wealth,  as  derived  from  them,  occurs 
in  superficial  detritus. 

Appealing  to  the  structure  of  the  different  mountains,  which  at 
former  periods  have  afforded  or  still  afford  any  notable  amount  of 
gold,  we  find  in  all  a  general  agreement.  Whether,  referring  to 
past  history,  we  cast  our  eyes  to  the  countries  watered  by  the  sources 
of  the  golden  Tagus,  to  the  Phrygia  and  Thrace  of  the  Greeks  and 
Romans,  to  the  Bohemia  of  the  Middle  Ages,  to  tracts  in  Britain 
which  w^ere  worked  in  old  times,  and  are  now  either  abandoned  or 
very  slightly  productive,  or  to  those  chains  in  America  and  Australia 
which,  previously  unsearched,  have,  in  our  times,  proved  so  rich,  we 
invariably  find  the  same  constants  in  nature.  In  all  these  lands, 
gold  has  been  imparted  abundantly  to  the  ancient  rocks  only,  whose 
order  and  succession  we  have  traced,  or  their  associated  eruptive 
rocks.  The  most  usual  original  position  of  the  metal  is  in  quartzose 
veinstones  that  traverse  altered,  palasozoic  slates,  frequently  near  their 
junction  with  eruptive  rocks.  Sometimes,  however,  it  is  also  shown 
to  be  diffused  through  the  body  of  such  rocks,  whether  of  igneous  or 
of  aqueous  origin.  The  stratified  rocks  of  the  highest  antiquity,  such 
as  the  oldest  gneiss  and  quartz  rocks  (like  those,  for  example,  of 
Scandinavia  and  the  Northern  Highlands  of  Scotland),  have  very 
seldom  borne  gold;  but  the  sedimentary  accumulations  which  fol- 
loAved,  or  the  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  (particularly 
the  first  of  these  three),  have  been  the  deposits  which,  in  the  tracts 


Chap.  XVII.] 


GOLD  IN  BRITAIN. 


433 


where  they  have  undergone  a  metamorphosis  or  change  of  structure  by 
the  influence  of  igneous  agency,  or  other  causes,  have  been  the  chief 
sources  whence  gold  has  been  derived. 

The  British  examples,  comparatively  small  in  produce  as  they 
have  been,  will  be  first  briefly  alluded  to ;  because  the  reader  can  at 
once  refer,  in  the  coloured  map  of  this  work,  to  two  districts  of  Wales 
wherein  gold  has  been  found,  and  in  one  of  which  it  is  now  in  the 
course  of  extraction. 

Gold  in  Britain. — In  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  about  ten  miles  west  of 
Llandovery,  at  a  spot  called  Gogofau,  near  Piimp-saint,  large  veinstones 
of  quartz  in  slaty  masses  were  cut  into  by  the  Romans,  who  excavated 
lofty  galleries,  which  are  still  open.  That  enterprising  people  evidently  de- 
rived gold  from  the  portions  of  the  veinstones  in  which  much  sulphuret  of 
iron  is  diffused;  since  many  gold  ornaments  have  been  found  at  the  adjacent 
Roman  station  of  Cynfil-Cayo,  with  traces  of  former  aqueducts,  probably 
to  convey  water  to  wash  the  gold.  Even  the  stones  *  and  troughs  used  in 
grinding  the  hard  matrix  are  yet  visible. 

In  North  Wales,  where  similar  but  older  strata  have  been  more  crystallized, 
and  infinitely  more  penetrated  by  igneous  rocks,  gold  has  not  only  been 
obtained  in  ancient  times,  but  is  still  found  to  a  certain  extent.  In 
Merionethshire  some  of  the  older  slaty  rocks  were  ten  years  ago  announced 
to  be  auriferous  by  Mr.  A.  Dean.f  The  district  then  referred  to,  which 
lies  to  the  north  of  Dolgelly,  and  to  the  north  and  west  of  the  small 
river  Mowddach,  has  lately  been  resurveyed  by  Professor  Ramsay,  who 
has  described  the  precise  geological  relations  and  mineral  character  of 
several  metalliferous  lodes,  which,  though  poor  in  lead  and  copper,  are, 
more  or  less,  impregnated  with  gold.  J    The  lodes  are  subordinate  to  the 

*  See  Silurian  System,  p.  367.  At  the  time  of  the  publication  of  that  work  (1839)  I  had  not 
visited  the  Ural  Mountains,  and  was  little  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  gold-bearing  rocks 
and  the  methods  employed  for  the  extraction  of  the  metal,  or  I  should  at  once  have  recognized 
as  certain,  what  I  only  ventured  to  suggest,  that  the  rock  might  formerly  have  been  quarried 
for  the  gold  it  contained.  Suspecting  that  some  traces  of  gold  might  be  detected  in  the  pyritous 
refuse  of  the  quartz  rock,  I  submitted  a  little  of  it  to  the  late  eminent  chemist.  Dr.  Turner ; 
but  he  could  not  detect  any  trace  of  the  precious  metal.  Recently,  however.  Prof.  Warington 
Smyth,  aided  by  Dr.  Percy,  has  detected  a  small  quantity  of  gold  diffused  in  the  quartz  vein- 
stone. See  also  Memoirs  of  the  Geological  Survey,  vol.  i,,  with  an  exposition  of  the  various, 
relations  of  gold,  by  Ramsay,  E.  Forbes,  Jukes,  Percy,  Warington  Smyth,  Hunt,  &c. 

t  Trans.  Brit.  Assoc.  Adv.  of  Science,  1844,  Proc.  of  Sect.  p.  56. 

X  Quart.  Journal,  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  (about  to  be  printed). 

F  F 


434 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XVII. 


Lingula  flags  or  lowest  Silurian  of  the  Government  surveyors,  and  these 
slaty  and  arenaceous  rocks  being  there  traversed  by  trap  dykes  (including 
magnetic  greenstone),  and  being  also  bounded  by  a  large  mass  of  eruptive 
rock,  are  much  altered,  and  often  in  a  talcose  and  chloritic  state,  with 
veins  of  quartz  and  much  disseminated  iron  pyrites.  The  principal  loca- 
lities where  the  gold  has  been  most  observed  are  Cwm-eisen-isaf  and 
Dol-y-frwynog.  One  of  the  veinstones  at  the  latter  place  consists  of  white 
saccharoid  quartz,  in  some  of  which  small  flakes  of  gold  are  distinctly 
visible  to  the  naked  eye. 

Professor  Ansted,  who  has  examined  the  same  gold  veins  in  situ,  had 
reported  to  me,  that  at  Dol-y-frwynog,  the  gold  is  disseminated  both  in 
grains  and  in  irregular  bands  or  veins,  parallel  to  the  Lower  Silurian  schists, 
and  contiguous  to  a  poor  lode  of  copper  ore  ;  the  whole  lying  near  to  the 
junction  of  a  greenstone  with  the  slaty  rocks.  The  auriferous  bands,  he 
says,  are  made  up  of  numerous  threads  of  quartz  and  sulphate  of  barytes, 
which,  besides  the  grains  and  flakes  of  gold,  contain  crystals  of  galena 
and  copper  pyrites.  The  gold  is  partially  present  to  such  an  extent 
(he  adds),  that  in  a  small  quantity  removed  by  himself  from  one  of  the 
threads  or  thin  veins  (and  richer  specimens  have  since  been  found)  the 
proportion,  upon  analysis,  was  that  of  60  oz.  to  the  ton  !  * 

At  a  few  places  in  Cornwall f  and  Devonshire,  gold  has  been  long  known 
to  exist  in  small  quantities,  both  in  the  matrix  of  mineral  lodes  and  occa- 
sionally in  accumulations  of  rolled  materials.  One  of  the  spots  which  now 
promises,  as  is  said,  to  be  most  productive,  is  the  Poltimore  mine,  near 
North  Molton,  Devon,  where  certain  schists  of  the  age  of  the  uppermost 
Devonian  or  lowest  Carboniferous  strata  are  mineralized  to  some  extent, 
and  were  formerly  worked  for  copper.  There,  the  matrix  or  gossan  of  the 
lode  is  suffused  by  particles  of  gold,  but  so  minute  as  to  be  for  the  most 
part  invisible  to  the  naked  eye.  If  this  condition  be  found  persistent 
throughout  considerable  masses  of  rock,  the  proprietors  may  doubtless 
derive  considerable  profit  from  such  mines ;  particularly  when  the  gold- 

*  As  gold  often  occurs  in  small  strings  or  threads  which,  though  rich  at  the  surface,  are  soon 
lost  in  the  body  of  the  rock,  time  alone  can  determine  the  value  of  these  British  mines  —  i.e. 
whether  some  of  them  are  to  prove  remunerative,  now  that  new  processes  for  extracting  the 
ore  have  been  discovered. 

f  Mr.  S.  R.Pattison  has  just  read  before  the  Geological  Society  (February  1st,  1854)  a  notice 
on  auriferous  quartz  rock  near  Davidstow,  North  Cornwall,  the  chief  gold-bearing  mass  of 
which  is  the  gossan  of  a  dyke  in  a  metamorphosed  rock  of  Upper  Devonian  age,  which, 
mantling  round  the  granite  of  Roughtor,  is  also  associated  with  dykes  of  trap. 


Chap.  XVII.J 


GOLD  IN  BR1TAIN\ 


435 


bearing  matrix  is  friable.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Cornish,  coarse, 
ancient  alluvia  or  gravel,  from  whence  the  tin  ore  has  been  extracted,  as 
well  as  other  portions  of  drift  in  that  county,  have  afforded  small  portions 
of  gold  ;  but  although  some  of  the  largest  fragments  have  been  (though 
very  rarely)  of  the  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg,  none  of  these  superficial 
accumulations  have  been  considered  worthy  of  exploration. 

In  Scotland,  whilst  slender  traces  *  only  of  gold  have  been  perceived 
in  the  older  crystalline  rocks  of  the  Northern  Highlands,  the  metal  was  for- 
merly found  in  the  slates  of  the  South  of  Scotland  (Lead  Hills),  which,  like 
those  of  North  and  South  Wales,  are  of  Lower  Silurian  age.  There  again 
it  is  in  a  region  where  the  strata  have  been  much  penetrated  by  porphyries 
and  other  igneous  rocks.  These  south  Scottish  gold  mines,  after  affording 
a  small  sum,  in  the  reign  of  James  the  Fifth,  were,  however,  abandoned  as 
soon  as  the  cost  of  production  exceeded  the  value  of  the  ore  extracted.f 

In  Ireland  we  read  the  same  lesson.  It  is  from  the  altered  lower 
Silurian  schists  of  Wicklow,  which  clasp  round  the  eruptive  granite  of 
Croghan-Kinshela  traversed  by  hornblendic  greenstones,  that  the  gold 
known  in  Ireland  has  been  derived,  and  is  still  occasionally  picked  up 
in  fragments  which  have  been  detached  from  the  sides  of  that  mountain, 
or  are  washed  down  by  the  rivulets  which  descend  from  the  hill.J 

Now,  if  any  portion  of  these  old  slaty  British  rocks,  or  their  associated 
eruptive  rocks,  had  been  largely  penetrated  by  gold,  then  most  assuredly 
much  more  auriferous  debris  would  have  been  recognized  in  the  local 
adjacent  gravel: — just  as  it  occurs  in  all  really  rich  gold-bearing  lands. 
But,  as  no  rich  auriferous  sand  or  gravel  is  known  in  any  part  of  the 

*  Near  Loch  Erne  Head,  a  metalliferous  veinstone  on  the  property  of  the  Marquis  of 
Breadalbane  has  recently  been  found  to  be  partially  impregnated  with  gold.  The  gold  occurs 
in  a  glossan,  contiguous  to  the  junction  of  trap  with  crystalline  limestone  and  schist,  and  is 
associated  with  arsenical  pyrites  and  lead  ore. 

f  See  Harkness  on  the  "Lower  Silurian  Rocks  of  Scotland."  Quart.  Journ.  Geo.  Soc. 
vol.  viii.  p.  396. 

X  The  Earl  of  Wicklow,  whose  property  is  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mountain  of  Croghan  Kin- 
shela,  has  collected  several '  pepitas '  of  this  Irish  gold,  the  largest  being  about  two  inches  long. 
They  are  free  from  quartz  or  other  rocky  matrix,  and  have  been  picked  out  of  the  debris  oi: 
coarse  gravel  on  that  slope  of  the  hill  where  a  rivulet  descends  through  the  property  of  the 
Earl  of  Carysfort.  No  veinstone  in  situ  has  ever  been  detected  (Mills  and  Weaver,  Trans.  Dublin 
Society) ;  and  although  poor  persons  have  stealthily  procured  specimens  during  this  century, 
the  quantity  has  never  been  sufficient  to  lead  to  the  belief  that  really  productive  diggings  could 
be  opened  at  the  Royal  Gold  Mine  of  Croghan.  Tinstone  is  said  to  have  been  found  with  the 
gold  here  as  in  Cornwall  and  other  places.  (See  Fitton,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.,  first  series 
vol.  i.  p.  270.  The  phenomena  are  well  developed  by  Prof.  Warington  Smyth,  Records  of  the 
School  of  Mines,  &c.,  vol.  i.  p.  3.,  with  a  map.) 

F  r  2 


436 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XVII. 


British  Isles,  we  may  rest  satisfied  that  in  our  own  country,  as  in  many 
others,  the  quantity  of  gold  originally  imparted  to  the  rocks,  was  small  and 
has,  to  a  great  extent,  been  exhausted.* 

Even  in  Bohemia,  which  produced  so  much  gold  in  the  Middle  Ages, 
and  where  the  Silurian  strata  are,  as  we  have  seen,  (chap.  14.)  penetrated 
by  many  igneous  rocks  (and  in  parts  much  metamorphosed),  there  are  now 
no  gold  works,  though  other  ores  (copper,  &c.)  are  profitably  extracted; 
and,  just  as  in  the  rocky  and  mountainous  tracts  of  Britain,  very  few 
places  only  can  be  cited  which  were  auriferous.  The  Thiiringerwald,  and 
some  chains  of  Central  Germany,  also  anciently  afforded  a  little  gold  in  rare 
and  widely-separated  localities  j" ;  but  these  regions,  as  well  as  the  Penin- 
sula and  its  golden  Tagus,  so  auriferous  in  the  classical  era,  have  long 
since  ceased  to  offer  any  notable  quantity  of  the  ore. 

TTie  Ural  Mountains.  —  No  country  of  the  world  furnishes  a  clearer 
example  than  Russia,  of  the  dependence  of  gold  on  certain  geological 
and  mineral  relations.  Her  chief  European  territories  are,  as  has 
been  stated,  occupied  by  slightly  solidified,  primeval  deposits.  Under 
those  conditions,  and  with  a  total  absence  of  any  crystalline  rocks, 
whether  of  intrusive  or  of  sedimentary  and  metamorphic  characters, 

*  As  these  pages  are  going  through  the  press,  a  work  by  Mr.  John  Calvert  has  appeared, 
entitled  the  "  Gold  Rocks  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,"  wherein  the  author  (who  has  recently 
returned  from  Australia)  holds  out  incentives  to  mine  largely  for  the  precious  metal  at  home, 
though  he  candidly  admits  that  his  main  suggestions  are  at  variance  with  the  recorded  opinions 
of  Sir  H.  T.  De  la  Beche,  myself,  and  many  geologists.  The  reader  who  may  have  attended  to 
this  subject  will  observe,  that  the  chief  argument  I  have  employed  in  the  writings  adverted  to 
in  the  note  p.  431.,  to  satisfy  the  public  mind,  that  auriferous  sites  in  the  old  countries  of  Europe 
would  for  the  most  part  prove  slightly  profitable  only,  was  that  all  such  works  had  ceased  in 
former  times  for  want  of  remuneration.  It  is  foreign  to  the  purpose  of  this  work  to  analyze 
theoretical  views  respecting  the  difinsion  of  gold  and  its  associated  minerals.  Let  me,  however, 
say,  that  whilst  I  believe  the  old  gold  tracts  of  Europe  have  been  on  the  whole  exhausted  of 
their  wealth,  there  may  still  be  found  spots  where  some  profit  is  attainable.  I  would  farther 
guard  any  inferences  I  have  drawn  from  our  previous  state  of  knowledge,  by  sajing,  that  ray 
opinions  were  formed  irrespective  of  the  new  discoveries  in  mechanical  science.  Crushing 
machines,  and  the  improved  application  of  mercury  may,  indeed,  liberate  a  notable  quantity  of 
ore  from  a  matrix  of  apparently  slight  value,  and  thus  set  at  nought  the  experience  of  ages. 
Not  pretending  to  enter  into  this  mercantile  part  of  the  question,  I  cling  to  the  belief  expressed 
throughout  the  text,  that,  in  the  long  run,  gold  will  mainly  be  found  in  the  rocks  indicated,  and 
will  be  worked  to  great  advantage  only,  as  during  past  ages,  in  the  natural  debris  of  those  rocks. 

t  The  sands  of  the  river  Rhine  (which  drains  so  vast  a  rocky  region)  are  in  one  pai't  slightly 
auriferous,  but  the  cost  of  extraction  of  the  gold  was  too  great  to  repay  the  speculators. 


Chap.  XVII.]         GOLD  OF  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS.  437 

not  a  particle  of  gold  has  been  discovered  in  them,  over  an  area  larger 
than  the  rest  of  Europe.  But  where  the  same  formations  have  been 
thrown  up  into  inclined  and  broken  positions  in  the  Ural  Chain,  and 
have  there  been  pierced  by  numerous  eruptive  rocks  of  porphyry, 
greenstone,  syenite,  and  granite,  in  association  with  huge  masses  of 
serpentine,  the  very  same  deposits,  so  soft  in  European  Russia,  have 
been  hardened,  crystallized,  veined,  and  rendered  highly  metalliferous ; 
some  even  of  the  igneous  rocks  being  also  occasionally  auriferous. 

As  the  rocks  in  this  chain,  which  separates  Europe  from  Asia,  are 
now  known  to  be  similar  in  character  to  those  of  numerous  other 
auriferous  ridges  in  Siberia  and  the  Altai  Mountains  of  Asiatic 
Russia,  the  present  description  may  serve  to  explain  the  composition 
of  vastly  larger  eastern  tracts.  The  study  of  this  Uralian  Chain 
has,  indeed,  already  thrown  light,  not  only  on  the  nature  of  metal- 
liferous rocks  of  other  countries,  but  has  enabled  us  to  define, 
within  certain  limits,  the  period  when  they  were  chiefly  impregnated 
with  gold,  and  also  to  suggest  that,  in  this  region  at  least,  the  metal 
appears  to  be  of  more  recent  origin  than  the  ores  of  copper  and 
iron  with  which  it  is  there  associated. 

With  a  watershed  for  the  most  part  not  exceeding  2000  feet 
above  the  sea,  their  highest  peaks  rarely  rising  above  5000  to  6000 
feet,  the  Ural  Mountains,  extending  from  north  to  south  through 
18  degrees  of  latitude,  are  composed  of  rocks  more  or  less  crystalline ; 
chiefly  the  metamorphosed  representatives  of  the  Silurian  and  Devo- 
nian, and  occasionally  of  the  carboniferous  age.  The  Lower  Silurian 
strata  are,  indeed,  to  be  recognized  in  a  crystalline  state  only. 
They  are  chiefly  talcose  schists,  quartzites,  and  limestones ;  whilst 
the  Upper  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous,  though  often  also 
considerably  metamorphosed  (the  limestones  being  frequently  con- 
verted into  marble  occasionally  dolomitic),  offer  here  and  there  traces 
of  their  characteristic  fossils.  The  flexures  and  fractures  of  the 
stratified  rocks  (Devonian  and  Carboniferous),  as  they  approach  the 

F  F  3 


438  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVII. 

western  flank  of  the  altered  and  metalliferous  axis  of  the  chain,  have 
been  represented  in  the  view  of  the  gorge  of  the  Tchussowaya,  p.  330. 

The  following  rough  sketch  will  convey  some  idea  of  the  wild, 
central,  and  mineralized  masses  which,  in  the  Northern  Ural,  peer 
out,  here  and  there,  from  amid  the  forests  of  the  gigantic  Pinus  Cembra. 
It  was  taken  by  myself  from  the  summit  of  the  Katchkanar*,  a 


View  from  the  Summit  of  the  Katchkanar,  N.  Ural. 
(From  Russia  in  Europe,  vol.  i.  p.  392.) 


The  snowy  mountains  seen  in  the  distance  to  the  north,  are  the  much  loftier  peaks  of 
Konjakofski  Kamen,  &c. 

*  The  following  is  the  sketch  of  the  approach  to  this  mountain  (visited,  I  believe,  by  no  other 
European  travellers)  through  the  forests,  as  given  in  the  work  "  Russia  and  the  Ural  Moun- 
tains," vol.  i.  p.  392.  "  A  large  chaotic  assemblage  of  loose  angular  blocks  nov  lay  around  us, 
from  amid  which  rose  the  magnificent  Pintis  Cembra,  towering  above  all  its  associates,  the  rocks 
being  overgrown  with  paeonies,  roses,  and  geraniums.  Such  stony  features  alone  would  have 
led  us  to  suppose  that  we  were  at  the  foot  of  the  object  of  our  exploration,  when  in  a  few 
minutes  the  broken  and  jagged  outline  of  the  Katchkanar  burst  upon  our  sight  under  a  fiae 
bright  sun  and  amid  the  merry  song  of  birds.    The  dull,  wet,  and  marshy  woodlands,  were  now 

exchanged  for  sunshine,  and  rocks  Accustomed  as  we  have  been  to  the  wildest  features 

of  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  and  the  Alps,  we  are  unacquainted  with  any  scene  presenting  a 
finer  foreground  of  abruptly  broken  rocks,  and  never  certainly  had  we  looked  over  so  grand  and 
trackless  a  forest  as  that  which  lay  around  us,  and  from  which  some  straggling  distant  peaks 
(those  on  the  north  only  being  still  capped  with  snow)  reared  their  solitary  heads." 


Chap.  XVII.]         GOLD  OF  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS.  439 

rugged  pile  of  stratified  and  jointed  augitic  greenstone,  highly- 
charged  with  magnetic  iron.  Platinum,  as  well  as  gold,  has  been 
washed  down  from  the  edges  of  this  mountain  and  carried  into  the  ad- 
jacent gorges  on  the  east ;  though  the  sources  from  whence  these  metals 
have  been  drifted  into  the  coarse  alluvium,  have  not  been  detected. 

While  the  traveller  who  simply  crosses  the  Ural  in  the  partial 
depression  followed  by  the  high  road  to  Ekaterinburg,  will  scarcely 
be  aware  that  he  has  passed  over  any  dominant  ridge,  the  geologist 
who  explores  the  mountains  along  their  line  of  bearing,  soon  per- 
ceives that,  to  the  north,  their  crest  is  marked  by  lofty  and  usually 
snowy  summits,  as  in  the  preceding  drawing.  To  the  south,  the 
central  mass  near  Zlataust,  consists  of  altered  sandstone  and  quartz- 
ites,  forming  sharp  peaks,  that  separate  Europe  from  Asia.* 

Few  chains  offer  more  contrasting  outlines  than  are  seen  upon  the 
European  and  Asiatic  flanks  of  the  Ural.  On  the  former  the  lime- 
stones and  other  stratified  rocks  are  indeed  contorted,  fractured,  and 
partially  altered,  as  before  represented  (p.  330.),  whilst  in  the  centre, 
as  on  the  eastern  slopes,  the  masses  consist  everywhere  either  of 
highly  altered  and  crystalline  strata,  or  of  the  eruptive  rocks  which 
pierce  them.  There  only,  and  particularly  where  the  schists  are 
traversed  by  veinstones  of  quartz,  or  cut  by  dykes  of  igneous  rocks, 
has  gold  been  originally  imparted  in  any  quantity  to  the  slaty,  talcose, 
and  chloritic  strata.  Though  some  efforts  were  made  by  the  earlier 
Russian  miners  to  extract  gold  from  the  solid  matrix  by  underground 
mining,  such  a  process  was  not  continued ;  it  having  been  found  infi- 
nitely more  profitable  to  extract  the  ore  from  the  broken  accumulations 
of  ancient  drift,  in  which  the  indestructible  gold  has  been  carried 
down  to  the  slopes  of  the  hills  or  lodged  in  the  higher  valleys  wherein 
small  watercourses  meander. 

The  only  work  at  which  subterranean  mining  in  the  solid  rock  is  still 


*  See  the  frontispiece  of  "  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains." 


440 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XVII. 


practiced,  and  at  a  very  small  profit,  is  at  Berezovsk  near  Ekaterinburg. 
There  the  shaft  traverses  a  mass  of  apparently  metamorphosed  and  crys- 
talline matrix,  called  'beresite,'  resembling  a  decomposed  granite  with 
veins  of  quartz,  in  which  some  gold  is  disseminated.  The  syenite  of  the 
Peschanka  mines,  near  Bogoslofsk,  is  likewise  impregnated  with  particles 
of  gold,  and  the  surface  degradation  of  that  rock  affords  profitable  washings. 
Much  farther  to  the  east  in  Siberia,  Colonel  Hoffman  long  ago  indicated 
a  tract,  where  the  schistose  stratified  rocks  are  equally  permeated  by  the 
small  diffused  particles  of  the  metal,  imperceptible  to  the  naked  eye. 

Considering,  however,  the  practice  which  has  hitherto  prevailed,  it  is  from 
the  broken  or  drifted  materials  only,  that  the  Uralian  gold  has  been  ground 
out  by  water  mills  and  collected  for  use.  This  is  notably  the  case  on  the 
east  flank  of  the  chain*,  where  the  mixed  and  coarse  detritus  of  all  the 
hard  rocks  has,  at  certain  spots,  proved  to  be  auriferous,  and  in  some  cases 
much  more  so  than  others  ;  there  being  very  large  tracts  indeed  where  no 
trace  of  gold  can  be  detected  even  in  similar  detritus. 

On  the  east  flank  of  the  South  Ural  (S.  of  Miask),  where  the  chain 
is  still  auriferous,  conical  igneous  rocks  have  burst  out,  as  represented 
in  the  opposite  drawing,  and  constitute  a  picturesque  scene.  The 
low  rich  grassy  grounds  around  this  lake  of  Aushkul,  in  the  country 
of  the  Baschkirs,  are,  to  some  little  extent,  auriferous ;  the  gold 
having  been  derived  by  debacles  of  former  periods,  which  have  de- 
nuded the  surfaces  of  the  slaty  and  quartzose  chain  (as  seen  in 
the  distance),  or  the  adjacent  conical  hills  of  greenstone,  altered 
schists,  porphyries,  syenite,  and  serpentine  which  surround  the  lake. 
The  slopes  and  depressions  are  partially  occupied  by  the  gold-bearing 
debris.! 

*  The  reader  must  recollect  that  the  superficies  of  all  the  localities  of  the  Ural  Mountains 
united,  in  which  gold  has  been  found,  amount  but  to  a  very  small  part  of  the  whole  chain. 
Incalculably  more  is  the  proportion  diminished  between  rocks  which  from  their  nature  might 
be  but  are  not  auriferous,  and  those  of  similar  structure  which  really  contain  gold,  when  we 
extend  researches  into  Central  and  Eastern  Siberia.  Thus,  gold- works  are  only  known  at  one 
spot  in  the  western  side  of  the  watershed,  viz.,  at  Chrestovosdvisgensk.  It  was  there  that 
most  of  the  few  diamonds  found  in  the  Ural  chain  were  detected  in  coarse  ancient  drift.  They 
were  no  longer  observed  when  I  visited  that  place,  and  thence  traversed  the  wild,  wooded  chain 
by  the  Katchkanar  to  Nijny  Turinsk.  See  "Russia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural  Mountains,"  pp.  391 
—480.  et  seq. 

t  The  rock  in  the  foreground  on  which  we  stood  is  a  compound  of  diallage  and  serpentine. 


Chap.  XVII.]         GOLD  OF  THE  URAL  MOUNTAINS. 


441 


Lake  of  Aushkul,  S.  Ural. 
(From  a  lithograph,  p.  437.   Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  359.   The  Holy  Mount 
of  the  Tatars  is  opposite,  and  the  Ural  range  is  seen  in  the  distance.) 

The  extent  to  which  limestones  of  the  carboniferous  age  have  been 
altered  on  the  eastern  flank  of  the  South  Ural,  is  instructively  seen 
at  Cossatchi-Datchi,  a  remote  spot  visited  by  my  companions  and 
myself,  and  where  also  a  little  gold  has  been  found. 

Hills  of  Cossatchi-Datchi. 
(From  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  439.) 


The  hills  forming  the  background  of  this  sketch,  composed  of  eruptive 

and  is  to  some  extent  magnetic;  the  most  striking  of  the  conical  mounts  is  the  Holy  Hill  of 
the  Baschkirs.   ("  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,"  p.  437.) 


442 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XVII. 


rocks  and  some  old  schistose  strata,  subtend  a  little  basin  in  which  a 
number  of  small  conical  hillocks  of  limestone,  as  seen  in  the  foreground,  are 
thrown  about.  Their  form  and  mineralized  condition  are  probably  due  to 
the  action  of  gaseous  vapours  and  change  of  the  original  substance  ;  since 
not  only  the  traces  of  bedding  are  obliterated,  but  the  rock  has  been 
rendered  fetid  and  saccharoid  ;  breaking  upon  a  slight  blow  of  the  hammer. 
In  this  case  the  metamorphic  action,  however  it  may  have  been  pro- 
duced, has  been  just  of  that  degree  of  intensity,  that,  whilst  in  rendering 
the  limestone  pulverulent  as  sugar,  it  has  left  numerous  organic  remains 
so  uninjured,  that  they  are  easily  removed  from  the  ambient  matrix.* 

At  the  Soimanofsk  mines,  south  of  Miask,  great  piles  of  ancient  drift  or 
gravel  having  been  removed  for  the  extraction  of  gold,  the  eroded  edges  of 
highly  inclined  crystalline  limestones  have  been  exposed,  which,  from  being 
much  nearer  the  centre  of  the  chain  than  the  above,  are  probably  of  Silurian 
or  Devonian  age.  It  is  from  the  adjacent  eruptive  serpentinous  masses  and 
slaty  rocks,  b,  that  the  gold  shingle,  c  (usually  most  auriferous  near  the 
surface  of  the  abraded  rock  a),  has  been  derived. 


Diggings  at  the  Soimaxofsk  Mutes. 
(From  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i,  p.  487.) 


The  tops  of  the  highly- inclined  beds  a,  are,  in  fact,  rounded  off,  and  the 
interstices  between  them  worn  into  holes  and  cavities,  as  if  by  very  power- 
ful action  of  water.    Now  here,  as  at  Berezovsk  (of  which  hereafter), 

*  After  enumerating  upwards  of  thirty  species  of  these  fossil  shells,  mv  companions  and  self  thus 
spoke  of  them : — "  Those  alone  who  have  the  same  respect  for  a  true  characteristic  fossil  as  our- 
selves, can  imagine  the  feelings  of  delight  with  which  we  here  found  congregated  in  one  natural 
Siberian  storehouse  so  great  a  number  of  shells,  some  of  which  we  could  not  distinguish  from 
well-known  forms  of  the  mountain  limestones  of  Yorkshire,  Westmoreland,  and  Derbyshire, 
nor  others  from  species  which  are  abundant  in  the  same  formations  in  Belgium  and  France ! 
....  Without  this  discovery  we  could  not  have  ventured  to  affirm,  that  many  other  adjacent 
masses  of  crystalline  limestone  immersed  among  the  granites  and  trappean  rocks  of  these 
mountains  belonged  to  similar  or  associated  deposits."  ("  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains," 
vol.  i.  p.  44.) 


Chap.  XVII.]       GOLD  DIGGINGS.  —  URAL  MOUNTAINS. 


443 


mammoth  remains  have  been  found.  They  were  lodged  in  the  lowest  part 
of  the  excavation,  at  the  spot  to  which  the  small  figure  of  a  man  is  pointing, 
and  at  about  fifty  feet  beneath  the  original  surface  of  overlying  coarse 
gravel  c*  before  it  was  removed  by  the  workmen  from  the  vacant  space 
under  the  dotted  line.  The  feeble  influence  of  the  streams  (n)  which  now 
flow,  in  excavating  even  the  loose  shingle  is  seen  at  the  spot  marked  o,  the 
bed  of  the  rivulet  having  been  lowered  by  human  labour  from  its  natural 
level  o,  to  that  marked  n,  for  the  convenience  of  the  diggers. 

In  sonae  spots  the  alluvium  in  which  the  gold  occurs  is  a  heavy 
clay ;  in  others  it  is  made  up  of  fragments  of  quartz  veins,  chloritic 
and  talcose  schist,  and  greenstone,  which  lie  upon  the  sides  of 
the  hillocks  of  eruptive  rocks.*  It  was  from  the  infillings  of 
one  of  the  gravelly  depressions  between  these  elevations  south  of 
Miask,  that  the  largest  lamp  of  solid  gold  was  found,  of  which  at 
that  time  (1824)  there  was  any  record. f  The  diggings  by  which 
the  gravel  or  local  drift  was  cleared  away  from  around  the  vertical 
masses  of  rock  whose  surfaces  have  been  so  much  eroded  and  chan- 
nelled out,  are  expressed  in  the  following  diagram. 

No  watercourse  sufficiently  powerful  to  transport  a  single  block, 
much  less  to  spread  out  broad  accumulations  of  such  coarse  materials, 
now  flows  into  this  upland  depression.  Nor  could  the  action,  during 
millions  of  years,  of  such  an  agency  as  that  of  the  puny  rivulets, 
which  now  meander  in  parts  of  the  gravel,  account  for  the  eroded 
and  highly  worn  surfaces  of  the  rocks,  whether  crystalline  limestones, 
quartz  rocks,  greenstone,  porphyry,  or  serpentine.  We  are  thus 
necessarily  compelled,  by  numerous  evidences,  to  adopt  the  belief, 
that  on  the  Asiatic  side  of  the  Ural,  as  in  many  parts  of  Europe, 
the  translation  of  vast  masses  of  drift  was  accompanied  by  powerful 

*  The  auriferous  shingle,  gravel,  or  sand  of  the  Ural  Mountains  is  poor  in  per-centage 
in  comparison  with  what  has  of  late  years  been  discovered  in  California  and  Australia.  Though 
very  large  'pepitas'  ornuggets  have  occasionally  been  found,  much  of  the  auriferous  ground 
considered  worth  working  in  Russia,  where  labour  is  cheap,  and  water  power  for  crushing 
is  every  where  at  hand,  would,  if  situated  in  Australia  or  California,  be  little  heeded. 

t  This  *  pepita '  weighs  ninety-six  pounds  Troy,  and  is  still  exhibited  in  the  museum  of  the 
Imperial  School  of  Mines  at  St.  Petersburg. 


444  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVII. 

and  long  continued  aqueous  abrasion  of  the  summits  and  slopes 
of  the  adjacent  auriferous  hills. 


Gold  Diggings  at  Zareyo  Alexandrofsk. 


a.  Ancient  rocks  consisting  of  talc  schist,  with  veins  of  quartz  (original  matrices  of  gold), 
penetrated  by  concretionary  felspar  rocks,  greenstone,  &c.  h.  Coarse  shingle  and  gravel 
about  twelve  feet  thick,  in  which  the  great  "  pepita "  was  found,  c.  Hills  from  which  the 
chief  debris  b  has  been  swept,  d.  Pyramid  erected  to  commemorate  the  visit  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander. 


Whatever  may  have  been  the  period  when  the  rock  was  first  ren- 
dered auriferous,  the  date  of  this  great  superficial  distribution  of  the 
gold  is  clearly  indicated.  For  it  contains  in  many  places  the  same 
remains  of  extinct  fossil  quadrupeds  that  are  found  in  the  coarse 
drift-gravel  of  Western  Europe.  The  Elephas  primigenius  or 
Mammoth,  Bos  aurochs,  Rhinoceros  tichorhinus,  with  gigantic  stags, 
and  many  other  species,  including  even  large  carnivores,  were,  un- 
questionably, before  that  period  of  destruction,  the  denizens  of 
Europe  and  Siberia ;  and  of  these  the  Bos  aurochs  is  the  only  one 
which  has  been  preserved  to  our  days.* 

*  The  Bos  aurochs  was  probably  saved  by  having  inhabited  some  isolated  spot  in  Western 
Russia  near  the  forest  of  Biela  vieja  in  Poland,  where  the  herd  now  lives,  and  by  having  been 
there  locally  exempted  from  the  causes  of  that  great  destruction  which  befel  their  associates. 
This  geological  view  is  fully  explained  by  me,  accompanied  by  an  excellent  account  of  the  Bos 
aurochs  by  Professor  Owen. — ("  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural  Mountains,"  vol.  i.  p.  503.  etseq.) 


Chap.  XVII.]        GOLD  DIGGINGS.  —  URAL  MOUNTAINS.  445 

This  little  diagram  explains  the  relations  of  the  coarse  auriferous 
drift  with  Mammoth  bones,  as  seen  at  the  Berezof  mines  near 
Ekaterinburg. 


Gold  Shingle  near  Ekaterinburg. 


a.  Auriferous  rocks  in  situ.  These  rocks  contain  some  gold  in  quartz  veins  in  the  mass  of  a 
metalliferous  lode  of  soft  granitoid  composition  called,  as  above  said,  Beresite,  by  the  Eus- 
sian  miners.  It  is  the  only  mine  in  this  chain,  or  in  Siberia,  which  is  worked  underground, 
and  though  very  shallow,  scarcely  repays  the  expenditure,  b.  Auriferous  debris  with 
Mammoth  bones,   c.  Alluvial  clay  covered  by  humus  and  bog  earth. 


Before  we  quit  the  consideration  of  the  Ural  Mountains  the  reader 
may  be  reminded  that,  throughout  the  length  of  500  miles,  the 
rocks  are  auriferous  at  wide  intervals,  and  in  limited  patches  only. 
Having  clearly  marked  the  geological  period  of  the  superficial  gold 
drift,  let  me  also  here  advert  to  a  suggestion  of  my  associates  and 
self  concerning  the  period  at  which  the  rocks  were  impregnated 
with  gold.*  It  has  been  already  stated,  that  no  secondary  forma- 
tion contains  veinstones  charged  with  any  notable  quantity  of  gold, 
and  that  when  the  metal  is  found  in  situ,  it  is  either  in  metamor- 
phosed strata  of  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  age  or  in 
associated  eruptive  rocks.  Now,  it  would  seem  as  if  these  rocks 
must,  in  the  Ural,  have  been  chiefly  impregnated  with  gold,  in  a 
comparatively  modern  geological  period.  In  the  first  place,  the 
western  flank  of  the  Ural  chain  offers  strong  evidence,  that  this 
golden  transfusion  had  not  been  effected  in  this  region  when  the 
Permian  deposits  were  completed.  During  that  period,  vast  heaps 
of  pebbles  and  sand,  all'  derived  from  a  pre-existing  Ural  chain, 
(the  older  stratified  rocks  of  which  had  even  then  undergone  much 
change,)  were  spread  out  over  the  lower  country  on  the  west. 

*  See  the  work  on  "  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,"  vol,  i.  p.  472.  et  seq. 


446 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XVJI. 


Together  with  fragments  of  all  the  rocks,  sedimentary  or  igneous, 
which  are  known  in  the  chain,  specimens  of  magnetic  iron  and  of 
copper  ore,  which  so  abound  in  the  range,  are  not  uncommon  in  this 
Permian  debris ;  but  no  where  does  it  contain  visible  traces  of  gold 
or  platinum.  Had  those  metals  then  existed  in  the  Ural  Mountains,  in 
the  quantities  which  now  prevail,  many  remnants  of  them  must  have 
been  washed  down  together  with  the  other  rocks  and  minerals,  and 
have  formed  part  of  the  old  Permian  conglomerates.  On  the  other 
hand,  when  the  much  more  modern  debacles,  that  destroyed  the 
great  animals,  and  heaped  up  the  piles  of  gravel  above  described, 
proceeded  from  this  chain,  then  the  debris  became  largely  auriferous. 
It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  the  principal  impregnation  of  the  rocks 
with  gold  —  i.  e.  when  the  chief  lumps  and  strings  of  it  were  formed 
—  took  place  during  the  intervening  time. 

What  then  was  probably  the  geological  period  when  these  rich 
auriferous  impregnations  of  the  Uralian  rocks  took  place  ?  We 
cannot  believe  that  it  occurred  shortly  after  the  Permian  era,  nor  even 
when  any  of  the  secondary  rocks  were  forming ;  since  no  golden 
debris  is  found  even  in  any  of  the  older  tertiary  grits  and  sands 
which  occur  on  the  Siberian  flank  of  the  chain.  If,  then^  the 
mammoth  drift  he  the  oldest  mass  of  detritus  in  which  gold  occurs  abun- 
dantly, not  only  in  the  Ural  but  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  we  are 
led  to  believe  that  this  noble  metal,  though  for  the  most  part  formed 
in  ancient  crystalline  rocks,  or  in  the  igneous  rocks  which  penetrated 
them,  was  only  abundantly  imparted  to  them  at  a  comparatively  recent 
period; — i.e.  a  short  time  (in  geological  language)  before  the  epoch 
when  the  very  powerful  and  general  denudations  took  place  which 
destroyed  the  large  extinct  mammalia.* 

*  In  many  instances  gold  is,  I  know,  associated  in  the  same  veinstone  with  other  ores  —  such 
as  silver,  or  argentiferous  galena,  and  with  various  ores  of  copper  and  iron  —  magnetic  iron 
being,  indeed,  a  very  frequent  accompaniment ;  whilst  the  association  with  tin-stone  has  before 
been  alluded  to.  Such  occurrences  do  not  invalidate,  but  strengthen  the  view  derived  from 
the  phenomena  in  the  Ural  Mountains.    For,  as  copper  and  iron  ores  are  frequently  found  in  old 


Chap.  XVII.]  FORMATION  AND  DISTRIBUTION  OF  GOLD. 


447 


That  the  gold  which  occurs  in  quartz  veins  in  the  solid  slate  rocks 
resulted  from  an  interior  agency,  in  which  heat  and  electricity  were 
combined  with  water  or  vapour,  seems  to  be  a  natural  conclusion,  if 
we  judge  from  the  appearance  which  the  strings  and  expansions  of 
the  metal  indicate  as  they  ramify  through  the  chinks  of  the  hard  rock, 
or  are  diffused  in  grains  in  its  mass.  We  may  also  suppose,  that 
the  prevalent  matrix  of  quartz,  whether  ejected  from  beneath,  or 
poured  in  from  above,  was  in  a  soft  and  gelatinous  state  when  it 
filled  the  cavities,  resembling  the  silicious  "  sinter  "  which  now  rises 
in  a  fluid  spout  from  Hecla,  and,  falling,  coagulates  into  a  modern 
quartz  rock  around  the  volcanic  orifice. 

In  viewing  the  widely  attested  fact  of  the  dispersion  of  auriferous 
debris  derived  from  the  surface  of  certain  rocks  during  some  of 
their  last  great  denudations,  we  are  naturally  led  to  favour  the 
suggestion  of  Humboldt,  that  the  formation  of  gold  had  some  closer 
relation  to  or  dependence  upon  the  atmosphere  than  that  of  the  baser 
metals  lead,  copper,  and  iron.  An  eminent  metallurgist.  Dr.  Percy, 
who  has  detected  minute  quantities  of  gold  in  almost  all  lead  ores, 
is,  indeed,  disposed  to  believe,  that  it  may  have  been  thrown  down 
by  deposition  from  an  aqueous  medium. 

coDglomerates  or  pebble  beds  of  secondary  age,  and  lumps  of  gold  have  never  been  detected  in 
them,  I  see  no  means  (explain  the  phenomena  as  we  may)  of  evading  the  inference,  that  no 
great  quantity  of  gold  ore  was  formed  (certainly  not  in  the  Ural  Mountains)  until  the  com- 
paratively recent  epoch  indicated  in  the  text.  In  the  work  "  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains," 
vol.  i.  p.  473.,  the  inference  is  thus  stated :  — "  Whether,  therefore,  we  judge  from  the  total 
absence  of  auriferous  matter  in  the  ancient  conglomerates  on  the  west,  and  in  the  tertiary  grits 
on  the  east,  or  from  the  absolute  materials  in  the  whole  series  of  regenerated  deposits,  we  con- 
clude, that  the  chain  became  (chiefly)  auriferous  during  the  most  recent  disturbances  by  which 
it  was  affected,  and  that  this  took  place  when  its  highest  peaks  were  thrown  up,  when  the 
present  watershed  was  established,  and  when  the  syenitic  granites  and  other  comparatively 
recent  igneous  rocks  were  erupted  along  its  eastern  edges." 

The  reader  who  wishes  to  have  fuller  information  on  the  subject  of  Uralian  and  Siberian  gold 
must  consialt  Humboldt's  Asie  Centrale ;  Reise  nach  dem  Ural,  &c.,  by  Humboldt,  Rose,  and 
Ehrenberg,  with  the  valuable  mineral  description  of  M.  Gustaf  Rose ;  various  memoirs  by 
Helmersen  and  Hoffman  in  the  Annuaire  des  Mines  de  Russie ;  and  Adolf  Erman  (Reise  um  die 
Erde),  as  well  as  an  account  of  the  general  diffusion  of  gold  and  a  valuable  gold  map  of  the 
world  by  that  Author. 


448  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVII. 

Whatever  may  be  the  correct  hypothesis  as  to  the  original  mode 
of  formation,  the  fact  is  undeniable,  that  wherever  the  veinstones  in 
the  solid  rock  have  not  been  ground  down  by  former,  powerful  denu- 
dation, but  remain  as  partial  testimonials  of  the  origin  of  gold,  the 
portions  which  have  as  yet  proved  to  be  the  richest,  are  those  which 
are  at  or  near  the  surface.  Experience  too,  dearly  bought  in  num- 
berless instances,  has  taught  the  miner,  throughout  long  ages,  that  in 
his  efforts  to  follow  the  veinstones  downwards,  by  deep  shafts,  into 
the  body  of  the  rock,  he  has  either  found  the  gold  diminish  in 
volume,  or  so  difficult  to  obtain,  that  the  cost  of  extraction  has  usually 
been  greater  than  the  value  of  the  metal. 

The  points  which  have  been  alluded  to,  as  drawn  from  personal 
observation  in  the  Ural  Mountains,  are  found  to  have  a  world-wide 
application  in  every  tract  which  has  been  or  is  still  auriferous.  Thus, 
the  giant  chain  of  the  Andes,  which  has  for  ages  afforded  much  gold 
in  its  range  through  Chili,  Peru,  and  Mexico,  is  essentially  of  the 
same  composition.  The  Indians,  who  lived  in  tracts  adjacent  to 
those  mountains,  followed  the  simple  process  of  picking  the  shining 
material  from  the  gravel,  sand,  and  shingle  derived  from  the  chain. 
So  that  when  the  Spaniards,  the  best  miners  of  the  sixteenth  cen- 
tury, first  colonized  South  America,  they  naturally  inferred,  that 
if  ignorant  natives  could  thus  gather  sufficient  quantities  of  gold 
to  roof  the  palaces  of  their  sovereigns,  they,  as  skilful  Europeans, 
might  extract  incredible  quantities  from  the  bowels  of  mountains,  the 
mere  detritus  of  whose  surfaces  had  contributed  such  a  vast  amount 
of  gold.  But,  as  frequently  as  deep  mines  enriched  the  speculators 
who  sought  for  copper  and  silver,  so  surely  gold  mining  in  the  solid 
rock  proved  abortive  *,  owing  to  the  slender,  downward  dissemination 
of  gold  in  a  hard  and  intractable  matrix. 

*  It  has  been  too  much  the  habit  to  underrate  the  capacity  and  skill  of  the  old  Spanish 
miners,  though  it  is  known  from  Humboldt,  that  during  the  government  of  the  monarchy  in 
South  America,  many  of  their  works  were  well  conducted ;  the  operations  having  been  para- 
lyzed chiefly  by  the  political  revolutions  which  have  occurred  in  those  regions. 


Chap.  XVJI.] 


GOLD  OF  AUSTRALIA. 


449 


As  the  phenomena  above  described  are  common  to  many  countries, 
the  accompanying  diagram  is  annexed,  to  convey,  as  far  as  possible 
at  one  view,  a  popular  idea  of  the  chief  relations  under  which  gold 
has  been  distributed  over  the  surface,  so  as  to  be  profitably  collected 
by  mankind. 

Ideal  Representation  of  the  Original  Forimation  of  Gold  in  the  Rocks,  and  its 

SUBSEQUENT  TRANSLATION  INTO  HeAPS  OF  GrAVEL. 


(From  a  large  diagram  exhibited  in  1850,  at  the  Royal  Institution.) 


a  b      a     b  a  a  b      a     b       a       b  a 


The  rocks,  a,  are  the  ancient  metamorphic  masses,  whether  talcose,  micaceous,  chloritic,  fel  - 
spathic,  or  siliceous  slates  (altered  primeval  slaty  rocks),  which  have  been  traversed  by 

,  quartzose  and  other  auriferous  veinstones,  h.  All  along  their  present  dark  summits  a*  are  seen 
lighter  tinted  lines,  which  represent  the  outline  and  condition  of  the  auriferous  ridges  before 
their  pinnacles  were  subjected  to  that  agency  of  destruction  and  abrasion,  by  which  great 
heaps  of  drift  and  gravel  were  transported  from  them,  so  as  to  form  the  hillocks,  c,  that  cover 
the  adjacent  slopes  and  fill  up  the  gorges  and  depressions,  d.  The  first  or  highest  of  these 
drifts,  &c,,  constitute  the  dry  diggings  of  the  miner ;  the  lower  heaps,  d,  in  which  streams 
meander,  being  the  wet  diggings.  It  being  impossible  to  represent  in  one  diagram  all  the 
conditions  under  which  gold  was  originally  formed  in  the  rocks,  I  have  merely  selected  the 
usual  case  of  veinstones,  the  old  or  destroyed  surfaces  of  which  were  the  richest. 

Gold  of  Australia, — The  extraordinary  quantity  of  gold  which  has 
been  poured  into  Britain  from  her  Australian  colonies  during  the 
last  two  years,  has  been  procured,  like  the  chief  masses  in  the 
other  tracts  described,  from  superficial  accumulations  of  shingle. 

If  the  former  trials  of  Spaniards  to  procure  gold  with  profit  from  deep  mines  in  the  solid  rock, 
and  which  were  proverbially  failures,  do  not  satisfy  living  speculators,  let  me  refer  them  to 
similar  results  in  our  day,  and  trials  by  our  own  countrymen.  Among  these,  I  would  specially 
allude  to  the  well-known  mine  of  Guadalupe  y  Calvo,  near  Durango,  in  Mexico,  worked  by 
British  skill  and  capital,  where,  according  to  information  I  received  from  one  of  its  ablest 
.directors  (my  friend  the  late  Colonel  Colquhoun,  R.  A.),  the  works,  which  aflforded  a  moderate 
profit  near  the  surface,  became  less  productive  as  the  mine  deepened,  and  finally  failed  alto- 
gether; the  gold  having  thinned  out,  and  its  place  being  entirely  taken  by  argentiferous 
galena.  See  Quarterly  Review,  Article, '  Siberia  and  California,'  vol.  Ixxxvii.  p.  410. 

G  G 


450 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XVII. 


gravel,  sand,  and  clay,  derived  from  the  wearing  away  of  adjacent 
hard  rocks,  whether  of  aqueous  or  of  igneous  origin. 

Having,  in  the  year  1844,  recently  returned  from  the  auriferous 
Ural  Mountains,  I  had  the  advantage  of  examining  the  numerous 
specimens  collected  by  my  friend  Count  Strzelecki,  along  the  eastern 
chain  of  Australia.  Seeing  the  great  similarity  of  the  rocks  of  those 
two  distant  countries,  I  could  have  little  difficulty  in  drawing  a 
parallel  between  them;  in  doing  which  I  was  naturally  struck 
by  the  circumstance  that  no  gold  *  had  yet  been  found '  in  the 
Australian  ridge,  which  I  termed  in  anticipation  the  *  Cordillera.'* 

*  The  announcement  that  '  no  gold  had  yet  been  detected,'  which  was  printed  in  my  Presi- 
dential Discourse,  Trans.  Roy.  Geog.  Soc.  1844,  is  the  clearest  proof  of  my  ignorance  of  a  trace  of 
the  metal  having  been  discovered  by  any  one.  In  the  last  two  years,  however,  facts  have 
transpired,  which  were  totally  unknown  to  me  when  I  ventured  upon  my  comparison.  Thus 
it  appears,  that  Count  Strzelecki  himself  discovered  traces  of  gold  in  1839 ;  but  on  relating  the 
fact  to  some  friends  and  to  the  Governor  of  New  South  Wales  Sir  G.  Gipps,  secrecy  was 
enjoined,  and  the  Count  never  more  reverted  to  the  subject ;  not  even  in  his  own  work,  1845. 
It  now  also  appears,  that  the  Eev.  W.  C,  Clarke  wrote  to  a  friend  in  the  colony  (1841),  mention- 
ing that  he  had  found  gold  ore;  but  this  circumstance  remained  as  much  unknown  to  myself 
and  all  European  men  of  science  as  the  other.  My  views,  whatever  they  may  be  worth,  were 
therefore  formed  quite  irrespectively  of  any  such  proceedings,  as  the  following  extract  from  a 
letter  of  my  friend  Count  Strzelecki  to  myself,  received  when  these  pages  are  passing  through 
the  press,  amply  testifies: — 'Nothing  can  give  me  greater  pleasure  and  comfort  at  any  time, 
than  to  bear  my  humble  testimony  to  the  inductive  powers  which  you  displayed  on  the 
occasion  of  your  predictions  in  regard  to  the  existence  of  gold  in  Australia;  and  conse- 
quently, I  can  affirm  now,  as  I  did  and  do  whenever  a  necessity  occurs,  that  I  never  men- 
tioned my  discovery  or  supposed  discovery  of  Australian  gold  to  you,  prior  to  your  papers  on 
the  subject,  nor  after  their  publication.' 

A  claim  has  recently  been  made  in  favour  of  Mr.  G.  Windsor  Earl  as  one  of  the  early  indi- 
cators of  Australian  gold,  which,  with  every  respect  for  the  accomplishments  of  that  gentle- 
man, seems  to  me  to  rest  on  no  foundation.  In  June  1845,  and  therefore  after  both  my 
Anniversary  Discourses  of  May  1844 — 1845,  in  which  the  subject  of  the  distribution  of  gold 
over  the  world  was  handled  at  some  length,  Mr.  Windsor  Earl  communicated  to  the  R.  Geo- 
gi-aphical  Society,  a  memoir  on  the  general  analogy  between  Australia  and  the  Asiatic  countries 
to  the  north  of  it  ;  (he  having  resided  at  Port  Essington).  Being  led  to  believe,  by  the 
great  geological  authority  Leopold  von  Buch  (who  was  present  on  the  occasion),  that  the 
insular  tracts  extending  northwards  from  Torres  Straits  were  chiefly  volcanic,  and  not  of  the 
same  mineral  structure  as  any  part  of  Eastern  Australia  with  which  we  had  then  been  made 
acquainted,  I  ventured  (verbally)  to  suggest  doubts  as  to  the  value  of  this  portion  only  of  Mr. 
Earl's  memoir.  But  neither  Leopold  von  Buch  nor  myself  made  any  allusion  to  metalliferous 
productions,  inasmuch  as  we  only  touched  upon  the  broad  outline  of  a  general  geological  com- 
parison ;  and  no  reference  whatever  having  been  made  hy  Mr.  Earl  to  Australian  gold,  no 


Chap.  XVII.] 


GOLD  OF  AUSTRALIA. 


451 


Impressed  with  the  conviction  that  gold  would,  sooner  or  later,  be 
found  in  the  great  British  colony,  I  learnt  in  1846  with  satisfac- 
tion that  a  specimen  of  the  ore  had  been  discovered.  I  thereupon 
encouraged  the  unemployed  miners  of  Cornwall  to  emigrate  and  dig 
for  gold,  as  they  dug  for  tin  in  the  gravel  of  their  own  district. 
These  notices  were,  as  far  as  I  know,  thfe  first  printed  documents 
relating  to  Australian  gold. 

At  that  time,  California,  inhabited  only  by  pastoral  Indians  and  a 
few  missionaries  and  Spanish  herdsmen,  was,  it  will  be  recollected, 
equally  unknown  to  be  auriferous.  Its  rich  alluvial  soil  had  not 
then  been  removed  from  the  surface,  and  the  accident  at  Sutter's 
Mill,  in  1847,  had  not  exposed  the  gold  in  the  gravel  and  shingle 
beneath  it.  We  can  still  better  understand  how  this  should  have  been 
the  case  with  regard  to  vast  tracts  of  Australia,  where  similar  mineral 
constants  exist,  but  where,  instead  of  a  comparatively  advanced 
people,  like  the  Mexicans  or  Peruvians,  a  wretched  race,  incapable 
of  appreciating  the  uses  of  the  precious  metals,  had  been  for  ages  the 
sole  inhabitants  of  a  vast  continent. 

Unwilling  to  offer  what  must  be  a  very  iraperfect  epitome  pf  the  distri- 
bution of  gold  in  Australia,  I  may,  however,  be  permitted  to  say  a  few 
words  on  a  subject  to  which  I  called  the  attention  of  my  countrymen 
for  several  successive  years  previous  to  the  opening  out  of  the  gold  fields 
of  that  vast  region. 

The  geological  survey  of  the  British  colonies  in  Australia,  to  the  advan- 
tages of  which,  in  the  opening  out  of  gold  mines,  I  directed  the  attention  of 
Her  Majesty's  Government  in  the  year  1848,  or  three  years  before  their 
practical  development,  has  been  since  ably  carried  into  effect  by  very 
competent  observers.  To  the  general  geological  descriptions  given  by 
Mitchell,  Strzelecki,  Clarke  and  Jukes,  voluminous  details,  published  for 

question  respecting  it  was  raised.  I  therefore  repeat,  that  at  that  time  no  one,  whether  in  Britain 
or  the  colonies,  had  printed  any  thing  on  the  auriferous  characters  of  the  Australian  rocks 
except  myself,  and  I  reiterate  my  conviction,  that  my  memoirs  of  1844,  1845,  and  1846,  are  the 
earliest  publications  on  the  subject.  See  Trans,  of  the  Eo}'.  Geograph.  Society,  President's 
Discourses,  1844,  1845 ;  and  Trans.  Roy.  Geol.  Soc.  Cornwall,  1846. 

G  G  2 


452 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XVII. 


the  use  of  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  have  been  added  within  the  last 
three  years,  explanatory  of  the  varied  mineral  condition  under  which  gold 
occurs  in  Australia.*  Thus  Mr.  Stutchbury,  the  Government  geologist, 
gave  us  clear  reports  upon  several  tracts  of  New  South  Wales,  after  Mr. 
Hargreaves  had  proved  (1851)  the  value  of  the  diggings.  The  Rev.  W. 
B.  Clarke  had,  however,  previously,  or  in  1847,  publicly  called  the  atten- 
tion of  the  colonists  of  Sydney  to  the  auriferous  character  of  New  South 
"Wales.  This  zealous  geologist  has  since  explored  the  largest  range  of 
its  gold-bearing  lands  over  upwards  of  six  degrees  of  latitude,  or  from  the 
Peel  River  on  the  north  to  the  Australian  Alps  of  Strzelecki  on  the  south, 
where  the  watershed  or  Cordillera,  rising  in  Mount  Kosciusko  to  6,500 
feet  above  the  sea,  trends  south-eastwards  into  the  province  of  Victoria. 

From  Mr.  Clarke  and  other  authors  we  learn,  that  the  parallel  which 
I  had  drawn,  in  1844,  between  the  rocks  of  the  Australian  *  Cordillera' 
and  those  of  the  Ural  Mountains  is  well  sustained.  Just  as  in  Siberia, 
the  greatest  amount  of  gold  is  found  in  the  heaps  of  debris,  or  old 
alluvia,  adjacent  to  certain  intersections  of  the  older  slaty  strata  by 
eruptive  rocks,  whether  granites,  porphyries,  or  greenstones.  We  may 
also  assume,  that  the  chief  auriferous  slaty  rocks  of  Australia  are  of  the 
same  age  as  the  central  and  older  masses  of  the  Ural,  viz.  Lower  Silurian ; 
because,  like  them,  they  are  overlaid  by  limestones,  which  contain  Pen- 
tameri,  Trilobites,  and  Corals,  indicative  of  the  Upper  Silurian  Group. 
The  last  are  followed  by  other  strata,  which  are  probably  of  Devonian  age, 
and  then  by  true  equivalents  of  the  Carboniferous  era. 

Whilst  the  most  prolific  sources  seem  to  have  been  the  quartzose  vein- 
stones which  traverse  the  older  slates,  we  are  further  instructed,  that  in 
Australia,  as  in  the  Ural  Mountains,  there  are  tracts  wherein  gold  is 
diffused  in  small  and  often  imperceptible  particles  through  the  body  of 
certain  granitic  rocks  f,  specially  those  (according  to  Mr.  Clarke)  which  are 
hornblendic  or  syenitic ;  whilst  the  limestones  in  both  countries  are  partially 
auriferous.  There  is  besides,  not  only  this  striking  coincidence  between  the 
Australian  Mountains  and  the  Ural,  viz.  that  both  have  a  main  meridian 

*  See  Papers  relative  to  the  recent  Discovery  of  Gold  in  Australia,  presented  to  both  Houses 
of  Parliament,  1852 — 1853.  For  my  own  connection  with  this  subject,  see  the  Papers  on  the 
same  subject,  presented  August  16.  1853,  p.  43. 

t  See  Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  vol.  i.  p.  483.,  where  it  is  stated,  '  The  fact  is,  then, 
that  though  gold  has  frequently  been,  and  is  for  the  most  part,  formed  in  quartzose  and  other 
veins  which  either  have  penetrated  or  been  separated  from  the  mass  of  the  slate  formation  (and 
of  these  the  Ural  affords  countless  examples),  it  has  also  been  diffused  in  some  tracts  through- 
out the  whole  body  of  the  rock,  whether  of  igneous  or  of  aqueous  origin.' 


Chap.  XVII.] 


GOLD  OF  AUSTRALIA. 


453 


direction  ;  but  also  the  fact,  that  each  chain  is  largely  and  profitably  auri- 
ferous on  one  side  of  the  watershed  only ;  in  Russia  on  the  eastern  or 
Siberian,  and  in  Australia  on  the  western  slopes  of  the  principal  range. 

Looking,  then,  at  the  Australian  phenomena  (including  those  of  Victoria) 
on  a  broad  scale,  there  are  no  essential  distinctions  between  them  and  the 
mineral  relations  of  gold  in  the  Old  World  and  America ;  except  that 
certain  slopes  and  hollows,  notably  those  of  Victoria*,  have  proved  to  be 
much  more  lucrative  than  those  of  any  known  region,  except  parts  of 
California. 

The  great  sources  of  wealth,  as  elsewhere,  are  depressions  which  have 
been  filled  with  debris  from  the  mountains,  whether  coarse  or  fine.  The 
sides  of  these  depressions  being  once  defined,  and  their  bottoms  being 
easily  ascertained,  the  period  of  their  exhaustion  may  be  estimated  approxi- 
mately. It  matters  nothing  to  the  statist  whether  this  golden  drift,  or 
accumulation  of  broken  materials,  was  for  the  most  part  aggregated,  as  I 
think,  by  causes  now  no  longer  in  action,  which  powerfully  abraded  the 
tops  and  sides  of  the  hills  (as  explained  in  the  previous  pages,  and  par- 
ticularly in  the  diagram,  p.  449.),  or  whether  the  diurnal  atmospheric 
action  alone  for  thousands  of  years  has  been  the  effective  agent.  Both 
causes  have  unquestionably  contributed  to  spread  out  and  make  accessible 
a  material,  the  search  after  which  in  the  solid  rock,  as  I  have  already 
stated,  has  hitherto  usually  been  so  profitless  a  speculation. 
,  When  the  British  public  hear  from  our  colonial  authorities,  that 
16,000  square  miles  of  a  part  of  New  South  Wales  are  auriferous f,  they 

*  See  Memoir  by  Mr.  Wathen,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  vol.  ix.  p.  74.  Mr.  G.  M. 
Stephen,  Vice-President  of  the  Geological  Society  of  Melbourne,  recently  arrived  from  Victoria, 
lias  brought  home  instructive  specimens  of  crystallized  gold,  and  many  small  precious 
stones  from  different  parts  of  Australia,  including  topaz,  chrysolite,  gai^net,  zircon,  tour- 
maline, &c.  Besides  some  of  these  which  also  occur  in  the  Ural  Mountains  (including  a  rare 
diamond),  the  gold  fields  of  Victoria  have  afforded  a  mineral  unknown  in  Russia,  i.  e.  tin,  which 
is  found  not  only  in  the  form  of  sand,  as  now  worked  by  Messrs.  C.  Terry  and  Co.,  but  also  in 
small  lumps,  and  highly  coloured  crystals,  described  by  Mr.  G.  M.  Stephen  in  a  Report  published 
at  Melbourne.  The  reader  who  wishes  to  catch  a  general  view  of  these  the  most  important 
of  the  Australian  gold  diggings,  and  acquire  an  insight  into  the  statistics  and  social  condition 
of  the  wonderful  colony  of  Victoria,  should  peruse  the  recent  work  of  Mr.  Westgarth. 

f  Report  of  the  Rev.  W.  Clarke  to  the  Governor  of  New  South  Wales.  Parliamentary  Papers, 
presented  Feb.  28.  1853.  Sir  C.  Fitzroy's  Dispatch,  p.  62.  See  Wyld's  Memoir  and  Maps ; 
and  Arrowsmith's  new  maps  of  the  auriferous  regions  of  Australia,  as  compiled  from  the 
Government  Surveys,  on  which  (particularly  that  which  is  printed  for  the  use  of  the  Houses  of 
Parliament)  the  localities  at  or  near  which  any  appreciable  amount  of  gold  has  been  detected 
are  coloured  yellow.    In  stating  that  the  gold  from  California  and  Australia  has  been  chiefly 

G  G  3 


454 


SILURIA. 


[CiiAP.  XVII. 


must  not  suppose  that  the  geologist,  who  thus  reports,  intends  to  say, 
that  profitable  researches  could  be  carried  out  over  that  vast  area.  The 
truly  rich  sites,  he  well  knows,  are  very  small  as  compared  with  the 
entire  country.  Again,  in  those  districts  where,  by  degradation  for 
ages,  fine  particles  of  gold  have  been  derived  from  the  granitic  or  other 
rocks  (the  chief  materials  of  the  matrix  perishing,  but  the  gold  remaining), 
we  are  not  to  infer,  that  any  human  endeavours  to  break  up  and  grind 
down  mountain  masses  of  such  original  rock  for  the  purpose  of  extracting 
the  metal  it  contains,  (seldom  visible  to  the  human  eye)  would  be  remune- 
rative, except  in  some  remarkable  cases  like  those  before  alluded  to  (p. 
437.)  At  all  events,  the  extent  to  which  such  appliances  can  extend,  will 
ere  long,  be  ascertained  through  the  spirit  and  intelligence  of  our  country- 
men :  and  in  the  mean  time  it  is  satisfactory  to  reflect,  that  a  basis  of  all 
such  researches  and  inquiries  has  been  provided  by  the  good  geographical 
survey  of  a  large  portion  of  this  new  country,  executed  by  Mitchell  and 
his  associates.  On  that  important  groundwork,  geologists  may  now  record 
all  subsequent  observations,  respecting  a  region  hitherto  almost  exclusively 
pastoral,  but  which  has  suddenly  become  a  great  and  populous  centre 
of  commerce  through  the  development  of  its  very  rich  fields  of  gold. 

Conclusion,  —  Notwithstanding  the  preceding  sketch,  it  would  ill 
become  any  geologist  who  throws  his  eye  over  the  gold  map  of  the 
world  prepared  by  Adolf  Erman,  to  attempt  to  estimate,  at  this  day, 
the  amount  of  gold  which  remains,  like  that  of  Australia,  undetected 
in  vast  regions  of  the  earth,  as  yet  unknown  even  to  geographers  ;  still 
less  to  speculate  upon  the  relative  proportions  of  it  in  such  countries. 
At  the  same  time,  the  broad  features  of  the  case  in  all  known  lands 
may  be  appealed  to,  to  check  extravagant  fears  and  apprehensions  re- 
derived  from  drifted  and  broken  materials,  as  in  the  Ural  Mountains,  I  am  quite  aware  that  a 
small  portion  of  ore  has  been  obtained  from  veinstones  -which  ti-averse  the  schists  in  situ. 
But,  as  few  shafts  have  yet  been  sunk  deep  into  those  rocks  (even  in  California),  the  specu- 
lators have  yet  to  learn  whether,  when  the  richer  surface  strings  of  the  metal  have  been 
worked  out,  the  lower  portions  of  the  veins  in  those  tracts  will  prove  exceptions  to  the  prevailing 
rule.  As  far  as  experience  can  teach,  it  is  only  where  the  mountains  have  been  shattered, 
and  great  mounds  of  their  debris  thrown  down  in  former  ages  upon  their  sides  (as  represented 
in  the  diagram,  p.  449.),  that  gold  can  be  extracted  by  human  labour. to  any  considerable 
profit.  The  chief  exceptions,  as  in  the  Brazils,  are  where  the  deep  mines  are  in  a  soft 
matrix,  and  are  worked  by  slaves  receiving  very  low  wages.  The  caveat,  however,  which  is 
inserted  in  the  note  *  p.  437.,  must  also  be  considered. 


CUAP.XVII.]  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  GOLD.  455 

specting  an  excessive  production  of  the  ore.  For,  we  can  trace  the 
boundaries,  rude  as  they  may  be,  of  a  metal  ever  destined  to  remain 
precious  on  account  of  those  limits  in  position,  breadth,  and  depth 
by  which  it  is  circumscribed  in  Nature's  bank.  Let  it  be  borne 
in  mind,  that  whilst  gold  has  scarcely  ever  been  found,  and  never  in 
any  quantity,  in  the  secondary  and  tertiary  rocks  which  occupy  so 
large  a  portion  of  the  surface,  mines  sunk  down  into  the  solid  rocks 
where  it  does  occur,  have  hitherto,  with  rare  exceptions,  proved 
remunerative ;  —  and,  when  they  are  so,  it  is  only  in  those  cases 
where  the  rocks  are  soft,  or  the  price  of  labour  low.  Further,  it 
has  been  well  ascertained,  whatever  may  have  been  the  agency  by 
which  this  impregnation  was  effected,  that  the  metal  has  been  chiefly 
accumulated  towards  the  surface  of  the  rocks;  and  then  by  the 
abrasion  and  dispersion  of  their  syperficial  parts,  the  richest  golden 
materials  have  been  spread  out,  in  limited  patches,  and  generally 
near  the  bottom  of  basin-shaped  accumulations  of  detritus. 

Now,  as  every  heap  of  these  broken  auriferous  materials  in  foreign 
lands,  has  as  well  defined  a  base  as  each  gravel  pit  of  our  own 
country,  it  is  quite  certain,  that  hollows  so  occupied,  whether  in  Cali- 
fornia or  Australia,  must  be  dug  out  and  exhausted,  in  a  greater  or 
less  period.  In  fact,  all  similar  deposits  in  the  old  or  new  world  have 
had  their  gold  abstracted  from  heaps  whose  areas  have  been  traced, 
and  whose  bottoms  were  reached.  Not  proceeding  beyond  the  evi- 
dences registered  in  the  stone-book  of  Nature,  it  may  therefore  be 
affirmed,  that  the  period  of  such  exhaustion  in  each  country  (for  the 
deposits  are  much  shallower  in  some  tracts  than  in  others)  will,  in 
great  measure,  depend  on  the  amount  of  population  and  the  activity 
of  the  workmen  employed  in  each  locality.  Anglo-Saxon  energy, 
for  example,  as  applied  in  California  and  Australia,  may  in  a  few 
years  accomplish  results,  which  could  only  have  been  attained  in 
centuries  by  a  scanty  and  lazy  indigenous  population  ;  and  thus  the 


456  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVII. 

present  large  flow  of  gold  into  Europe  from  such  tracts,  icill,  in  my 
opinion,  begin  to  diminish  tvithin  a  comparatively  short  period. 

In  defining  the  general  character  of  the  most  productive  auriferous 
rocks,  the  geologist  must,  however,  necessarily  admit  a  considerable 
number  of  exceptions  to  any  prevailing  rule.  For,  whilst  the 
chemist,  as  before  said,  has  recently  detected  traces  of  gold  in  lead 
and  copper  ores, — a  discovery  of  considerable  interest,  doubtless,  in 
regard  to  the  theory  of  the  origin  of  the  precious  metal,  —  the  re- 
searches of  the  miner  teach  us,  that,  in  any  auriferous  region  where 
certain  quartzose  lodes  are  surcharged  with  ores  of  iron,  particu- 
larly the  oxides  and  sulphurets,  there  some  amount  of  gold  will 
probably  be  found.  Again,  the  diffusion  or  dissemination  of  small 
particles  of  gold  throughout  the  body  of  various  rocks  both  of 
igneous  and  aqueous  origin  is,  as  before  said,  a  phenomenon  dwelt 
upon  by  certain  authors.  Humboldt,  indeed,  asserted  long  since,  that 
in  Guiana  *  gold,  like  tin,  is  sometimes  disseminated  in  an  almost 
imperceptible  manner  in  the  mass  itself  of  the  granitic  rocks  without 
the  ramification  or  interlacing  of  any  small  veins.'*  In  Mexico 
the  gold  mine  of  Guadalupe  y  Calvo,  above  alluded  to  was  in  por- 
phyry. In  Australia  (districts  of  Braidwood,  and  others  south  of 
Sydney),  a  peculiar  variety  of  felspathic  granite  is  described  by  Mr. 
Clarke  as  being  permeated  by  small  particles  of  gold ;  whilst  in 
Siberia,  Hoffman  had  some  years  before  spoken  of  its  distribution  in 
such  minute  quantities  in  clay-slate,  that  it  was  only  by  pounding 
up  large  lumps  of  the  rock  that  any  perceptible  quantity  could  be 
extracted.  J 

In  all  regions,  therefore,  where  such  rocks  occur,  we  may  find 
gold  either  in  the  coarse  debris  or  the  fine  alluvia  resulting  from 
their  decomposition.  Felspar  and  quartz  being  their  chief  com- 
ponent parts,  we  can  easily  imagine  how  their  former  destruction 


*  Voyages,  vol.  ii.  p.  238.  f  P^ige  449. 

X  Reise  nach  dem  Goldwaschen  Ost  Sibiriens,  by  Enist  Hofmann,  St.  Petersburg,  1847. 


Chap.  XVII.]  GENEKAL  VIEW  OF  GOLD.  457 

on  a  great  scale  would  leave  as  a  residue  large  heaps  of  that  pipe- 
clay (the  decomposed  felspar),  or  those  gritty  pebbles  (the  abraded 
quartz),  which  with  the  accompanying  ores  of  iron  (particularly 
the  black  magnetic  oxide)  are  so  frequently  the  gold-bearing  matrices 
in  the  drift  of  auriferous  countries.  But  whilst  it  is  an  admitted 
fact,  that  gold  has  sometimes  been  so  diffused  in  minute  and  imper- 
ceptible particles  in  certain  rocks,  we  have  yet  to  learn  whether  such 
diffusion  extends  far  downwards  into  the  body  of  any  mountain. 
Even  if  it  be  so,  the  extraction  of  ore  so  diffused  might,  if  the 
rocks  were  hard,  prove  too  costly  an  operation.  At  all  events,  the 
indisputable  fact  is,  that  the  chief  quantities  of  gold,  including  all  the 
considerable  lumps  and  pepitas,  having  been  originally  imbedded  in 
the  upper  parts  of  the  veinstones,  have  been  broken  up  and  trans- 
ported with  the  debris  of  the  mountain-tops  into  slopes  and  adjacent 
valleys. 

In  conclusion,  let  me  express  my  opinion,  that  the  fear  that  gold 
may  be  greatly  depreciated  in  value  relatively  to  silver — a  fear  which 
may  have  seized  upon  the  minds  of  some  of  my  readers  —  is  unwar- 
ranted by  the  data  registered  in  the  crust  of  the  earth.  Gold  is, 
after  all,  by  far  the  most  restricted — in  its  native  distribution — of 
the  precious  metals.  Silver  and  argentiferous  lead,  on  the  contrary, 
expand  so  largely  downwards  into  the  bowels  of  the  rocks,  as  to 
lead  us  to  believe,  that  they  must  yield  enormous  profits  to  the  skilful 
miner  for  ages  to  come  ;  and  the  more  so  in  proportion  as  better 
machinery  and  new  inventions  shall  lessen  the  difficulty  of  subter- 
ranean mining.*  It  may  indeed  well  be  doubted  whether  the  quan- 
tities both  of  gold  and  silver,  procured  from  regions  unknown  to  our 
progenitors,  will  prove  more  than  sufficient  to  meet  the  exigencies  of 
an  enormously  increased  population  and  our  augmenting  commerce 

*  A  recent  report  from  Col.  Lloyd,  H.  M.  Charge  d' Affaires  in  Bolivia,  communicated 
.through  H.  R.  H.  Prince  Albert  to  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  shows  to  what  an  enor- 
mous extent  silver  may  yet  be  extracted  from  Copiapb  and  other  South  American  mines.  This 
was,  indeed,  the  view  taken  long  ago  by  Humboldt. 


458  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVII. 

and  luxury.  But  this  is  not  a  theme  for  a  geologist ;  and  I  would 
simply  say,  that  Providence  seems  to  have  originally  adjusted  the 
relative  value  of  these  two  precious  metals,  and  that  their  relations, 
having  remained  the  same  for  ages,  will  long  survive  all  theories. 
Modern  science,  instead  of  contradicting,  only  confirms  the  truth  of 
the  aphorism  of  the  patriarch  Job,  which  thus  shadowed  forth  the 
downward  persistence  of  the  one  and  the  superficial  distribution  of 

the  other :  —  '  Surely  there  is  a  vein  for  the  silver  The  earth 

hath  dust  of  goldJ^ 

*  The  Book  of  Job,  chap,  28. 


P.  S.  —  Since  this  chapter  was  in  type,  Mr.  A.  R.  C.  Selwyn,  of  the  Geological  Survey,  whose 
labours  were  so  successful  in  North  Wales  (see  p.  28.),  having  recently  gone  to  Victoria  in  the 
capacity  of  Government  Geologist,  has  sent  home  an  excellent  sketch,  accompanied  by  map  and 
sections,  of  the  structure  of  the  country  around  Mount  Alexander,  distinguishing  the  true 
stratification  of  the  sedimentary  rocks  (Lower  Silurian?),  whether  micaceous  felspathic  sand- 
stones, flagstones,  or  clay  slates,  from  an  intense  and  vertical  slaty  cleavage  which  runs  through 
them  from  north  to  south,  and  with  which  the  course  of  the  auriferous  quartz  veins  and  the 
strike  joints  are  coincident.  He  also  shows  how  the  granite  has  metamorphosed  the  contiguous 
slaty  rocks,  and  has  injected  *  el  van'  dykes  into  them.  Mr.  Selwyn  coincides  with  Mr.  Wathen 
(p.  453.),  and  others,  in  stating,  that  the  auriferous  drift  is  local,  and  although  lying  at  various 
heights  is  usually  richest  at  or  near  the  bottom  of  these  accumulations. 

In  reference  to  New  Zealand,  the  Governor,  Sir  G.  Grey,  has  communicated  to  myself  a  letter 
addressed  to  him  by  Mr.  C.  Heaphy,  giving  an  account  of  the  gold  diggings  (not  yet  extensive) 
at  Coromandel,  on  the  east  coast  of  the  Northern  Island,  where  the  chief  rocks  are  quartzose 
and  granitic. 

Lastly,  Mr.  J  S.  Wilson,  who  after  a  residence  in  South  Australia,  passed  three  years  as  a  gold 
miner  in  the  Sierra  Nevada  of  California,  has  communicated  a  memoir,  on  the  auriferous  rocks 
of  that  region,  to  the  Geological  Society  of  London.  The  views  resulting  from  his  own  obser- 
vation and  experience,  confirm  decisively  the  opinions  stated  throughout  the  text,  in  aflirming 
the  fact  of  the  downward  impoverishment  of  gold-bearing  quartz  veins,  and  in  demonstrating 
that  the  richest  produce  is  essentially  derived  from  loose  superficial  debris,  piled  up  on  the 
mountain  sides  and  slopes,  or  in  ravines,  and  at  various  and  considerable  altitudes  above  the 
sea.  The  quicksilver  (cinnabar)  which  is  extracted  from  the  coast  range,  occurs  in  veinstones, 
in  clay  slate  (Silurian  ?),  as  in  the  Sierra  Morena  of  Spain.  These  memoirs  will  appear  in  the 
Journal  of  the  Geological  Society  of  London. 

In  this  chapter  I  have  necessarily  abstained  from  alluding  to  many  tracts  more  or  less 
auriferous,  but  not  rich  in  produce,  which  come  under  the  same  laws  of  distribution  as  those 
described  in  the  text.  Such,  for  example,  are  the  phenomena  of  the  southern  provinces  of 
the  United  States  (S.  Carolina,  &c.),  and  also  of  the  British  province  of  Canada,  whence  a 
certain  amount  of  gold  has  been  derived  from  metamorpliic  rocks,  which,  according  to  Mr. 
Logan,  are  probably  of  Lower  Silurian  age. 


459 


^       CHAPTEE  XVIII. 

CONCLUSIOIN^. 

RECAPITULATION — GENERAL   VIEW   OF   THE  SUCCESSION   OF  LIFE  FROM  A  BEGINNING 

AS  BASED  ON  POSITIVE  OBSERVATION  THE  PROGRESS  OF  CREATION  THEORETICAL 

SPECULATIONS  DISTINGUISHED  FROM  ABSOLUTE  GEOLOGICAL  RESULTS. 

Reverting  to  the  main  object  of  this  work,  —  the  history  of  the 
primeval  rocks, — let  us  now  see  what  inferences  may  be  drawn  from 
data  established  by  the  researches  of  the  geologist.  Passing  rapidly 
over  the  earliest  stages  of  the  planet,  which  are  necessarily  involved 
in  obscurity,  our  sketch  of  ancient  nature  began  with  the  first 
attainable  evidences  of  the  formation  of  sediments  composed  of  mud, 
sand,  and  pebbles.  It  was  shown,  that  the  lowest  accessible  of  these 
deposits,  though  of  enormous  dimensions,  and  occasionally  less  altered 
than  strata  formed  after  them,  are  almost  entirely  azoic,  or  void  of 
traces  of  inhabitants  of  the  seas  in  which  they  were  accuniulated. 
One  solitary  genus  of  zoophytes  has  been  alone  detected  in  such 
bottom  rocks ;  the  heat  of  the  surface  during  those  earlier  periods 
having  been,  it  is  supposed,  adverse  to  life. 

Proofs  were  then  adduced  to  demonstrate  that  in  the  next  forma- 
tions, scarcely  differing  at  all  in  mineral  character  from  those  which 
preceded  them,  observers  in  various  regions  had  detected  clear  and 
unmistakeable  signs  of  a  contemporaneous  appearance  of  animal  life, 
as  shown  by  the  presence  of  a  few  genera  of  crustaceans,  mollusks, 
and  zoophytes,  occupying  layers  of  similar  date  in  the  crust  of 
the  earth.  Proceeding  upwards  from  this  protozoic  zone,  wherein 
organic  remains  are  comparatively  rare,  we  then  ascended  to  other 
sediments,  in  which,  throughout  nearly  all  latitudes,  we  recognize  a 


460  SILUKIA.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

copious  distribution  of  submarine  creatures,  resembling  each  other 
very  nearly,  though  imbedded  in  rocks  now  separated  by  wide  seas, 
and  often  raised  up  to  the  summits  of  high  mountains.  Examining 
all  the  strata  exposed  to  view,  that  were  formed  during  the  first 
long  natural  epoch  of  similar  life  termed  Silurian,  %e  found  that  the 
successive  deposits  were  charged  with  a  great  variety  of  forms,  —  of 
the  trilobite  a  peculiar  crustacean,  —  of  the  orthoceratite,  the  earliest 
chambered  shell, — as  well  as  with  numerous  exquisitely  formed  mol- 
lusks,  crinoids,  and  zoophytes;  the  genus  graptolite  of  the  latter 
class  being  exclusively  found  in  these  Silurian  rocks.  In  short,  my 
contemporaries  have  assembled  from  those  ancient  and  now  desiccated 
marine  sediments  or  repositories  of  primeval  creatures,  examples  of 
every  group  of  purely  aquatic  animals,  save  fishes.  The  multiplied 
researches  of  the  last  twenty  years  have  failed  to  detect  the  trace 
of  a  fish,  amid  the  multitudes  of  all  other  marine  beings  in  the 
variojis  sediments  which  constitute  the  chief  mass  of  the  Silurian 
rocks.  Of  these,  though  they  are  the  lowest  in  the  scale  of  the 
great  division  vertehrata,  we  are  unable  to  perceive  a  vestige  until  we 
reach  the  highest  zone  of  the  Upper  Silurian,  and  are  about  to  enter 
upon  the  Devonian  period.  Even  on  that  horizon,  the  minute  fossil 
fishes,  long  ago  noticed  by  myself,  are  exceedingly  scarce,  and  none 
have  since  been  found  in  strata  of  higher  antiquity.  In  fact,  the 
few  fragments  of  cartilaginous  ichthyolites  of  the  highest  band  of 
Silurian  rock,  still  remain  the  most  ancient  known  beings  of  their 
class.  (See  PI.  35.) 

Looking,  therefore,  at  the  Silurian  System  as  a  whole,  and 
judging  from  the  collection  of  facts  gathered  from  all  quarters 
of  the  globe,  we  know,  that  its  chief  deposits  (certainly  all  the 
lower  and  most  extensive)  were  formed  during  a  long  period,  in 
which,  while  the  sea  abounded  with  countless  invertebrate  animals, 
no  marine  vertebrata  had  been  called  into  existence.  The  Silurian 
(except  at  its  close)  was,  therefore,  a  series  in  which  there  appeared 


Chap.  XVIII.]  PROGRESS  OF  CREATION.  461 

no  example  of  that  bony  framework  of  completed  vertebrae,  from 
which,  as  approaching  to  the  vertebrate  archetype,  the  comparative 
anatomist*  traces  the  rise  of  creative  power  up  to  the  formation  of 
man. 

Whether,  therefore,  the  term  of  *  progressive,'  or  of  that  of  *  suc- 
cessive,' be  applied  to  such  acts  of  creation,  my  object  is  simply  to 
show,  upon  clear  and  general  evidence,  that  there  was  a  long  period 
in  the  history  of  the  world,  wherein  no  vertebrated  animal  lived.  In 
this  sense,  the  appearance  of  the  first  recognizable  fossil  fishes,  is  as 
decisive  a  proof  of  a  new  and  distinct  creation,  as  that  of  the  placing 
of  man  upon  the  terrestrial  surface,  at  the  end  of  the  long  series  of 
animals  which  characterize  the  younger  geological  periods. 

Nor  have  we  been  able  to  disinter  from  the  older  strata  of  this 
long  period  of  invertebrate  life,  any  distinct  fragments  of  land  plants. 
But  just  in  the  same  stratum  wherein  the  few  earliest  small  fishes  have 
been  detected,  there  also  have  we  observed  the  first  appearances  of  a 
diminutive,  yet  highly  organized,  tree  vegetation.  (See  Appendix  C.) 

If  it  be  granted  that  the  position  of  the  earliest  recognizable 
vertebrata  is  good  positive  evidence  on  which  to  argue,  still  it 
might  be  contended  that  such  forms  may  at  a  future  period  be  found 
in  lower  strata.  In  this  work,  however,  I  reason  only  on  known 
data.  Nor  is  it  on  this  testimony  alone,  strong,  clear,  and  universal 
as  it  is,  that  my  view  is  sustained ;  for  as  soon  as  we  pass  into  the 
formation  immediately  overlying,  and  quit  the  zone  wherein  the  first 
few  small  fishes  are  to  be  detected,  we  are  furnished  with  collateral 

*  See  Owen  on  the  Homology  of  the  Vertebrate  Skeleton :  Reports,  Brit.  Assoc. 
Adv.  Science,  1846,  p.  169.  The  general  reader  will  find  a  powerful  essay,  em- 
bodying the  opinions  of  the  same  high  authority,  on  the  proofs  of  a  progression  in 
creation,  Quarterly  Review,  1851,  p.  412,  et  seq.  The  arguments  there  em- 
ployed have  been  strengthened  by  subsequent  discoveries  alluded  to  in  this 
volume.  I  would  also  specially  refer  the  reader  to  Professor  Sedgwick's  '  Dis- 
course on  the  Studies  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,'  for  a  masterly  and  eloquent 
illustration  of  several  of  the  views  which  are  here  advocated. 


462  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

proofs  that  this  was  the  earliest  great  step  in  a  progressive  order 
of  creation.  In  the  following  or  Devonian  period,  we  are  sur- 
rounded by  a  profusion  of  larger  fossil  fishes,  with  vertebrae  for  the 
most  part  very  imperfectly  ossified,  and  with  dermal  skeletons  of 
very  singular  forms ;  all  differing  vastly  from  anything  of  their 
class  in  existing  nature.  These  fishes  were  thus  clearly  added  to 
the  other  forms  of  marine  life.  Again,  in  this  Devonian  era, 
we  are  presented  with  well  defined  land  plants,  also  of  much  larger 
dimensions  than  the  very  rare  specimens  in  the  uppermost  Silurian ; 
while,  towards  the  close  of  the  period,  we  meet  with  an  air-breathing 
reptile.  The  little  Telerpeton  had  groves  of  tree  ferns  or  lycopo- 
diaceous  plants,  and  even  of  ConiferaB,  amid  the  roots  of  which  he 
could  nestle.  (See  p.  254.) 

Just  as  the  introduction  of  cartilaginous  fishes  (^Onchus  e.  g.)  is 
barely  traceable  at  the  close  of  the  long  Silurian  era,  so  becoming 
soon  afterwards  more  abundant,  they  are  associated  in  all  younger 
formations  with  true  osseous  fishes,  whose  remains  are  found 
intermixed  with  the  other  exuvias  of  the  sea.  Putting  aside,  there- 
fore, theory,  and  judging  solely  from  positive  observation,  we  may 
fairly  infer,  first,  that  during  very  long  epochs  the  seas  were  unoccu- 
pied by  any  kind  of  fishes ;  secondly,  that  the  earliest  discoverable 
creatures  of  this  class  had  an  internal  framework  almost  incapable  of 
fossilization,  and  so  left  in  the  strata  their  teeth  and  dermal  ske- 
letons only ;  and  thirdly,  that  in  the  succeeding  period,  the  oldest 
fishes  having  bony  vertebrae  make  their  scanty  appearance,  but 
become  numerous  in  the  overlying  deposits.  Are  not  these  absolute 
data  of  the  geologist  clear  signs  of  a  progress  in  creation  ? 

In  like  manner,  there  is  a  progress  in  the  productions  of  the  land ; 
the  great  Carboniferous  period  being  marked  by  the  first  copious  and 
universally  abundant  terrestrial  flora,  the  prelude  to  which  had  ap- 
peared in  the  foregoing  Devonian  epoch.  This  earliest  luxuriant 
tree  vegetation,  the  pabulum  of  our  great  coal-fields,  is  also  specially 


CflAF.  XVIII.]  PROGKESS  OF  CREATION.  463 

remarkable  for  its  spread  over  many  latitudes  and  longitudes ;  and 
together  with  it  occur  the  same  common  species  of  marine  shells,  all 
indicating  a  more  or  less  equable  climate  from  polar  to  inter-tropical 
regions ;  a  phenomenon  wholly  at  variance  with  the  present  distribu' 
tion  of  animal  or  vegetable  life  over  the  surface  of  the  planet. 

Lastly,  while  the  Permian  era  was  distinguished  by  the  disappear- 
ance of  the  greater  number  of  the  primeval  types,  and  by  essential 
modifications  of  those  w4iich  remained,  it  still  bore  a  strong  resem- 
blance, through  its  plants  and  animals,  to  the  Carboniferous  period  ; 
whilst,  in  unison  with  all  the  great  facts  elicited  by  our  survey 
of  the  older  strata,  it  was  marked  by  the  appearance  of  an  animal  of 
a  higher  grade  than  any  one  in  the  foregone  eras, — a  large  thecodont 
reptile — allied  (according  to  Owen)  to  the  living  Monitor. 

In  speaking  of  the  Silurian,  Devonian,  Carboniferous,  and  Permian 
rocks,  let  me  however  explain,  that  whilst  each  of  the  three  latter 
groups  occupy  wide  spaces  in  certain  regions,  no  one  of  them  is  of 
equal  value  with  the  Silurian,  in  representing  time  or  the  succes- 
sion of  animal  life  in  the  crust  of  the  globe.  When  the  Silurian 
system  was  divided  into  lower  and  upper  parts,  our  acquaintance  with 
younger  formations  simply  sufficed  to  show  a  complete  distinction 
between  its  animal  remains  as  a  whole  and  those  of  the  Carboni- 
ferous rocks,  from  which  it  is  separated  by  the  thick  accumulations  of 
the  Old  Red  Sandstone.  At  that  period,  the  shelly,  slaty  rocks  of 
Devonshire  were  not  known  to  be  the  equivalents  of  such  Old  Red 
Sandstone  ;  still  less  had  the  relations  and  fossil  contents  of  the  strata 
now  called  Permian  been  ascertained.  tTudging  from  the  fossils  then 
collected,  it  was  believed,  that  the  Lower  Silurian  contained  organic 
remains  very  distinct  from  those  of  the  Upper  Silurian ;  and  yet  the 
two  groups  were  united  in  a  system,  because  they  were  characterized 
throughout  by  a  common  fades.  This  so-called  system  was,  in  short, 
typified  by  a  profusion  of  Trilobites  and  Graptolites,  with  Orthides 
and  Pentameri  of  a  type  wholly  unknown  in  the  Carboniferous 


464  SILUEIA.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

rocks.  And  whilst  fishes  were  seen  to  exist  in  the  intermediate 
masses  of  Old  Red  Sandstone,  no  traces  of  them  could  be  detected 
below  the  very  uppermost  zone  of  the  Silurian  rocks.  Nineteen 
years  have  elapsed,  and,  after  the  most  vigilant  researches  in  various 
regions  of  both  hemispheres,  these  great  features  remain  the  same 
as  when  first  indicated.  The  labours,  however,  of  those  who  fol- 
lowed me,  have  infinitely  more  sustained  the  unity  of  that  system*; 
for  its  lower  and  upper  divisions  are  now  proved  to  be  connected,  not 
only  by  such  generic  types  and  analogous  forms,  but  further  by  the 
community  of  a  very  considerable  number  of  identical  bodies. 

In  a  broad  classification  of  primeval  life,  one  eminent  naturalist  f 
views  the  Devonian,  Carboniferous,  and  Permian  rocks  as  simply 
the  Upper  Palasozoic ;  the  Silurian  rocks  constituting  the  Lower 
Palaeozoic,  But,  whether  this  ancient  series  be  divided  into  double 
or  triple  classes  (some  palaeontologists  preferring  to  hold  the 
Devonian  as  a  separate  and  intermediate  type),  the  result  of  the 
researches  of  the  numerous  authors  appealed  to  in  this  volume  has 
unquestionably  justified  the  application  of  the  term  *  system,'  to  the 
Silurian  rocks. 

At  the  close  of  the  Permian  era,  an  infinitely  greater  change  took 
place  in  life,  than  that  which  marked  the  ascent  from  the  Silurian 
system  to  the  overlying  groups.  The  earlier  races  then  disappeared 
(at  least  all  the  species),  and  were  replaced  by  an  entirely  new 
creation,  the  generic  types  of  which  were  continued  through  those 
long  epochs  which  geologists  term  secondary  or  mesozoic  (the  medi- 
eval age  of  extinct  beings).  In  these,  again,  the  reader  will  learn, 
by  consulting  the  works  of  many  waiters,  how  one  formation  fol- 

*  See  the  works  of  John  Phillips,  E.  de  Verneuil,  Edward  Forbes,  Joachim 
Barrande,  James  De  C.  Sowerby,  James  Hall,  J.  W.  Salter,  D.  Sharpe,  T. 
Davidson,  John  Morris.  The  most  recent  researches  in  Britain  give  the  large 
number  of  nearly  100  species  of  fossils,  common  to  the  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian. 
(See  also  the  Preface,  and  Table  A.  in  the  Appendix.) 

t  Edward  Forbes. 


Chap.  XVIII.]  MINERAL  CONDITIONS.  465 

lowed  another,  each  characterized  by  different  creatures ;  many  of  them, 
however,  exhibiting  near  their  downward  and  upward  limits  certain 
fossils  which  link  on  one  reign  of  life  to  another. 

In  surveying  the  whole  series  of  formations,  the  practical  geologist 
is  fully  impressed  with  the  conviction,  that  there  has,  at  all  periods, 
subsisted  a  very  intimate  connection  between  the  existence,  or  at 
all  events  the  preservation  of  animals,  and  the  media  in  which  they 
have  been  fossilized.  The  chief  seat  of  former  life  in  each  geo- 
logical epoch,  is  often  marked  by  a  calcareous  mass,  mostly  in  a 
central  part,  towards  which  the  animals  increase  from  below,  and 
whence  they  diminish  upwards.  Thus,  the  Llandeilo  limestone  of 
the  Lower  Silurian  and  the  Wenlock  of  the  Upper  Silurian,  are 
respectively  centres  of  animalization  of  each  of  those  groups.  In  like 
manner,  the  Eifel  limestone  is  the  truest  index  of  the  Devonian,  the 
Mountain  limestone  of  the  Carboniferous,  and  the  Zechstein  or  Eng- 
lish Magnesian  limestone  of  the  Permian.  Throughout  the  secondary 
rocks  the  same  law  prevails  more  or  less ;  and  wherever  the  typical 
limestone  of  a  natural  group  is  absent,  there  we  perceive  the  deposits 
to  be  ill-characterized  by  organic  remains.  For  example,  the  Trias, 
so  rich  in  fossil  contents  when  its  great  calcareous  centre  the  Mus- 
chelkalk  is  present,  as  in  Germany  and  France,  is  a  miserably  sterile 
formation  in  Britain,  where,  as  in  our  New  Red  Sandstone,  no  such 
limestone  exists.* 

Whilst  it  is  beside  my  present  aim  to  enter  upon  descriptions 
of  such  secondary  deposits,  still  less  of  those  called  tertiary,  which 
intervened  between  them  and  the  sediments  of  the  present  day,  we 
may  still  cast  an  eye  over  the  general  order  admitted  by  geologists,  to 

*  The  observation  in  the  text  does  not  apply  to  the  oolitic  series  of  England, 
throughout  which  lime  is  diffused  at  many  stages ;  nor  to  many  limestones  which 
may  have  been  formed  by  deposit  from  chemical  solution.  For  a  full  ex- 
planation of  the  origin  of  such  deposits  and  the  associated  phenomena,  the  reader 
is  referred  to  the  instructive  work  by  Sir  H.  T.  De  la  Beche,  '  The  Geological 
Observer,'  1853. 

H  H 


466  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

see  how  it  harmonizes  with  what  has  been  related  of  the  succession 
of  animals  belonging  to  the  older  rocks,  as  proving  a  succession  from 
lower  to  higher  grades  of  life. 

Proceeding  into  the  secondary  strata,  which  often  constitute  vast 
mountain  masses,  we  pass  first  through  the  Trias,  then  traverse 
the  Lias,  and  afterwards  the  long  series  of  the  Oolitic  or  Jurassic 
formations,  all  of  which  are  charged  with  many  animal  and  vegetable 
remains,  and  laden  with  a  great  profusion  of  curious  and  large  Saurians, 
very  unlike  the  lizards  which  preceded  them.  Besides  numerous  land 
plants,  insects  now  become  abundant, — a  tribe  which  began  to  appear 
in  the  Carboniferous  era,  or  in  the  first  great  forests ;  and  with 
these  are  found  bones  of  that  large-winged  reptile,  the  ^  pterodactyle ' 
of  geologists.  But  still,  surrounded  as  we  are  in  these  secondary 
strata  by  the  spoils  of  the  land,  we  have  to  journey  through  nearly 
a  half  of  them,  before  we  obtain  any  other  evidences  of  the  exist- 
ence of  mammalia,  than  two  or  three  teeth  of  a  carnivorous  animal 
said  to  be  found  in  a  bone  bed  of  the  Trias*  (but  which  may  pos- 
sibly be  the  bottom  bed  of  the  Lias),  and  the  scarce  fragments,  in  the 
Stonesfield  Oolite,  of  the  Amphitherium,  formerly  named  Didel- 
phis  Bucklandi  by  Broderip.  This  last-mentioned  creature,  which  is 
allied  to  living  marsupials,  though  discovered  many  years  ago,  has 
had  no  companions  added  to  it  by  the  hordes  of  collectors  who  have 
sought  for  them,  except  the  small  but  highly  curious  Phascolotherium 
of  Owen.j 

*  See  Lyell's  Elements  of  Geology,  4tli  edit.  p.  13. 

t  See  Owen,  British  Foss.  Mammalia,  p.  31.  On  the  point,  indeed,  of  the 
absence  of  mammalia  in  the  older  rocks,  I  may  be  allowed  to  quote,  if  not  the 
words,  at  least  the  sentiments,  of  the  same  eminent  contemporary.  '  Had 
mammalia  existed  in  the  same  number  and  variety  in  the  ancient  forests, 
that  have  contributed  to  the  coal  strata,  as  in  the  actual  woods  and  swamps 
of  the  warmer  parts  of  the  globe,  —  had  armadillos  and  ant-eaters  been  then 
created  to  feed  on  the  insects,  sloths  on  the  leaves,  monkeys  on  the  fruits  of 
the  coal  plants,  as  they  do  now  in  the  Brazilian  forests  where  the  mammals  pre- 


Chap.  XVIII.]  GENERAL  GEOLOGICAL  ORDER.  467 

After  this,  we  have  plentiful  evidences  of  successive  shore  deposits 
at  many  periods,  with  abundant  examples  of  sediments  formed  in 
lakes  and  rivers  (an  order  of  things  of  which  vestiges  were  first 
apparent  towards  the  close  of  the  primeval  period),  and  with  con- 
tinual signs  of  adjacent  lands  affording  numerous  forms  of  plants 
and  insects.  The  Wealden,  of  such  vast  thickness,  is,  indeed,  exclu- 
sively tenanted  by  land  and  fresh-water  remains ;  and  yet,  though 
its  strata  are  full  of  plants  and  the  gigantic  fossil  lizards  of  the 
period,  not  one  bone  of  a  mammal  has  been  exhumed  from  them ; 
while  bones  of  birds  make  their  first  appearance  only  in  the  greensand 
and  chalk. 

We  have  to  work  through  the  whole  cretaceous  series  and  its  pro- 
lific fauna,  to  take  leave,  in  short,  of  the  secondary  rocks,  and  enter 
upon  the  tertiary  epochs,  before  such  remains  are  at  all  plentiful. 
Then,  for  the  first  time  in  this  incalculably  long  series  of  forma- 
tions, we  have  before  us,  on  all  sides,  the  bones  of  the  higher  order 
of  mammalia;  and  these  having  been  drifted  from  adjacent  lands, 
are  constantly  associated  with  the  exuviae  of  marine  creatures, 
which,  though  of  classes  known  in  the  earlier  formations,  are 
entirely  different  in  species. 

Animals  of  every  sort  thenceforward  abound  in  each  succeeding 
formation;  and  exhibit  an  increasing  quantity  and  variety  of  both 
sea  and  land  mammalia  as  we  approach  the  superficial  accumulations. 
In  the  last  are  entombed  the  bones  of  gigantic  quadrupeds, — 
quadrupeds  which  once  inhabited  our  present  continents,  and  which 
must  have  required  for  their  sustenance  a  range  over  lands  as  exten- 
sive as  those  now  occupied  by  man  and  his  associates. 

ponderate  over  reptiles,  we  might  have  expected  the  first  evidences  of  an  air- 
breathing  vertebrate  animal  to  have  been  a  mammalian  !'  Quarterly  Review,  1851, 
p.  423. 

H  n  2 


468  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

Let  the  reader  dwell  on  these  remarkable  facts  which  the  labours 
of  geologists  have  elicited  in  the  last  fifty  years.  Let  him  view 
them  progressively  and  in  the  order  indicated  by  Nature  herself. 
Let  him  execute  a  patient  survey  from  the  lower  deposits  upwards, 
and  he  will  find  everywhere  a  succession  of  vertebrated  creatures, 
rising  from  lower  to  higher  organizations,  —  a  doctrine  first  promul- 
gated by  the  illustrious  Cuvier,  but  from  much  less  perfect  data  than 
we  now  possess.*  Guided  by  facts  only,  he  will  everywhere  recog- 
nize signs  of  a  similar  primordial  life  registered  on  the  same  lower 
tablets  of  stone ;  and  thence  examining  upwards,  he  will  admit  the 
proofs  of  the  advancing  steps  above  indicated. 

These  views  of  the  successive  creation  of  different  races  are,  it  is 
true,  mainly  based  upon  the  progressive  rise  in  the  scale  of  the  ver- 
tebrate sub-kino-dom.  Of  that  class  we  can  best  reojister  a  beginning:, 
and  thence  trace  the  distinct  progress  which  sustains  our  general 
inference.  When  we  turn  to  other  and  inferior  classes,  crustaceans, 
mollusks  and  corals,  naturalists  assure  us  (and  I  willingly  subscribe 
to  their  dicta)  that  many  of  the  earlier  leading  groups  were  quite  as 
highly  organized  as  any  of  their  representatives  in  subsequent  ages 
or  at  the  present  day. 

Nay,  even  whilst  I  close  this  volume,  one  of  our  leaders  in  the 
philosophy  of  Natural  History  has  propounded  a  new  theory,  which 
he  terms  'The  Manifestation  of  the  relation  of  Polarity  in  the 
Distribution  of  Generic  Types  in  Time.'f 

Kegarding  all  the  epochs  after  the  Trias  to  be  combinedly  equi- 
valent to  those  preceding  (or  the  palasozoic),  he  maintains  that  the 

*  The  paleozoic  or  primeval  fossils  were  necessarily  little  known  to  that  great 
comparative  anatomist,  who  drew  his  conclusions  from  data  within  the  scope  of  the 
knowledge  of  his  day;  i.e.  from  the  higher  orders  of  vertebrata  which  appear  in 
the  more  recent  epochs  only. 

t  Address  to  the  Geological  Society  of  London,  Feb.  17.  1854,  by  Professor 
E.  Forbes,  President. 


Chap.xviil]  geological  hypotheses.  469 

development  of  types  of  life,  as  manifested  by  generic  combinations 
during  the  long  secondary  and  tertiary  epochs,  styled  by  him 
'  Neozoic,'  is  in  opposition  to,  or  in  a  relation  of  polarity  with, 
the  comparable  phenomenon  during  the  *  Palaeozoic'  period.  This  is 
indicated  by  the  concentration  of  the  maximum  of  what  he  terms  'ge- 
neric ideas/  in  some  of  the  earlier  stages  of  the  older,  and  towards  the 
termination  of  the  more  recent  period;  w^hilst,  as  we  approach  to  the 
interlacing  point,  (i.e.  the  Trias)  there  is  a  poverty  in  the  origination 
of  generic  types.  This  polarity,  he  contends,  is  evident  in  both 
directions  within  each  great  group  of  invertebrate  animals,  as  well 
as  in  the  assemblage  of  plants;  but  in  the  vertebrata,  the  main 
direction  of  development  of  generic  ideas  is,  he  admits,  towards 
the  newer  or  Neozoic  pole. 

This  ingenious  speculation  does  not  interfere  with  my  chief  argu- 
ment, as  based  on  facts  which  indicate  great  periods  wherein  few  or 
no  animals  existed,  followed  by  a  long,  invertebrate  epoch.  At  the 
same  time,  let  me  repeat,  that  the  earliest  signs  of  living  things, 
announcing  as  they  do  a  high  complexity  of  organization,  entirely 
exclude  the  hypothesis  of  a  transmutation  from  lower  to  higher 
grades  of  being.  The  first  fiat  of  Creation  which  went  forth, 
doubtlessly  ensured  the  perfect  adaptation  of  animals  to  the  sur- 
rounding media ;  and  thus,  whilst  the  geologist  recognizes  a  begin- 
ning, he  can  see  in  the  innumerable  facets  of  the  eye  of  the  earliest 
crustacean*,  the  same  evidences  of  Omniscience  as  in  the  comple- 
tion of  the  vertebrate  form. 

Yet,  however  they  admit  the  facts,  some  of  my  speculative  con- 
temporaries think  that  they  can  so  explain  them,  as  not  to  justify  the 
inference  of  progressive  creations.  They  suppose,  that  nearly  all  the 
strata  of  date  antecedent  to  those  in  which  the  first  signs  of  life  have 

*  See  Dr.  Buckland's  clear  and  beautiful  illustration  of  this  phenomenon  in  his 
Bridgwater  Treatise. 

H  H  3 


470  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVII. 

been  detected,  are  often  in  so  crystalline  a  state,  that  if  they  originally 
contained  remains  of  animals,  the  traces  of  them  must  have  been  ob- 
literated by  changes  since  effected  in  the  structure  of  the  rock.  Now, 
if  this  supposition  had  been  supported  by  the  researches  of  late 
years,  we  must  doubtless  have  admitted  that  the  origin  of  life  in  the 
globe  was  buried  in  a  hopeless  obscurity.  But  the  hypothesis  has 
been  set  aside,  as  before  explained,  by  the  fact  of  the  existence 
of  deposits  many  thousands  of  feet  thick,  and  scarcely  at  all 
altered,  which,  made  up  of  sand,  mud,  and  pebbles,  constitute  the 
very  foundations  of  the  fossil  bearing  strata.  In  these  huge  lower 
sediments  a  zoophyte  only  has  been  detected;  but  immediately  above 
them,  in  various  and  distant  countries,  we  perceive  the  oldest  known 
small  group  of  animals.  If  the  opposing  argument  had  been  derived 
from  the  evidences  collected  in  one  region  only,  it  might  have  been 
su£fi2:ested,  that  as  the  same  formation  which  is  barren  in  life 
over  one  district,  teems  with  signs  of  it  in  another,  so  the  infra- 
Silurian  or  bottom  rocks  (the  Cambrian  of  the  Geological  Surveyors) 
may  still  prove  to  be  fossiliferous.  But,  even  if  a  few  types  should 
hereafter  be  discovered  in  those  lower  strata,  the  reasoning  would  in 
no  wise  change  its  character,  if  such  infra-Silurian  fossils  were 
not  found  to  pertain  to  higher  forms  of  life, — a  result  which  would 
be  in  manifest  contradiction  to  all  the  ascertained  facts  respecting 
geological  succession.  Nor  can  we  allow  this  hypothesis,  founded  on 
an  exceptional  possibility,  to  countervail  the  universal  data  that  have 
been  registered,  and  which  demonstrate  in  many  countries  the  unfos- 
siliferous  character  of  the  lowest  sedimentary  formations. 

Again,  when  the  explorer  of  the  older  formations  produces  his 
specimens  of  fossils  from  various  parts  of  the  world,  to  show  that  the 
mass  of  the  Silurian  rocks  contains  all  classes  of  marine  life  with  the 
exception  of  fishes,  his  antagonist  might  reply,  that  gelatinous  fishes, 
void  of  backbones  (like  the  solitary  little  Amphioxus  now  living), 
may  have  been  the  only  creatures  of  their  class  which  swarm  in  the 


Chap.  XVIII.]  GEOLOGICAL  HYPOTHESES.  471 

broad  seas  then  prevailing :  and  if  so,  that  no  traces  of  them  could 
exist;  their  boneless  bodies  perishing  and  leaving  no  sign  of  their 
former  existence.  As  an  old  student  of  Nature's  works,  I  cannot 
allow  this  bare  possibility  to  be  placed  in  opposition  to  the  very 
numerous  and  well  recorded  facts,  which  announce  the  perfection 
of  all  the  other  classes  of  the  ancient  submarine  kingdom.  If 
thousands  of  invertebrate  animals  have  left  their  coverings  behind,  is 
it  rational  to  suppose,  that  every  form  of  the  great  class  of  fishes 
should  be  wanting  in  that  framework  which,  whether  consisting  of 
dermal  plates  or  of  bony  vertebras,  characterizes  them  in  the  strata 
of  all  succeeding  epochs  ?  Nay  more,  we  see  that  in  this  same  long 
period  in  which  no  traces  of  fishes  appear,  there  specially  prevailed 
a  superabundance  of  cephalopods ;  and  as  creatures  of  that  structure 
are  well  known  to  be  carnivorous,  little  doubt  can  be  entertained, 
that  they  acted  the  part  of  fishes,  and  were  the  scavengers  of  the 
Silurian  seas. 

Another  hypothesis  which  has  been  advanced  in  opposition  to  the 
mass  of  positive  evidence  is,  that  although  such  earlier  rocks  are  void 
of  ichthyolites,  the  sediments  may  have  all  been  formed  in  limited 
zones  around  the  earth;  just  as  it  is  believed  by  some  naturalists,  that 
there  are  seas  subject  to  certain  currents  and  conditions  of  the  bottom 
in  which  no  fishes  are  now  living.  But  here,  again,  the  applica- 
tion of  such  a  theory  is,  I  would  suggest,  still  more  negatived  by  the 
facts  adduced.  Silurian  rocks  similar  in  structure,  and  containing 
the  same  organic  remains,  are  not  confined  to  any  one  segment  of  the 
earth's  surface  however  broad,  but  are  largely  developed  in  nearly 
all  known  regions.  The  argument  is,  therefore,  untenable  in  face  of  the 
knowledge  we  have  acquired,  that  amidst  a  profusion  of  all  the  other 
forms  of  aquatic  life,  fishes  only  are  absent  from  strata  of  this  early 
age. 

This  prevalence  of  a  widely  spread,  primeval  ocean,  and  of  a  sur- 
face which  had  not  yet  been  subjected  to  those  innumerable  variations 

H  H  4 


472  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

of  outline  which  have  since  changed  and  modified  the  different 
climates  of  the  earth,  when  connected  with  a  belief  in  the  former 
greater  radiation  of  heat  from  its  interior,  are  the  chief  data  required 
to  satisfy  us,  that  physical  conditions  then  prevailed,  with  which  the 
nature  and  extensive  spread  of  the  earlier  groups  of  animals  are  in 
harmony. 

Admitting  that  in  the  remote  sedimentary  periods,  large  areas  of 
land  (though  probably  of  no  very  great  altitude),  as  well  as  vast  rivers, 
must  have  existed  as  sources  of  the  enormous  primeval  deposits,  we 
may  still  well  believe  that  such  lands  were  widely  separated  by  seas ; 
and  that  hence  we  ought  necessarily  to  meet  with  a  smaller  number 
of  shore  animals  and  a  s^reater  number  of  oceanic  forms.  Takino^ 
advantage  of  this  simple  fact,  some  persons  have  suggested,  that  we 
may  have  as  yet  discovered  only  the  deep-sea  products  of  the  Silu- 
rian period ;  and  that  when  the  true  edges  of  its  lands  come  to  be 
detected,  we  may  then  find  plants  and  many  creatures  now  unknown 
to  us.  To  this  I  confidently  reply,  that  many  proofs  have  already 
been  adduced  of  lands  which  were  contiguous  to  the  marine  Silurians, 
both  Lower  and  Upper.  Innumerable  pebble  beds,  coral  reefs,  and 
trails  of  animals  that  crawled  upon  the  mud,  are  the  principal 
evidences  required,  and  to  these  I  will  presently  revert. 

It  has  also  been  said,  that  the  great  number  of  fioating  shells  or 
cephalopods,  particularly  the  Orthoceratites,  which  abounded  in  the 
Silurian  era,  are  in  themselves  indicators  of  deep  seas,  remote  from 
land,  into  which,  therefore,  terrestrial  spoils  were  little  likely  to 
be  transported.  Now,  the  Silurian  chambered  shells  may,  indeed, 
have  required  a  certain  depth  of  water,  and  yet  many  of  them,  like 
the  Nautilus  Pompilius  of  the  present  day,  may  have  lived  at  no 
great  distance  from  the  land  of  that  time.  For,  in  the  succeeding 
Carboniferous  period,  when  the  mountain  limestone  was  formed,  we 
find  no  lack  of  floating  shells,  and  other  mollusca  equally  charac- 
teristic of  certain  depths  of  water,  and  yet  these  are  associated  with 


Chap.  XVIII.]  PEIMEVAL  CONDITIONS.  473 

abundance  of  plants  which  were  drifted  from  land ;  simply,  as  I 
would  say,  because  the  earth  then  bore  an  arboreal  or  tree  vegetation, 
whereof  we  can  discover  no  traces  in  the  Silurian  time,  notwith- 
standing the  certain  existence  of  contiguous  lands  and  of  large  streams 
at  that  early  period.  So  is  it,  indeed,  in  every  subsequent  formation 
of  the  geological  series.  Thus,  in  the  secondary  deposits  of  the  Lias 
and  Oolites,  we  meet  with  an  equal,  if  not  a  greater,  number  of 
floating  shells  than  in  the  Silurian.  The  Ammonites  and  Belemnites 
of  that  period,  requiring  the  same  depth  of  water,  have  taken  the 
place  of  the  Orthoceratites ;  and  yet  associated  with  them,  we  have 
everywhere  proofs  of  the  proximity  of  the  land,  in  the  abundance  of 
fossil  plants  and  wood  derived  from  terra  Jirma,  doubtless  then  much 
more  extensive  and  diversified  than  in  the  earliest  times,  and  also 
clothed  with  a  rich  vegetation. 

If  the  old  continents  and  islands,  which  existed  during  the  accumu- 
lation of  the  marine  Silurian  deposits  had  borne  large  trees,  the 
numerous  researches  of  geologists  in  all  quarters  of  the  globe  must 
have  brought  to  light  some  signs  of  them.  For,  whilst  we  know 
that  there  are  rocks  of  considerable  extent,  which,  from  the  fine  nature 
of  their  materials,  may  probably  have  been  deposited  in  an  ocean  at 
some  distance  from  a  shore  (though  we  have  as  yet  little  or  no 
evidence  as  to  the  accumulation  of  sediment  in  deep  seas,  where  no 
currents  prevail);  there  are,  on  the  other  hand,  many  Silurian  districts 
of  the  Old  and  New  World,  where  the  form  and  structure  of  the 
deposits  bespeak  the  action  of  waves  and  surge,  and  where  the  im- 
bedded seaweeds,  zoophytes,  and  other  remains,  compel  us  to  adopt  the 
same  view.  And  if  the  primeval  fauna  does  aiford  fewer  spiral  uni- 
valve shells,  than  are  seen  among  the  animals  of  the  laminarian  zones 
of  our  modern  seas,  we  may  suggest  that  shore  lines,  as  we  under- 
stand them,  must  have  been  much  less  numerous  in  primeval  epochs 
than  at  the  present  day ;  now  that  the  surface  has  been  diversified 
by  lofty  dividing  ridges  on  the  land  and  corresponding  depressions 


474  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

in  the  ocean.  With  this  important  reservation,  we  do,  however, 
obtain  as  many  of  those  signs  of  shores  as  we  can  expect  to  find  in 
the  earlier  deposits. 

Take,  for  example,  the  illustrations  of  this  point  furnished  by  the 
American  geologists,  from  a  very  wide  extent  of  their  country,  where 
the  strata  are  nearly  horizontal,  and  where,  without  any  ambiguity, 
our  kinsmen  have  traced  life  downwards  in  the  successive  crusts 
of  the  earth,  to  the  same  primordial  zone  as  their  contemporaries 
have  done  in  Britain*,  Scandinavia,  and  Bohemia.  The  Americans 
have  evidences  in  their  lowest  Silurian  beds  of  numerous  trails  or 
tracks  of  animals,  whether  crustaceans  or  gasteropods,  which  moved 
over  a  film  of  mud  or  sand  formed  by  one  tide  before  another 
covered  the  impressions,  and  left  them  as  proofs  to  future  ages  of 
layers  which  were  deposited  on  the  shores  and  edges  of  former  lands. 
Again,  in  other  Silurian  beds  of  the  far  West,  there  exists  the  same 
abundance  of  coral  reefs  as  in  Britain,  and  the  still  stronger  evi- 
dence of  pebbly  shores,  which,  though  they  must  have  been  beaten 
by  waves,  never  contain  the  trace  of  a  land  plant.  Why,  therefore, 
wander  from  such  plain  facts  into  the  region  of  theory  ?  And  why 
not  admit  what  is,  indeed,  in  accordance  with  all  we  have  observed, 
that  the  very  long  Silurian  era  had  nearly  passed  away  before 
trees  grew  upon  the  land  or  fishes  swam  in  the  waters  ? 

In  the  fundamental  facts  described  in  this  volume,  we  cannot, 
therefore,  but  recognize  arrangements,  which,  though  perfect  as 
respected  all  truly  primeval  creatures  and  plants,  were  essentially 
different  from  those  of  our  own  time.  For,  if  the  then  existing  con- 
tinents or  islands  had  borne  trees,  some  fragments  of  them  must 
have  been  transported  into  adjacent  estuaries,  and  mixed  in  the  mud 
and  sand,  like  the  vegetables  of  every  subsequent  epoch,  by  the 

*  Even  after  these  pages  were  written,  Mr.  Salter  has  described  a  trail  of  the 
Hymenocmns  vermicauda,  in  the  Lingula  Flags  of  North  Wales  (Lowest  Silurian 
of  the  Geological  Survey).    See  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  (May,  1854.) 


Chap.  XVIII.  j  PKIMEVAL  CONDITIONS.  475 

agency  of  those  great  streams,  of  whose  mechanical  power  we  have 
such  decisive  proofs.  The  Silurian  rocks  extend  over  areas  as  large, 
if  not  larger,  than  any  great  system  of  the  following  periods ;  and  yet 
in  them  alone,  I  repeat,  is  there  an  entire  absence  of  an  arborescent 
vegetation,  derived  from  the  then  adjacent  lands.  (See  Appendix  C.) 

And  here  it  is  well  to  remind  the  student  of  the  wide,  if  not  uni- 
versal spread  of  the  primeval  strata.  In  the  annexed  small  general 
map  of  the  world  are  represented  all  the  regions  over  which  one  or 
more  of  the  primeval  fossil  groups  are  known  to  exist,  as  well  as  those 
crystalline  rocks,  which  were  formed  before,  or  are  associated  with 
them.*  In  viewing  the  dark  tint  of  this  map  we  may  suppose,  that 
when  such  extensive  palaeozoic  sea  bottoms  were  raised  into  lands, 
the  former  continents,  from  which  the  sediments  had  been  derived, 
were  submerged.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  a  fact,  that  in  all 
quarters  of  the  globe,  Silurian  strata  constantly  lie  in  juxtaposition 
to  the  other  overlying  palaeozoic  formations ;  and  hence  it  is  impos- 
sible to  apply  to  the  lowest  strata  any  reasoning  which  does  not 
equally  refer  to  those  which  repose  upon  them.  For,  as  the  Silu- 
rian rocks  are  constantly  found  in  the  same  longitudes  and  latitudes 
as  the  Devonian  and  Carboniferous,  why  is  it  that  in  the  one  there 
are  never  found  traces  of  vertebrata  and  land  plants,  and  that  in 
the  same  places,  remains  of  both  these  classes  abound  in  the  other  ? 
By  no  theoretical  suggestion,  therefore,  can  the  fair  inference  be 
evaded,  that  things  which  did  not  exist  during  the  Silurian  period, 
were  created  in  the  very  same  tracts  during  the  following  ages. 

The  uniformitarian  who  would  explain  every  natural  event  in  the 
earliest  periods  by  reference  to  the  existing  conditions  of  being,  is 
thus  stopped  at  the  very  threshold  of  the  palace  of  former  life, 

*  The  reader  must  not  be  critical  as  to  the  exact  demarcation  assigned  to  the 
palaeozoic  and  crystalline  rocks  by  the  dark  tint  of  this  map,  which  marks  the 
relative  proportions  of  the  primeval  to  the  secondary  and  tertiary  rocks.  The 
chief  intention  is  to  direct  the  eye  to  all  the  regions  where  the  older  rocks  prevail. 


476  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVIIL 

which  he  cannot  deprive  of  its  true  foundations.  Nature  herself,  in 
short,  tells  him  through  her  most  ancient  monuments,  that  though 
she  has  worked  during  all  ages  on  the  same  general  principles  of 
destruction  and  renovation  of  the  surface,  there  was  formerly  a  dis- 
tribution of  land  in  reference  to  the  sea,  very  different  in  outline 
from  that  which  now  prevails.  That  primeval  state  was  followed  by 
outbursts  of  great  volumes  of  igneous  matter  from  the  interior,  the 
extraordinary  violence  of  which  is  made  manifest  by  clear  evidences. 
Fractures  in  the  crust  of  the  earth,  accompanied  by  oscillations  that 
suddenly  displaced  masses  to  thousands  of  feet  above  or  beneath 
their  previous  levels,  were  necessarily  productive  of  such  translations 
of  water,  as  to  abrade  and  destroy  solid  materials,  to  an  extent  infinitely 
surpassing  any  change  of  which  the  historical  era  affords  an  example. 

I  could  here  cite  the  works  of  Leopold  von  Buch,  Elie  de  Beau- 
mont, Sedgwick,  Studer*,  and  numerous  other  geologists,  for  count- 
less proofs  of  this  grander  intensity  of  former  causation,  by  which 
gigantic  masses  were  inverted,  and  strata  forming  mountains  have 
been  so  wrenched,  broken,  and  twisted,  as  to  pass  under  the  very 
rocks  out  of  whose  materials  they  were  constructed.  The  reader 
who  may  travel  to  the  Alps  and  other  mountain  chains,  will  there 
see  signs  of  such  former  catastrophes,  each  of  which  resulted  from 
convulsions  utterly  immeasurable  and  inexplicable  by  any  reference 
to  those  puny  oscillations  of  the  earth  which  can  be  appealed  to 
during  the  times  of  history.  (For  my  own  views  on  this  point  see 
Appendix  Q.)  But  restraining  my  pen  on  these  collateral  points,  I 
must  adhere  to  our  immediate  subject,  the  proofs  of  successive 
creation  coincident  with  such  former  conditions  apart  from  great 
physical  revolutions. 

If  we  reflect  upon  the  succession  presented  to  us  in  the  primeval 
rocks,  we  have,  I  repeat,  cumulative  evidence,  that  the  wide-spread 


*  See  particularly  Studer's  new  work,  '  Geologie  der  Schweiz,'  vol.  ii.  1853. 


XVIII.]        PKIMEVAL  AND  SUBSEQUENT  CONDITIONS.  477 

and  general  diffusion  of  the  same  types  of  animal  and  vegetable  life 
was  due  to  a  former  temperature  and  outline  of  the  surface  essen- 
tially distinguished  from  those  of  our  day.  To  whatever  extent 
continents  and  islands  may  have  existed  during  these  long  early 
periods,  and  however  we  may  speculate  on  the  extent  of  pristine 
shores,  it  seems  certain,  that  the  lands  accessible  to  our  survey  and 
bearing  any  such  vegetation,  increased  very  considerably  in  the  car- 
boniferous times.  In  those  days,  the  very  same  species  of  marine 
animals  lived,  from  the  latitude  of  Spitzbergen  to  the  parallels 
of  Peru  and  Australia.*  Yast,  low  deltas  then  also  extended  them- 
selves, which,  on  being  desiccated,  bore  an  absolutely  uniform  terres- 
trial vegetation  nearly  all  over  the  globe.  Many  of  the  ancient  tree 
ferns  must  have  grown  on  tracts  little  above  the  water,  and  jungles 
larger  than  Britain  must  have  been  successively  and  repeatedly  sub- 
merged and  re-elevated  to  form  new  lands,  covered  by  the  vege- 
tation that  supplied  the  elements  for  the  construction  of  great  coal- 
fields. These  phenomena  assure  us,  therefore,  that  a  very  great 
portion,  if  not  the  whole  surface  of  the  earth,  enjoyed  at  that  time 
an  equable  and  warmer  climate.  (See  Sketch,  p.  268.) 

Believing,  as  I  do,  with  many  geologists,  that  this  former  tem- 
perature of  the  earth  was,  in  great  measure,  caused  by  the  radiation 
of  its  internal  heat,  independently  of  solar  action,  other  physical  as 
well  as  zoological  phenomena  lead  me  further  to  suppose,  that  the 
land  of  those  early  days  could  not  have  been  thrown  up  into  very 
lofty  mountains.  For,  if  so,  such  great  elevations  must  have  been 
accompanied  by  corresponding  deep  chasms  in  the  sea  bottom,  and 
these  would  necessarily  have  been  impassable  barriers  to  the  numerous 
primeval  submarine  creatures  which  have  been  described  as  co- 
existent over  the  most  remote  region.     Profound  abysses  of  the 

*  See  the  observations  of  d'Orbigny,  p.  409.  Colonel  Lloyd  has  just  brought 
home  from  the  Peruvian  Andes  several  species  of  carboniferous  mollusca  identical 
with  British  forms.  The  same  occur  in  Australia.  See  McCoy,  Ann.  Nat.  Hist. 
1847. 


478  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

ocean  are,  it  is  well  known,  as  complete  barriers  to  the  migration 
of  marine  creatures,  as  lofty  mountains  are  to  inhabitants  of  the  land. 
The  recent  discovery,  therefore,  of  the  vast  profundity  of  the  ocean 
midway  between  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  Cape  Horn,  amount- 
ing to  7000  fathoms  or  nearly  double  the  height  of  the  loftiest  moun- 
tains (even  allowing  for  some  amount  of  error  in  the  sounding), 
is,  indeed,  the  strongest  possible  illustration  of  the  impassable  nature 
of  such  subaqueous  barriers.  These  have  resulted  from  oscillations 
of  the  surface,  which  occurring  since  primeval  times,  have  necessarily 
caused  great  variations  in  the  marine  provinces  of  life,  placing  them 
in  strong  contrast  with  the  uniformity  of  the  ancient  faunas.  (See 
Appendix  F.) 

Duly  estimating  the  great  value  of  the  submarine  knowledge 
acquired  and  applied  by  a  naturalist,  whose  researches,  coupled  with 
those  of  Loven  and  other  contemporaries,  have  thrown  new  lights 
on  many  phenomena  previously  unexplained,  let  us  guard  against 
the  inference,  that  because  such  acquaintance  with  the  natural 
operations  of  our  own  era  is  applicable  to  the  last  geological  data 
or  those  of  tertiary  age,  it  should  also  apply  to  the  quasi  universal, 
and  therefore  very  diiFerent,  physical  conditions  under  which  pri- 
meval creatures  existed.  During  the  tertiary  period,  the  crust  of 
the  earth  had,  as  we  know,  approximated  considerably  to  its  pre- 
sent varied  outline,  and  before  it  drew  to  a  close,  great  changes 
had  taken  place,  b)^  which  regions  formerly  occupied  by  animals  and 
plants  requiring  a  warm  and  equable  climate  were  covered  even  by 
ice  and  glaciers.  Whilst,  therefore,  we  thank  Edward  Forbes  for 
dredging  the  sea  bottoms,  and  teaching  us  that  deep  sea  mollusks 
are  now  living  near  high  lands  in  the  Mediterranean,  whence  pebbles 
may  be  so  washed  down  as  to  lie  in  juxtaposition  with  the  tenants  of 
the  deep ; — either  this  argument  cannot  bear  upon  the  primeval  era, 
in  which  there  is  no  evidence  whatever  of  high  lands  and  detached 
mediterranean  seas;  or  if  applied,  it  is  the  strongest  evidence  to 


Chap.  XVIII.]        PEIMEVAL  AND  SUBSEQUENT  CONDITIONS.  479 

show,  that  the  supposed  primeval  cliffs  and  grounds  were  void  of 
terrestrial  vegetation. 

On  what  data,  it  may  be  asked,  is  founded  the  beautiful  and 
rational  theory  of  Lyell,  which  explains  the  successive  changes  of  the 
climate  of  the  earth  ?  Is  it  not  mainly  dependent  on  those  diversified 
evolutions  proceeding  from  beneath  the  surface,  which  have  caused 
changes  in  the  outline  of  former  lands  and  seas,  equivalent  in  extent, 
although  different  in  position  to,  our  present  continents  and  oceans  ? 
And,  if  such  a  varied  distribution  of  earth  and  water  as  the  present 
had  existed  in  the  pristine  periods  we  have  been  considering,  how 
could  the  same  groups  of  animals,  manifestly  requiring  the  same 
conditions,  the  sa*me  temperature,  and  the  same  food,  have  had  an 
almost  universal  diffusion  ? 

Although  it  is  quite  true,  that  specific  distinctions  are  seen  to  have 
frequently  prevailed  in  the  fossils  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  coun- 
tries situated  at  no  great  distance  from  each  other,  as  explained  in  the 
chapters  which  treat  of  the  distribution  of  the  fauna  of  that  age,  the 
fact  is  by  no  means  antagonistic  to  my  reasoning.  Should  it,  for 
example,  be  even  said,  that  the  variety  in  the  distribution  of  Silurian 
species  is  as  great  as  in  the  same  areas  of  sea  of  the  present  day,  I 
reply,  that  it  is  not  to  species  but  to  the  classes,  groups,  and  genera, 
that  the  objector  must  appeal.  If  unable  to  explain  why  in  the  ear- 
liest primeval  times,  so  many  Trilobites,  Orthides,  Orthoceratites,  and 
Corals  of  analogous  forms  were  spread  out  over  enormous  distances, 
it  is  enough  for  us  to  feel  assured,  that  the  various  associates  of  the 
Calymene  Blumenbachii,  or  any  other  well-known  Trilobite,  must 
have  required  just  the  same  temperature  and  surrounding  media  in 
whatever  part  of  the  world  they  lived.  It  is  not  because  the  land 
animals  of  Europe  are  dissimilar  in  species  to  those  of  Africa  that  the 
faunas  of  the  two  regions  are  so  distinct,  but  that  we  have  not  among 
our  European  associates  the  same  groups  as  those  which  live  in  hotter 
climes.    I  therefore  conceive,  that  the  fact  of  the  diffusion  of  the 


480 


SILURIA. 


[Chap.  XYIII. 


same  families  and  genera  of  Trilobites,  Corals,  and  other  fossils, 
however  they  may  vary  as  to  species,  must  have  required  an  equably 
diffused  temperature  and  similar  conditions  for  their  existence.  Still 
more  clearly  is  this  inference  sustained  by  the  spread  of  the  same 
old  vegetation,  and  often  of  the  same  species  of  plants  over  half 
the  globe. 

Resting  then  on  these  universal  facts  as  a  firm  basis,  the  geologist 
who  explores  his  way  upwards,  sees,  as  before  stated,  that  the  forma- 
tions which  w^ere  next  accumulated  in  the  same  latitudes  and  longi- 
tudes as  the  Silurian  rocks,  and  sometimes  in  actual  and  conformable 
contact  with  them,  do  contain  land  plants  mixed  with  marine  remains. 
And  yet  the  only  unequivocal  vegetables  found  in  the  elder  strata 
are  sea-weeds ;  whilst  the  later  formed  and  contiguous  rocks,  though 
equally  charged  with  exuviae  of  the  sea,  are  laden  with  many  spoils 
of  the  land,  both  vegetable  and  animal. 

Patient  researches  having  thus  demonstrated,  that  in  the  primeval 
eras  all  living  things  differed  completely  from  those  of  our  own  times, 
so  we  see  how  the  animals  subsequently  created,  were  adapted  to 
new  and  altered  physical  conditions.  Proceeding  onwards  from  the 
early  period  in  which  we  can  trace  no  sign  of  land  plants  or  ver- 
tebrata,  and  in  which  the  solid  materials,  inclosing  everywhere  a 
similar  fauna,  were  spread  out  with  great  uniformity,  we  soon  begin  to 
perceive  the  proofs  of  powerful  revolutions,  chiefly  commencing  after 
the  coal  formation*,  by  which  the  earth's  surface  was  so  corrugated, 

*  I  by  no  means  deny  that  much  perturbation  prevailed  in  the  earlier  stages 
of  the  planet,  as  explained  in  the  two  first  chapters.  On  the  contrary,  I  admit  the 
powerful  emission  of  much  igneous  matter,  the  transmutation  of  sedimentary  into 
crystalline  rocks,  and  the  presence  of  great  terrestrial  masses  anterior  to  the  accu- 
mulation of  any  of  the  deposits  which  are  now  under  consideration.  But  I  deny 
that  there  are  indications  of  the  existence  of  any  very  lofty  mountains,  until  the 
crust  of  the  earth  had  undergone  some  of  the  subsequent  mutations  alluded  to  ; 
particularly  those  which  followed  the  accumulation  of  the  carboniferous  strata.,  and 
which  were  repeated  at  so  many  subsequent  periods,  notably  and  powerfully  in 
the  tertiary  times. 


Chap.  XVIII.]  CONCLUSION-.  481 

that,  after  many  perturbations,  the  groups  of  animals  and  plants  were 
infinitely  more  restricted  than  before  to  given  regions  and  climates. 
And,  as  the  highly  diversified  conditions  of  the  latest  geological 
era  and  of  the  present  day  were  wholly  unknown  in  the  primeval 
epochs,  so  it  follows,  that  we  should  greatly  err,  if  we  endeavoured 
to  force  all  ancient  nature  into  a  close  comparison  with  existing 
operations.    (See  Alps,  Appendix  Q.) 

The  numerous,  positive  evidences  of  a  former  wide  distribution 
of  similar  animals  and  plants,  enable  us  fairly  to  bring  before  our 
mind's  eye  the  physical  geography  of  those  great  epochs  when  such 
large  portions  of  our  present  continents  were  under  the  waters,  and 
forests  of  tree-ferns  occupied  very  extensive  low  lands,  subjected 
during  a  long  period  to  numerous  oscillations.  Not  less  clearly  do  we 
infer  from  other  physical  evidences,  how  eruptive  forces  subsequently 
acted ;  breaking  out  with  great  violence  after  the  close  of  the  car- 
boniferous era,  and  throwing  the  strata  into  those  grand  undulations 
and  contortions,  accompanied  by  stupendous  fractures,  which  have 
given  to  the  coal  basins  their  curvatures  and  limits. 

Thenceforward  was  continued  that  lons^;  series  of  additional  and 
repeated  emissions  of  volcanic  matter  from  within,  of  elevations  of 
the  sea  bottom,  and  corresponding  depressions  of  land,  combined  with 
the  metamorphism  of  strata  (these  changes  being  often  accompanied 
by  corresponding  new  creations  of  animals  suited  to  the  existing 
conditions),  during  the  secondary  and  tertiary  periods.  By  these 
great  physical  operations,  our  planet  was  eventually  brought  to 
possess  the  climatal  relations  which  have  for  so  long  a  time  prevailed. 
That  these  elevations  and  depressions  finally  produced  a  state  of 
things  altogether  distinct  from  that  of  the  earlier  eras,  is,  in  short, 
registered  by  a  multitude  of  well-attested  data. 

Among  the  terrestrial  changes  to  which  science  clearly  points, 
there  is  no  one  which  better  deserves  to  be  recorded  in  a  few  parting 
words,  than  that  great  mutation  of  surface  and  its  accompanying 

I  I 


482  SILURIA.  [Chap.  XVllI. 

loss  of  warmth,  by  which  extensive  fields  of  ice  were  first  formed  upon 
the  sea,  and  large  glaciers  upon  the  land.  As  very  lofty  mountains 
in  moderate  latitudes,  and  masses  of  land  and  water  in  Arctic  or 
Antarctic  regions,  are  now  essentially  the  seats  of  glaciers  and  ice- 
rafts  ;  so  we  know  that  these  bodies  alone  have  the  power  of  trans- 
porting huge,  erratic  blocks  from  their  native  mountains  to  con- 
siderable distances  by  land,  or  for  hundreds  of  miles  over  the  sea  in 
floating  icebergs.  Now,  of  the  translation  of  such  blocks  we  have 
no  evidence  whatever  in  any  former  geological  period !  On  the 
contrary,  whilst  every  boulder  of  the  primary,  secondary,  or  older 
tertiary  rocks  bears  on  its  surface  the  signs  of  having  been  water- 
worn  or  rounded  by  aqueous  or  atmospheric  agency,  the  great 
blocks  of  the  later  cold  period  (gigantic  in  comparison  with  all 
that  preceded  them)  are  often  angular  or  nearly  in  that  state  in 
which  they  left  the  mountain  side,  before,  in  short,  they  were  wafted 
over  seas  or  lakes  to  be  dropped,  at  remote  distances  from  their 
parent  rocks,  upon  sediments  which  by  subsequent  elevation  have 
been  made  portions  of  our  continents.  Hence,  independently  of 
the  indications  of  a  more  equably  diffused  and  warmer  temperature 
in  older  times  than  at  the  present  day,  these  large  erratics  are  in 
themselves  decisive  testimonials  of  that  intense  cold  which,  it  is 
believed,  was  principally  due  to  the  great,  elevated  masses  of  land 
which  specially  characterize  the  modern  period. 

Receding  backwards  from  this  glacial  phenomenon,  which  con- 
tinuing into  our  own  times,  has  been  so  skilfully  illustrated  by 
eloquent  writers*,  it  is  specially  my  province  to  endeavour  to  impress 
upon  the  reader  the  Importance  of  endeavouring  to  form  an  esti- 
mate of  the  physical  geography  of  the  earth  during  those  remote 
periods  when  the  Palasozoic  deposits  were  accumulated.  If  very  lofty 
mountains  did  not  then  exist,  we  have,  indeed,  in  this  single  phe- 


*  Charpentler,  Agasslz,  and  James  Forbes.  (See  Appendix  Q). 


Chap.  XVIII.]  CONCLUSION^.  483 

nomenon,  what  may  have  been  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  that  equable 
and  warm  climate  so  indispensably  requisite  to  harmonize  with  the 
facts  recorded  in  this  volume.  And  if  we  add  the  inference  adopted 
by  many  philosophers  and  geologists,  that  the  earth,  in  cooling  down 
from  its  original  molten  state,  must,  during  long  succeeding  ages, 
have  diminished  in  heat  over  its  whole  surface,  we  are  enabled,  by 
reference  to  physical  changes  alone,  to  satisfy  ourselves,  that  w^e 
have  in  them  the  chief  elements  required  to  explain  all  climatal 
results. 

Finally,  if  this  retrospective  survey  of  the  changes  of  the  earth  be 
but  the  outline  of  a  picture  which  must  be  filled  up  by  an  assiduous 
study  of  the  works  of  nature,  let  me  say  that  it  has  not  been  at- 
tempted without  deliberate  consideration  and  extensive  researches 
amid  the  younger  as  well  as  the  most  ancient  deposits.  And,  if  any 
theoretical  portions  of  the  preceding  pages  be  objected  to,  they  can 
easily  be  separated  from  those  historical  facts  which  are  established 
upon  positive  observation. 

The  leading  object  of  this  volume  is  simply  to  call  attention  to 
the  oldest  vestigea  of  life  which  have  been  discovered  in  the  crust  of 
the  globe,  and  accurately  to  chronicle  the  order  in  which  other  early 
races  followed  them. 

From  the  effects  produced  upon  my  own  mind  through  the  study 
of  these  imperishable  records,  I  am,  indeed,  led  to  hope,  that  my 
readers  will  adhere  to  the  views  which,  in  common  with  many  con- 
temporaries, I  entertain  of  the  succession  of  life.  For,  he  who  looks 
to  a  beginning,  and  traces  thenceforward  a  rise  in  the  scale  of  being, 
until  that  period  is  reached  when  Man  appeared  upon  the  earth, 
must  acknowledge  in  such  works  repeated  manifestations  of  design, 
and  unanswerable  proofs  of  the  superintendence  of  a  Creator. 


FINIS. 


I 


APPENDIX. 


Vertical  Range  of  Silurian  Fossils, 

The  following  table  is  designed  to  show  the  number  of  species  ascertained 
to  be  common  to  the  Lower  and  Upper  Divisions  of  the  Silurian  System. 
It  is  compiled  by  Mr.  Salter,  chiefly  from  data  in  the  Museum  of  Practical 
Geology,  and  those  supplied  by  Prof.  M'Coy  in  his  descriptions  of  the 
fossils  in  the  Woodwardian  Museum  of  Cambridge.  A  few  other  works 
have  been  referred  to,  but  it  has  been  thought  best  not  to  swell  the  list 
from  less  authentic  sources.  Where  the  species  has  been  catalogued  in 
the  lists  of  the  Geological  Survey,  the  authority  is  marked  G.  S.,  for  its 
occurrence  either  in  the  Lower  or  the  Upper  Silurian.  W.  M.  signifies 
those  species  for  which  Professor  M'Coy  is  responsible  in  the  work  above 
alluded  to. 

There  being  at  present  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  precise  geolo- 
gical relations  of  the  '  Upper  Caradoc '  (some  authors  regarding  it  as  the 
base  of  the  Upper,  and  others  as  the  top  of  the  Lower  Silurian),  this  band 
has  been  omitted  in  the  first  estimate.  If  it  be  included  in  the  Lower 
Silurian  Division,  as  in  the  original  Silurian  System  and  in  this  work,  the 
number  of  species  common  to  the  two  divisions  would  be  considerably 
increased  above  the  number  indicated  in  this  Table. 

Note. — A  few  of  the  species  quoted  by  Professor  M'Coy  as  occurring  in  the  Lower  Division 
are  omitted ;  there  being  reason  to  doubt  their  geological  position. 


Lower 
Silurian 

(Llandeilo 
and 

Caradoc*). 


Species  which  range  from  the  Llandeilo 
into  the  Wenlock  or  Ludlow  Formations. 


Upper 
Silurian. 
(Wenlock  and 
Ludlow). 


Foreign 
Upper 
Silurian. 


G.  S. 
G.  S. 


Graptolithus  priodon,  Bronn.  - 
Retiolites  Geinitzianus,  Barr.  - 


G.  S. 
G.  S.? 


Barrande 

(Bohemia) 


Only  the  lower  or  typical  Caradoc  is  here  intendtd, 
*i  I  3 


486 


APPENDIX. 


Lower 
Silurian 

and 
Caradoc). 

Species  which  range  from  Ihe  Llandeilo 
into  the  Wenlock  or  Ludlow  Formations. 

Upper 
Silurian 
(Wenlock  and 
Ludlow). 

Foreign 
Upper 
Silurian. 

Kjr.  O. 

Stromatopora  striateila,  D  Orb. 

(jr.  O. 

(jr.  S. 

Helioiites  interstincta,  vVanl.  - 

G.  S. 

W.  M. 

 petallitormis,  Lonsd. 

G.  S. 

AV.  M. 

 tuDulata,  Lonsd. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

 megastoma,  M'Coy  - 

MilneEdw. 

M'Coy 

 inordinata,  Lonsd. 

IVTi  1  n  p  TT.fl  w 
irxiiuc  Xjyi  »v  • 

G.  S. 

Favosites  alveolaris,  Goldf. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

 Gothlandica,  Linn.  - 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

Stenopora  (Favosites)  fibrosa,  Goldf., 

G.  S. 

both  the  branched  and  amorphous 

varieties. 

G.  S. 

Halysites  catenulatus,  Linn.  - 

G.  S. 

W.M. 

Nebulipora  papillata,  M'Coy  - 

W.  M. 

W.  M. 

Omphyma  turbinata,  Linn. 

G.S. 

G.  S. 

Sarcinula  organum,  Linn. 

Milne  Edw. 

(Gottland) 

Lonsdale 

Petraia  bina,  Lonsd.      -       -  _ 

G.  S. 

I  IjitHiUUV  J 

G.  S. 

Ptilodictya  lanceolata,  Goldf.  - 

G  S 

G.  S. 

Glauconome  disticha,  Goldf. 

G  S 

W.  M. 

Fenestella  Milleri,  Lonsd. 

G.  S. 

W.M. 

 subantiqua,  D'Orb.  - 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

Cornulites  serpularius,  Schloth. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

Tentaculites  annulatus,  Schloth. 

G.  S.? 

\Y.  M. 

  ornatus.  Sow. 

G.  S. 

W  M 

oerpuiiies  uibpdr,  odiier  - 

W.  M.  ? 

Tt           ■    1   •      X    I.             1    J-        1T^••  3 

Beyrichia  tuberculata,  Kloden 

G.  S. 

G  S. 

Cyphaspis  megalops,  M'Coy 

G.  S.  • 

G.  S. 

Lichas  bulbiceps,  Phi  11.  &  Salter 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

 anglicus,  Beyrich 

G.  S. 

Eichvvald 

 verrucosus,  Eichw. 

G.  S. 

(Russia) 

G.  S. 

Acidaspis  Brightii,  Murch. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

Cheirurus  bimucronatus,  Murch. 

G.  S. 

APPENDIX. 


487 


Lower 
Silurian 

(Llandeilo 
and 

Caradoc). 


W.  M. 

Barrande 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 
G.  S.? 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 
W.M. 
Sowerby 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 
W.M. 
G.  S.? 
W.  M. 
W.M. 
W.M. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
W.  M. 
G.  S. 
G.S. 
G.S. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 
W.M. 
G.  S. 


Species  which  range  from  the  Llandeilo 
into  the  Wenlock  or  Ludlow  Formations. 


j-  Staurocephalus  Murchisoni,  Barr. 

Encrinurus  punctatus,  Briinnich. 
Phacops  caudatus,  Brongn. 

 Stokesii,  Milne  Edw. 

Calymene  Blumenbachii,  Brongn. 
Proetus  latifrons,  M'Coy 
 Stokesii,  Murch. 


Crania  (Patella)  implicata,  Sow. 

Spirifer  crispus,  Linn.  - 

 plicatellus  (radiatus),  Linn. 


Atrypa  reticularis,  Linn. 

 marginalis,  Dalm. 

 cuneata,  Dalm.  - 


Rhynchonella  depressa,  Sow.  - 

 borealis,  Schloth. 

 Lewisii,  Davidson 

 Nucula,  Sow. 

  rotunda,  Sow. 


Pentamerus  undatus,  Sow.  (the  same 

as  P.  linguifer,  Sow.  ?)  - 
Orthis  biloba.  Linn.       _       -  . 

 calli gramma,  Dalm. 

 elegantula,  Dalm. 

 hybrida.  Sow.  - 

  insularis,  Pander 

 reversa,  Salter  - 

 testudinaria,  Dalm. 


Strophomena    rhomboidalis,  Wabl. 
(depressa,  Dalm.  and  of  this  work) 

 pecten,  Linn. 

■  simulans,  M'Coy 

 corrugata,  Portl.  - 

*i  I  4 


Upper 
Silurian 
(Wenlock  and 
Ludlow). 


G.  S. 

G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.S 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 

G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
W.  M. 
G.  S. 


G.S. 
G.S. 
W.  M. 
G.  S. 


488 


APPENDIX. 


Lower 
Silurian 
(LlandeUo 

and 
Caradoc). 

Species  which  range  from  the  Llandeilo 
into  the  Wenlock  or  Ludlow  Formations, 

Upper 
Siliurian 
(Wenlock  and 
Ludlow). 

Foreign 
Upper 
Silurian. 

G.  S. 

Strophomena  antiquata,  Sow.  - 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

  euglypha,  Dalm. 

G.  S. 

de  Vemeuil 

 imbrex,  Pander. 

G.  S. 

Davidson. 

W.M. 

Leptaena  laevigata,  Sow.  - 

G.  S, 

W.M. 

  minima,  Sow.    -       -  - 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

  quinquecostata,  M'Coy 

W.M.? 

G.  S. 

  sericea.  Sow.  - 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

  transversalis,  Dalm.  - 

G.  S. 

W.M. 

Pterinea  pleuroptera,  Conrad  - 

W .  M. 

G.  S. 

  retroflexa,  Wahl. 

G.  S. 

W.  M.? 

  tenuistriata,  M'Coy  - 

W.  M. 

TT.  ^L 

Modiolopsis  antiqua.  Sow, 

G.S. 

W.M. 

Orthonotus  semisulcatus,  Sow. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

Cardiola  interrupta,  Goldf. 

G.  S. 

W.^L 

Area  Ldmonduformis,  M'Coy 

W.M. 

W.  M. 

OucuUella   (Clidophorus  r)  antiqua, 

Sow.         -       -       -       -  - 

G.  S. 

Xucula  Anglica,  D'Orb.  (ovalis,  Sil. 

Sj-st.)  

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

Acroculia  (Z^erita)  Haliotis,  Sow.  - 

G.S. 

G.  S.? 

Theca  Forbe-sii.  Sharps  - 

G.S. 

(Hamage 

(T.  triangularis.  Hall,  is  a  distinct  Lower 

Grange, 

SUarian  species,  found  in  Scotland.) 

Shropshire.) 

G.  S. 

Conularia     Sowerbji,  Defrance  (C. 

cancellata,  Sandberger  and  M'Coy) 

Lr.  o. 

G.  S. 

Scalites  (irocnus)  lenticularis,  bow. 

*V  .  AL 

(jr.  i5. 

rSelleropnon  culatatus,  oow. 

n  G 

Kjr.  b. 

W.M.? 

 expansus,  Sow.  - 

G.  S. 

G.S. 

 trilobatus,  Sow.  - 

G.S. 

G.  S. 

 carinatus,  Sow. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

Orthoceras  angulatum,  Hisinger 

G.  S. 

W.  M. 

 filosum,  Sow. 

G.  S. 

G.S. 

  annulatum,  Sow.  - 

G.  S. 

W.M. 

  laqueatum,  HalL  - 

^y.  M. 

APPENDIX. 


489 


Lower 
Silurian 
(Llandeilo 

and 
Caradoc). 

Species  which  range  from  the  Llandeilo 
into  the  Wenlock  or  Ludlow  Formations. 

Upper 
Silurian 
(Wenlock  and 
Ludlow). 

Foreign 
Upper 
Silurian. 

G.  S. 

Orthoceras  primasvum,  Forbes 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

  subundulatum,  Portl. 

W.M. 

G.  S. 

  tenuicinctum,  Portl. 

G.  S. 

W.  M. 

 ■   ventricosum,  Sliarpe 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

  Ibex,  Sow.    -       -  - 

G.  S. 

G.S. 

  subannulatum 

W.  M. 

G.  S. 

Lituites  cornu-arietis,  Sow. 

G.  S. 

96  species 

Llandeilo 
Formation. 

G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
G.  S. 
W.M. 
W.M. 
G.  S. 
W.  M. 
Hall 

(America) 

G.  S. 
G.  S. 

W.M. 

18  species 

Additional  Llandeilo  Species  "which  range 
into  the  '  Upper  Caradoc '  or  intermediate 
formation,  but  not  into  the  Wenlock  or 
Ludlow  rocks. 

Petraia  elongata,  Phill.  -       -  - 
Trinucleus  concentricus  -       -  - 
Spirifer  (Atrypa)  percrassus,  M'Coy 
Atrypa  hemispherica,  Sow. 
Pentamerus  globosus,  Sow. 

 oblongus,  Sow. 

 lens,  Sow.    -       -  - 

 undatus,  Sow. 

Orthis  Actoniae,  Sow.     -       -  - 

  vespertilio,  Sow.  - 

Strophomena  compressa,  Sow. 
Rhynchonella  decemplicata,  Sow. 
Modiolopsis  orbicularis.  Sow.  - 
Clidophorus  ovalis,  M'Coy 
Nucula?  post-striata,  Emmons 

Holopella  cancellata,  Sow. 
Pleurotomaria  (like  P.  balteata,Plijll.) 

Bellerophon  subdecussatus,  M'Coy  - 

Upper 
Caradoc. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 
W.M. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 
Forbes 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 

G.  S. 
W.  M. 
W.  M. 

G.  S. 
G.  S. 

W.  M. 

A  marked 
species. 

490 


APPENDIX. 


If,  instead  of  regarding  it  as  a  distinct  intermediate  formation,  the 
Caradoc  band  be  classed  either  with  the  Upper  or  the  Lower  Silurian, 
these  species  must,  in  that  case,  be  added  to  those  before  given;  thus 
making  a  total  of  114  species  common  to  the  Lower  and  Upper  groups. 
It  is  believed  that  many  more  species  exist  in  the  Upper  Caradoc  forma- 
tion which  occur  also  in  the  Llandeilo  flags. 

No  notice  has  been  here  taken  of  the  very  peculiar  assemblage  of 
fossils  found  in  the  Silurian  sandstones  of  Galway.  These  beds  constitute, 
as  explained  in  the  text  (p.  170.,)  a  considerable  thickness  of  Silurian  strata. 
If  they  be  classed  with  the  '  Upper  Caradoc '  or  intermediate  formation, 
10  or  12  more  very  characteristic  Lower  Silurian  fossils  must  be  added  to 
the  above  common  list.  Or,  if  they  be  regarded  as  equivalents  of  the 
Llandeilo  or  Bala  rocks,  to  which,  as  developed  in  the  South  of  Scotland, 
they  bear  a  strong  analogy,  then  the  unity  of  the  Silurian  System  is  still 
more  sustained,  inasmuch  as  they  are  crowded  with  characteristic  Upper 
Silurian  species ;  no  less  than  63  common  Upper  Silurian  forms,  associated 
with  the  above-mentioned  and  other  Llandeilo  flag  species,  being  found  in 
this  single  district. 

B. 

Recent  Surveys  of  the  British  Silurian  Rocks, 

There  are  some  points  of  detailed  research  made  while  the  work  was 
in  progress,  to  which  I  may  here  direct  attention.  Certain  typical  tracts  of 
the  British  Silurian  rocks  have  been  re-surveyed  by  the  Government 
geologists,  and  results  have  been  obtained  which  seem  to  me  to  support 
the  inferences  recorded  in  the  text.  In  re-visiting  North  Wales,  and  in 
searching  for  more  complete  fossil  evidences  in  the  'Lingula  Flags,  or 
Lowest  Silurian'  of  the  Survey,  Mr.  Salter  has  made  important  additions  to 
our  knowledge  by  the  discovery  of  fossils,  which  prove  that  this  deposit, 
like  the  protozoic  band  described  by  M.  Barrande  in  Bohemia,  has  a 
marked  and  peculiar  facies.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  to  be  remembered 
that  two  of  the  few  genera  of  Trilobites  in  this  lowest  zone  of  life, 
(Agnostus  and  Olenus),  occur  also  in  the  Llandeilo  or  Bala  group. 

A  few  words  are  also  called  for  to  remove  any  doubt  respecting  the  zoolo- 
gical contents  of  the  strata  that  constitute  the  intermediate  or  debateable 
ground,  now  termed  Upper  Caradoc,  between  the  Lower  and  Upper 
Silurian.  In  truth,  the  whole  of  the  formation  which  I  grouped  under  the 
term  of  Caradoc,  having  undergone  a  special  scrutiny  by  Professor  Ramsay, 
and  Messrs.  Salter  and  Aveliue  (Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  vol.  x.  p.  62.), 


ArrENDix. 


491 


has  been  divided  by  those  authors  into  lower  and  upper  parts,  the  former 
constituting  by  its  fossils  a  portion  of  the  Llandeihj  or  Bala  formation. 
This  fact  is  partially  alluded  to  above  (pp.  80.  86.  97.  et  seq.),  and  it  has 
been  rendered  clearer  since  my  pages  were  printed.  The  partition  just 
effected,  was,  indeed,  previously  suggested,  on  fossil  evidence,  by  Professors 
Sedgwick  and  M'Coy.*  But  in  respect  to  Shropshire,  the  Government 
Surveyors  have  proved,  that  the  older  of  these  shelly  sandstones,  as  ex- 
hibited along  the  flanks  of  Caer  Caradoc,  is,  as  I  described  it,  laden 
with  fossils  which  are  identical  with  types  of  the  Llandeilo  formation, 
most  of  which  were  published  in  my  original  work.  Even  in  the  *  Silurian 
System,'  p.  305.  pi.  32.  fig.  9.  and  elsewhere,  the  geologist  will  see  that, 
although  I  was  unacquainted  with  the  division  recently  indicated  of  Lower 
and  Upper  Caradoc,  the  rocks  of  Meifod,  described  as  Caradoc  sandstone, 
are  truly  the  same  in  fossil  contents  as  the  greater  mass  of  the  rocks  on  the 
flanks  of  Caer  Caradoc  itself,  which  are  now  classed  by  the  Government 
Surveyors  as  Llandeilo.  My  general  term  for  all  such  rocks,  whether 
sandy,  flag -like,  schistose,  or  slaty,  was  and  is  simply  Lower  Silurian.'  The 
same  fossils,  indeed,  not  only  pervade  the  districts  of  Shropshire  and  Mont- 
gomeryshire, or  the  Lower  Silurian  of  my  old  map,  but  spread  over  North 
Wales,  down  to  the  Snowdon  slates,  and  even  below  that  horizon;  and 
thus  the  reasoning  I  formerly  employed  in  urging  the  broad  application 
of  the  term  *  Lower  Silurian'  is  sustained  to  an  extent  much  beyond 
my  early  anticipations.  For,  until  the  physical  structure  and  fossil  con- 
tents of  the  whole  region  had  been  precisely  elaborated,  no  one  could  have 
imagined,  that  the  soft  shelly  sandstones  on  the  sides  of  Caer  Caradoc  were 
of  the  same  age  as  the  hard,  slaty  rocks  of  Bala  and  Snowdon ! 

The  Upper  Caradoc,  on  the  contrary,  as  seen  under  the  shale  of  Wenlock 
Edge,  where  it  is  now  shown  to  be  transgressive  to  the  older  strata,  and 
conformable  to  the  Wenlock  shale,  or  in  the  tract  north  of  Bishop's  Castle, 
where  it  flanks  unconformably  the  southern  ends  of  the  Longmynd  and 
Shelve  districts,  or  as  ranging  along  the  west  flank  of  the  Abberley  and 
Malvern  Hills  to  May  Hill,  or,  again,  as  re-appearing  in  Radnorshire  and 
adjacent  parts  of  Wales,  is  unquestionably  of  an  intermediate  character. 
I  classed  this  rock  with  the  Lower  Silurian,  chiefly  from  its  mineral  cha- 
racters and  infra  position  to  the  Wenlock  shale  and  limestone,  and  as 
indicating  the  highest  sandstone  of  the  lower  group  ;  and  also  because 
two  or  three  of  its  fossils  which  seemed  to  me  most  characteristic 


*  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  See.  Lend.  vol.  ix.  p.  215. 


492 


APPENDIX. 


are  not  found  in  the  Upper  Silurian  division.  Hence  I  have  adhered  to 
my  old  tabular  arrangement.  But  I  must  now  clearly  state,  that  whilst  in 
Shropshire  and  Radnorshire  this  upper  sandstone  retains  such  forms  of 
the  Lower  Caradoc  and  Llandeilo  strata,  as  Pentamerus  oblongus  and 
Atrypa  hemispherica,  it  is  charged  in  many  places,  particularly  at  May 
Hill,  as  indicated  by  Professors  Sedgwick  and  M*Coy,  with  numerous 
species  of  the  overlying  Wenlock  formation,  which  here  make  their  appear- 
ance, for  the  first  time,  in  the  ascending  order.  Whatever,  therefore,  may 
be  its  name,  whether  Upper  Caradoc,  May  Hill  Sandstone,  or  Lower 
Wenlock  grit,  it  is  truly  a  transition  band,  which  unites  the  Lower  and 
Upper  Silurian,  and  is  to  be  regarded  as  identical  with  the  stratum  I 
have  described  as  occupying  the  same  position  in  E-ussia,  and  with  that 
in  America  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  the  Clinton  Group. 

It  must  here  also  be  noted,  that  the  transgression  recently  detected 
in  Shropshire,  between  the  lower  and  upper  Caradoc,  is  a  local  pheno- 
menon, which  does  not  extend  to  large  portions  even  of  the  annexed 
map.  The  Government  Surveyors  have,  indeed,  published  sections  across 
the  Silurian  rocks  of  Wales,  which,  as  in  America,  Bohemia,  and  many 
foreign  countries,  exhibit  conformable  passages  between  all  the  strata, 
from  those  of  azoic  age,  through  the  Llandeilo  and  Caradoc,  to  the  true 
Upper  Silurian  of  Wenlock  and  Ludlow  inclusive. 

c. 

Traces  of  Vegetable  Matter  in  the  Silurian  and  older  Rocks, 

Although,  as  stated  in  the  preceding  pages,  no  remains  of  plants  have 
been  discovered  below  the  Ludlow  rocks,  which  are  recognizably  of  ter- 
restrial origin,  I  have  long  known  of  the  presence  both  of  bitumen  and 
anthracite  in  even  the  oldest  greywacke,  or  the  Longmynd  rocks  (see  Sil. 
Syst.  p.  261.  et  seq.)  Theoretically  I  have  inferred  that  these  substances 
were  derived  from  masses  of  sea-weeds.  (See  Russia  and  Ural  Moun- 
tains, p.  14.,  Nicol,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  iv.  p.  204.,  and 
Harkness,  ib.  vol.  viii.  p.  393.) 

In  justice,  however,  to  my  friend  Professor  Nicol,  it  is  right  to  state,  that 
he  detected  under  the  microscope,  a  tubular^  fibrous  structure  in  the  ashes 
of  anthracite  derived  from  the  Lower  Silurian  greywacke  of  Peebleshire, 
and  also  observed,  among  those  rocks  in  Liddesdale,  fragments  of  what  he 
supposed  might  be  reeds,  like  the  imperfect  remains  of  such  vegetables  in 


APPENDIX. 


493 


the  coal  sandstones.  (Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  See.  Lond.,  vol.  vi.)  In  any  en- 
deavour to  form  a  correct  view  of  the  origin  of  life,  it  is  doubtless  im- 
portant to  try  to  settle  this  point  by  a  rigid  scrutiny.  But,  even  if  these 
very  rare  vegetable  remains  should  prove  to  belong  to  the  land  and  not 
to  the  sea,  my  general  argument  would  not  be  invalidated  by  the  existence 
of  a  very  scanty  terrestrial  Flora  (not  amounting  in  size  to  arborescence) 
which  was  coincident  with  the  first  traces  of  animal  life. 

Mr.  John  Kelly  informs  me  that  anthracite  has  been  discovered  in  the 
old  greywacke  of  Cavan,  Ireland,  the  courses  of  which  dip  with  the 
strata. 

D. 

Unconformity  in  Ireland  of  the  Longmyndor  Bottom  Rocks  Cambrian^ 
of  the  Survey^  to  the  Lower  Silurian, 

An  excellent  and  clear  account  of  this  phenomenon,  with  sections,  has 
been  published  by  Mr.  J.  Beete  Jukes,  the  director  of  the  Survey  in 
Ireland,  and  Mr.  Andrew  Wyley,  entitled,  "  On  the  Structure  of  the  N« 
Eastern  part  of  the  County  of  Wicklow."  (Proc.  Geol.  Soc.  Dublin, 
December,  1853.)  It  would  appear  that  the  black  slates  ranging  from 
the  counties  Wicklow  and  Wexford,  to  Dublin,  and  forming  the  inferior 
portion  of  the  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  the  S.E.  of  Ireland,  rest  quite 
unconformably  on  the  upturned  edges  of  the  so-called  *  Cambrian '  rocks* 
The  Lingula  flags  seem  to  be  absent.  The  physical  relations  of  these 
rocks  in  Ireland  are  therefore  distinct  from  those  of  Wales,  Siluria, 
Bohemia,  Scandinavia,  and  parts  of  N.  America,  where  such  inferior 
masses  are  perfectly  conformable  to  the  Lowest  Silurian  with  fossils.  On 
the  other  hand,  their  position  in  Ireland  accords  with  the  physical  disruption 
noticed  in  France  by  Elie  du  Beaumont  and  Dufrenoy,  where  the  *  primor* 
dial  zone'  of  Lingula  flags  is  also  wanting. 


E. 

Barrande^s  Silurian  System  in  Bohemia, 

In  addition  to  what  is  stated  (p.  340.  et  seq.)  I  may  here  take  notice  of  a 
few  memoranda  made  by  myself  last  summer  in  the  cabinet  of  M.  Bar- 


494 


APPENDIX. 


rande  at  Prague,  though  they  imperfectly  allude  to  phenomena  which 
he  has  described  or  will  describe  in  full  detail.  Among  the  Bohemian 
graptolites  the  C.  priodon  (Ludensis^  Sil.  Syst.)  is  beautifully  preserved, — 
its  smaller  end  is  incurvated.  Of  corals  there  occur  quite  as  many 
Silurian  forms  as  are  known  in  England,  perhaps  seventy  or  eighty.  The 
Cystideas  of  the  Lower  Silurian  (stage  D.  of  Barrande)  are  occasionally 
of  great  size,  and  some  of  them,  resembling  the  Echino-encrinites  of  Scan- 
dinavia and  Russia,  ascend  into  the  stage  E.  or  Upper  Silurian. 

Among  the  Cephalopoda  the  Orthoceratites  (Foss.  59.  p.  326.),  with  a 
large  lateral  siphuncle,  are  as  rare  as  in  Britain  —  shells  which  are  very 
common  in  Russia  and  Sweden.  In  reference  to  one  group  of  Ortho- 
ceratites, M.  Barrande  shows  how  a  field  geologist  may  erroneously  re- 
cognize forms  as  identical,  from  a  perfect  similarity  of  outline,  but  which 
are  clearly  distinct  when  the  ornamental  features  of  the  shelly  covering  are 
magnified.  The  profusion  of  chambered  shells  in  the  basin  of  Prague  has 
enabled  him  to  trace  many  gradations  between  the  generic  types  Gompho- 
ceras,  Phragmoceras,  Troclioceras,  Cyrtocera?,  &c.  ;  and  in  the  centre  of 
two  specimens  of  these  he  has  detected  animal  matter  in  the  state  of 
Adipocere!  These  bodies  are,  therefore,  he  justly  considers,  the  oldest 
mummies  ever  exhumed ;  since  they  occur  in  Lower  Silurian  rocks  with 
Trinuclei ! 

The  most  ancient  Xautilus  yet  found  is  probably  the  N.  tyrannus  Barr., 
a  huge  form  of  a  genus  which,  as  mentioned  in  the  text,  the  author  has 
traced  through  all  its  stages  of  growth.  There  are  some  Goniatites  of 
forms  approaching  Nautilus ;  but  no  species  is  a  known  Devonian  type ; 
not  even  in  the  very  highest  strata  near  Prague. 

It  may  also  be  remarked,  that  the  singular  genus  of  bivalves  of  the 
Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  Busaco,  described  as  Ribeiria  by  Mr.  D.  Sharpe, 
occurs  also  in  the  middle  of  the  Lower  Silurian  of  Bohemia.  Besides  the 
genera  of  Trilobites  enumerated  at  p.  342.  of  this  work,  as  occurring  in 
the  primordial  or  lowest  zone,  that  band  also  contains  the  minute  Hydro- 
cephalus, so  named  by  Barrande  from  its  monstrous  head,  and  the  Ario- 
nellus,  a  large  flat  form,  as  yet  unknown  elsewhere.  In  the  mass  of  the 
Lower  Silurian,  or  stage  D.  of  the  author,  occur  the  Beyrichia  (Agnostus) 
lata  of  Sweden  and  America,  and  the  Acidaspis  Buchi,  described  also 
by  M.  Bertrand  Geslin  from  rocks  of  this  age  near  Nantes ;  whilst  the 
Cytherinae  (of  which  there  are  about  twenty  species)  range  from  the 
Lower  Silurian  to  the  highest  of  the  Upper  Silurian  limestones. 

Space  does  not  permit  of  an  examination  of  the  analogies  and  identities 


APPENDIX. 


495 


prevailing  among  the  Bracliiopods  and  Gasteropods  of  the  basin  of  Pragiief 
as  compared  with  those  of  Silurian  age  in  other  countries.  Suffice  it  to 
say,  that  when  fully  elaborated,  the  whole  of  the  fossils  will  probably  amount, 
under  the  discrimination  of  M.  Barrande,  to  about  1500  species! 

F. 

Depth  of  the  Primeval  Seas,  and  colouring  of  the  Shells  of  the  3IoU 
lusca  which  lived  in  them. 

In  discussing  the  subject  of  the  probable  depth  of  the  primeval  seas,  it 
might  have  been  inferred,  that  assuming  the  quantity  of  water  upon  the 
surface  of  the  earth  to  have  been  constantly  the  same,  it  necessarily  follows 
that  during  those  long  periods  when  the  crust  had  undergone  comparatively 
few  variations  of  outline,  there  must  have  been  a  great  uniformity  in  the 
depth  of  the  waters.  This  inference  has  been  incidentally  strengthened  by 
Professor  E.  Forbes,  who  having  shown  in  a  short  memoir  recently  read 
before  the  Royal  Society,  that  no  mollusca  which  live  beneath  the  depth  of 
50  fathoms  exhibit  those  distinct  pattern-colours  which  mark  the  shells  of 
the  animals  inhabiting  higher  zones,  brought  this  observation  to  bear  on 
the  fact,  that  some  palaeozoic  types  (specially  those  of  the  carboniferous 
age)  still  retained  their  colours,  and  hence  that  such  animals  could  not  have 
lived  at  any  great  profundity  or  far  removed  from  the  influence  of  light. 
MM.  d'Archiac  and  de  Verneuil  did,  indeed,  advert  many  years  ago  (1839, 
Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  Lond.  vol.  vi.  p.  360.)  to  shells  of  Devonian  age  which 
were  partially  coloured,  and  Mr.  Salter  has  called  my  attention  to  Silurian 
fossils  in  the  Government  Museum  which  also  exhibit  colour. 

G. 

Extension  of  Silurian  Rocks  in  Spain. 

Since  the  text  was  printed,  I  learn  that  M.  Casiano  de  Prado  has  dis- 
covered Graptolites  in  several  parts  of  the  Guadarrama  chain,  where  they 
occur  in  black  schists  associated  with  large  masses  of  silicious  grits 
(quarzites).  This  enterprising  geologist  has  also  traced  such  schists  to 
near  Salamanca,  and  has  further  satisfied  himself,  that  there  is  an  absolute 


496 


APPENDIX. 


continuity  of  Lower  Silurian  rocks  from  the  Sierra  Morena  into  GalHcia ; 
the  range  passing  through  Estramadura  and  by  the  Sierras  of  Gata  and 
Francia.  Most  of  the  mountains  which,  extending  from  S.  to  N.  form  the 
boundary  between  Spain  and  Portugal  may  thus  be  considered  to  be  of  the 
same  age. 

The  Sierra  Morena  and  the  environs  of  Almaden  have  again  been 
specially  explored  by  M.  Casiano  de  Prado,  who  has  prepared  a  geological 
map  of  that  tract,  which  will  shortly  appear  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Geolo- 
gical Society  of  France,  and  has  discovered  many  Silurian  and  Devonian 
fossils  which  will  be  described  by  MM.  Barrande  and  de  Verneuil. 

The  Silurian  rocks  (lower)  are  very  rich  in  Trilobites,  and  have  already 
afforded  about  20  species  of  those  crustaceans,  among  which  occur  the 
greater  number  of  the  forms  described  by  Mr.  Sharpe  from  Portugal 
(p.  404.)  ;  such  as  Calymene  Tristani,  Phacops  socialis,  P.  Dujardini, 
Placoparia  Tournemini,  Illa3nus  Lusitanicus,  &c. 

An  important  suggestion  too  has  been  made  by  M.  de  Prado,  and  par- 
tially confirmed  by  M.  Barrande,  viz.  that  the  equivalent  of  the  primordial 
zone,  with  its  peculiar  fauna,  exists  in  Spain.  One  imperfect  fossil  only 
has  however  been  yet  found. 

MM.  de  Verneuil  and  de  Loriere  liave  also  detected  Silurian  rocks  in  two 
ridges  directed  from  N.N.W.  to  S.S.E»,  which  range  from  near  Moncayo 
towards  Montalban  in  Aragon. 

H. 

Foramtnifera  in  the  Silurian  Rocks. 

Mr.  H.  C.  Sorby  has  the  merit  of  having  been  the  first  to  discover 
Foraminifera  under  the  microscope  in  the  Silurian  Rocks. 

The  forms  in  the  Aymestry  or  Ludlow  Limestone  (the  black  limestone 
of  Sedgley)  are  very  clearly  recognisable  ;  those  of  the  Wenlock  Limestone 
(from  Easthope)  being  less  so.  These  Foraminifera  are  related  to  the 
genus  Endothyra^  found  by  Professor  Phillips  in  the  Mountain  Limestone 
of  Yorkshire  and  Westmoreland. 

I  regret  that  1  was  unacquainted  with  an  able  memoir  of  Mr.  Sorby  on 
Slaty  Cleavage  when  the  earlier  chapters  were  printed.  (See  Edin.  New 
Phil.  Journ.,  1853.) 


APPENDIX. 


497 


I. 

Supposed  Anomaly  at  Neffiez  in  France  explained. 

Allusion  having  been  made  (p.  393.)  to  a  physical  intermixture  of  Silurian 
with  Carboniferous  fossils  at  this  one  little  spot  in  the  South  of  France, 
I  have  the  satisfaction  to  announce,  that  M.  Fournet  himself,  who  first 
described  the  phenomenon,  is  now  convinced  that  it  is  simply  due  to  a 
violent  contortion  and  inversion  of  the  strata,  as  suggested  by  de  Ver- 
neuil,  and  supported  by  myself,  (p.  394.) 

K. 

Australian  Gold. 

The  reader  who  may  wish  to  be  acquainted  with  the  amount  of  the  pro- 
duce, as  well  as  with  the  history  and  nature  of  the  Australian  Gold  Mines, 
will  find  a  clear  and  able  digest  of  the  whole  subject  by  M.  Delesse,  of 
Paris,  printed  in  the  Annales  des  Mines,  1853,  Tom.  iii.  Serie  5,  p.  185. 
The  same  memoir  was  printed  in  the  "  Moniteur." 

L. 

Produce  of  Silver. 

In  confirmation  of  the  view  taken  (p.  457.)  of  the  future  augmentation  of 
the  quantity  of  silver,  and  in  allusion  to  Humboldt's  anticipation  of  that 
increase  mentioned  in  the  note  of  that  page,  let  me  say,  that  the  same 
illustrious  friend  again  expressed  his  conviction  to  that  effect  to  me  last 
autumn,  in  Berlin,  and  reminded  me  that  Spain  (the  seat  of  the  richest 
silver  mines  in  the  days  of  Hannibal)  had  of  late  years  proved  to  be 
argentiferous  to  a  prodigious  extent. 

M. 

Silurian  Rocks  in  Silesia, 

Since  this  work  was  printed.  Professor  Goppert,  of  Breslau,  has  informed 
me,  that  Graptolites  have  been  found  in  rocks  underlying  the  well-known 
Devonian  formations  of  Silesia  (see  p.  338.),  thus  leading  us  to  suppose  that 
adequate  researches  will  elucidate  a  similar  succession  in  other  parts  of 
Germany. 

K  K 


498 


APPENDIX. 


N. 

Pal(2ozoic  Rocks  in  Asia  Minor. 

M.  Pierre  de  Tchihatclieff  has  just  communicated  to  the  French  Insti- 
tute a  sketch  of  the  succession  of  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous 
rocks  in  Asia  Minor.  (Comptes  Rendus,  3  Avril,  1854.)  The  newly  dis- 
covered large  coal-field  near  Eregli  (Heraclea)  on  the  Black  Sea,  is  in  the 
Carboniferous  Limestone. 

0. 

Discoveries  along  the  Flanks  of  the  Malvern  Hills, 

My  friend  the  Rev.  W.  S.  Symonds,  F.  G.  S.,  (who  has  obligingly 
prepared  the  Index  of  this  work,)  has  recently  informed  me  that,  in 
sinking  shafts  on  the  new  railroad  from  Worcester  to  Hereford,  the 
Woolhope  beds  have  been  observed  in  nearly  vertical  position  opposite 
Winning  Farm,  on  the  west  flank  of  the  ridge.  The  strata  at  this  place 
are  charged  with  Bumastus  Barriensis,  and  other  characteristic  fossils. 
Again,  in  a  deep  excavation  for  the  foundation  of  the  new  house  of 
Messrs,  Burrows'  at  Great  Malvern,  a  bright  red  sandstone  was  found 
beneath  the  detritus  of  the  hill,  and  quarried  to  the  depth  of  twenty  feet, 
dipping  to  the  east  at  an  angle  of  70^.  The  age  of  this  rock,  whether 
Triassic  or  Permian,  has  not  yet  been  determined. 

p. 

Other  Reptilian  Remains  in  the  Permian  Rocks  of  Russia, 

My  friend  Major  Wangenheim  von  Qualen,  to  whom  my  associates  and 
myself  were  much  indebted  for  information  respecting  the  structure  of  the 
Permian  Rocks  of  Orenburg,  has  since  our  visit  detected  bones  of  another 
reptile  which  occurs,  not  like  the  remains  of  the  Rhopalodon  (Fischer) 
in  the  sandstone  and  conglomerate,  but  in  the  limestone  of  the  formation. 
The  preservation  of  the  head  of  this  animal  has  enabled  M.  Eichwald  to 
assign  to  it  the  name  of  Zygosaurus  Lucius,  and  to  compare  it  with  the 
crocodile.  On  referring  M.  Eichwald's  description  (Bull.  Soc.  Imp.  Nat. 
Moscow,  1852,  No.  4.)  to  Professor  Owen,  that  celebrated  comparative 
anatomist  thus  writes  to  me: — "The  characters  which  M.  Eichwald 
points  out  in  his  fossil,  as  resembling  those  in  the  crocodile,  also  occur  in 


APPENDIX. 


499 


the  fossil  skulls  of  the  Labyrinthodont  reptiles ;  and  the  observation  upon 
the  number  and  comparatively  small  size  of  the  teeth,  in  the  Permian 
reptile,  would  lead  to  a  suspicion  that  it  may  really  belong  to  the  Laby- 
rinthodont family.  All  doubt  would  be  removed  by  an  inspection  of  the 
occiput  of  M.  Eichwald's  fossil ;  if  that  part  presented  a  single  condyle 
for  articulation  with  the  neck-vertebrae,  it  would  determine  the  accuracy 
of  his  views  of  its  affinities :  but  if  the  occiput  showed  a  pair  of  condyles 
it  would  prove  the  fossil  to  be  a  Sauroid  Batrachian." 

Q. 

On  the  former  Changes  of  the  Alps. 

(This  abstract  of  a  discourse  addressed  to  the  Royal  Institution,  March 
7th,  1851,  is  given,  to  illustrate  briefly  the  chief  mutations  of  a  moun- 
tain chain  in  comparatively  recent  geological  periods.) 

The  complicated  structure  of  the  Alps  so  baffled  the  penetration  of  de 
Saussure,  that  after  a  life  of  toil,  the  great  and  original  historian  of  those 
mountains  declared,  'there  was  nothing  constant  in  them  except  their 
variety.'  In  citing  this  opinion.  Sir  Roderick  Murchison  explained  how 
that  obscurity  had  since  been  gradually  cleared  away  by  the  application  of 
modern  geology,  as  based  upon  the  succession  of  organic  remains.  He 
then  proceeded  to  specify  the  accumulations  of  which  the  Alps  were  com- 
posed, and  to  mark  the  changes  or  revolutions  they  had  undergone,  be- 
tween the  truly  primeval  days  when  the  earliest  recognizable  animals 
were  created,  and  the  first  glacial  period  in  the  history  of  the  planet. 

His  object  being  to  convey,  in  a  popular  manner,  clear  ideas  of  the 
physical  condition  of  these  mountains  at  different  periods,  he  prepared 
for  the  occasion  three  long  scene-paintings,  which  represented  a  portion  of 
the  chain  at  three  distinct  epochs.  The  first  of  these  views  of  ancient 
nature  exhibited  the  Alps  as  a  long,  low  archipelago  of  islands,  formed,  in 
great  part,  out  of  the  Silurian  and  older  sediments  which  had  been  raised 
above  the  sea;  the  lands  bearing  the  tropical  vegetation  of  the  carboniferous 
era.  (See  woodcut,  p.  268.) 

He  then  stated  that  there  were  in  the  Alps  no  relics  of  the  formations 
to  which,  as  marking  the  close  of  the  primeval  or  palaeozoic  age,  he  had 
assigned  the  name  of  Permian,  and  rapidly  reviewed  the  facts  gathered 
together  by  many  geologists  from  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  maintaining 
that  they  unequivocally  sustained  the  belief,  that  there  had  been  a  succes- 

K  K  2 


500 


APPENDIX. 


sion  of  creations  gradually  rising  from  lower  to  higher  types  of  life,  as 
we  ascend  from  inferior  to  superior  formations.  He  carefully,  however, 
noted  the  clear  distinction  between  such  a  creed,  as  founded  -on  the  true 
records  of  creation,  and  the  theory  of  transmutation  of  species  ;  a  doctrine 
from  which  he  entirely  dissented. 

In  the  second  painting  (an  immense  lapse  of  time  being  supposed  to 
have  occurred),  the  Alps  were  represented  as  a  mountainous  ridge  in 
which  all  the  submarine  formations  from  the  secondary  to  the  older  ter- 
tiary or  Eocene  had  been  elevated  upon  the  flank  of  the  primeval  rocks. 
Each  rock  system  was  distinguished  by  a  colour  peculiar  to  it,  and  the 
nature  of  the  animals  contained  in  each  of  these  deposits  was  succinctly 
touched  upon.  Between  the  youngest  of  the  primary  formations  and  the 
oldest  of  the  secondary  rocks,  it  was  stated,  that  there  is  not  one  species 
in  common  in  any  part  of  Europe  ;  the  expression  being  that  "  an  entirely 
new  creation  had  succeeded  to  universal  decay  and  death." 

In  speaking  of  the  Alpine  equivalents  of  the  British  Lias  and  Oolites, 
Sir  R.  paid  a  sincere  tribute  to  Dr.  Buckland,  who  led  the  way,  thirty 
years  ago,  in  recognizing  this  parallel.  Leopold  von  Buch  was  also  par- 
ticularly alluded  to  as  having  established  such  and  other  comparisons,  and 
as  having  shown  the  extent  to  which  large  portions  of  these  mountains 
have  been  metamorphosed  from  an  earthy  into  a  crystalline  state.  In 
treating  of  the  cretaceous  system  it  was  shown  that  the  Lower  Green  Sand 
of  England,  so  well  illustrated  by  Dr.  Fitton,  was  represented  in  the  Alps 
by  large  masses  of  limestone,  since  called  Neocomian  by  foreign  geologists. 

Emphasis  was  laid  upon  the  remarkable  phenomena,  that  every  where  in 
the  south  of  Europe  (as  in  the  Alps)  the  Nummulite  rocks,  with  the 
*  flysch'  of  the  Swiss,  and  the  *macigno'  of  the  Italians,  have  been  raised 
up  into  mountains  together  with  the  chalk  (Hippurite  beds  and  Inoceramus 
rock)  on  which  they  rest.  Hence  it  was,  that  before  Sir  Roderick  Murchi- 
son  made  his  last  survey  of  the  Alps,  the  greater  number  of  geologists 
classed  the  Nummulite  rocks  with  the  cretaceous  system,  and  considered 
them  both  to  be  of  secondary  age.  But  judging  from  the  mass  of  fossils, 
which  differ  entirely  from  those  of  the  chalk,  and  also  from  their  super- 
position, he  had  referred  these  Nummulite  rocks  to  the  true  lower  tertiary 
or  Eocene  of  Lyell.  Beds  of  this  age,  though  once  merely  dark-coloured 
mud,  have  been  converted  into  the  hard  slates  of  Glarus  with  their  fossil 
fishes  (among  which  eels  and  herrings  first  made  their  appearance).  Some 
strata  of  this  date  at  Monte  Bolca  contain  well  known  fishes,  and  others 


APPENDIX. 


501 


again  have  been  rendered  so  crystalline  amid  the  peaks  of  the  Alps 
as  to  resemble  primary  rocks ;  so  intense  has  been  the  metamorphosis ! 

Dwelling  on  the  atmospheric  conditions  which  prevailed  after  the  ele- 
vation of  the  older  tertiary,  Sir  R.  inferred  that  a  Mediterranean  and 
genial  climate  prevailed  during  all  the  long  period  while  the  beds  of  sand 
(Molasse)  and  of  pebbles  (Nagelflue)  were  accumulating  under  the  waters 
both  of  lakes  and  of  the  sea,  derived  from  the  neighbouring  slopes  of  all 
the  pre-existing  rocks.  The  marine  portions  of  the  Molasse  and  Nagelflue 
contain  the  remains  of  some  species  of  shells  now  living  in  the  Medi- 
terranean ;  whilst  in  alternating  and  overlying  strata,  charged  exclusively 
with  land  and  fresh  water  animals,  including  numerous  insects,  not  one 
species  among  many  hundreds  is  identical  with  any  form  now  living.  This 
point,  on  which  he  first  insisted  on  his  return  from  the  Alps  in  1848, 
Sir  R.  considered  to  be  of  paramount  importance  in  proving,  that 
terrestrial  life  was  much  less  endowed  with  the  capacity  to  resist  physical 
changes  of  the  surface  than  submarine  life ;  for  here  we  have  a  land  fauna 
which  is  Pliocene  in  the  order  of  the  strata,  and  yet  is  scarcely  Eocene 
when  we  regard  its  organic  contents. 

A  certain  number  of  the  more  remarkable  animals  that  lived  during 
this  younger  tertiary  age  were  then  adverted  to,  such  as  the  Rhinoceros 
and  other  large  quadrupeds,  the  fossil  Viverrine  fox  *,  collected  by  himself 
(the  original  of  which  was  on  the  table),  the  huge  Salamander  (Andrias 
Scheuchzeri)  and  a  Chelydra  which  Professor  Bell  has  described  as 
analogous  to  the  snapping  turtle  of  the  southern  states  of  North  America. 
These  creatures,  with  quantities  of  plants,  including  small  palms,  were 
all  indicative  of  a  warm  and  genial  climate.  On  such  sure  grounds  the 
second  diagram  represented  the  Alps  as  covered  with  a  subtropical  vege- 
tation ;  several  of  the  above-mentioned  animals  being  sketched  in  the  fore- 
ground. 

The  author  had  satisfied  himself  f,  in  common  with  Studer,  Escher,  and 
all  the  geologists  who  have  well  explored  the  Alps,  that  everywhere  along 
their  northern  flank  terrific  dislocations  have  occurred,  amounting  in  many 
places  to  a  total  inversion  of  mountains,  whereby  tertiary  deposits  accumu- 
lated beneath  the  waters  during  the  period  he  had  just  been  describing, 
were  thrown  under  the  strata  of  former  date.  He  then  briefly  pointed  out 
what  he  had  demonstrated  in  detail  elsewhere :  viz.  that  the  sands  and 

*  Now  in  the  British  Museum. 

t  Quart.  Joum.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  vol.  v.  p.  157. 


502 


APPENDIX. 


pebble-beds  of  that  age  had  been  suddenly  heaved  up  from  beneath  the 
waters  along  the  outer  or  northern  flank  of  the  chain,  so  as  to  form  moun- 
tainous masses,  the  inverted  and  truncated  ends  of  which  had  been  forced 
under  the  edges  of  the  very  rocks  out  of  whose  detritus  they  had  been 
formed. 

Before  this  great  revolution  had  taken  place  no  large  erratic  blocks  were 
known,  but  after  it  they  became  common,  and  were  the  necessary  products 
of  that  intensely  cold  climate  to  which  the  Alps  were  then  subjected — a 
change  of  which  their  surface  bears  many  distinct  evidences. 

During  the  same  period  the  low  countries  of  northern  Europe  were, 
it  is  well  known,  covered  by  an  Arctic  sea.  The  Jura  and  the  Alps 
having  also  then,  as  it  is  believed,  been  subtended  by  water,  icebergs  and 
rafts  must  have  been  detached  from  the  higher  range,  carrying  away  blocks 
of  stone  northwards  to  be  dropped  at  intervals ;  just  as  it  has  been  de- 
monstrated that  the  Scandinavian  blocks,  which  floated  southwards,  were 
dropped  in  Prussia,  Poland,  and  the  low  lands  of  Russia,  when  all  those 
regions  were  under  the  influence  of  an  Arctic  sea.  In  short,  Bavaria 
and  the  lower  parts  of  the  Cantons  Vaud,  Neufchatel,  and  Berne,  must 
then  have  been  covered  by  waters  which,  whether  salt  or  fresh,  bathed 
the  foot  of  the  Alps. 

The  inference  that  the  change  from  a  former  genial  climate  to  the  first 
great  period  of  cold  was  sudden,  was  further  sustained  by  the  fact,  that  the 
inclined  strata  in  which  the  Mediterranean  animals  are  buried,  are  at  once 
covered  transgressively  and  unconformably  by  other  beds  of  gravel,  shingle, 
and  mud,  in  which  the  remains  of  plants  and  animals  are  those  of  a  cold 
climate. 

The  third  scene,  therefore,  exhibited  the  beds  of  sand  and  pebbles  of  the 
genial  tertiary  period  thrown  up  into  mountains  on  the  flanks  of  the  chain, 
the  peaks  of  which  were  probably  then  covered  for  the  first  time  with 
snow ;  and  from  the  ravines,  whether  opening  upon  the  sea-shore  or  into 
deep  fiords  or  bays,  into  which  glaciers  and  their  moraines  advanced, 
giving  birth  to  icebergs  on  which  rocks  were  floated  away. 

In  concluding.  Sir  Roderick  thus  expressed  himself :  —  "  Having  thus 
now  conducted  you  rapidly  through  the  most  prominent  changes  which  the 
Alps  have  undergone,  from  the  first  period  when  they  had  emerged,  pro- 
bably as  an  archipelago  of  low  islands  in  a  hot  climate,  to  that  epoch 
when  the  animals  and  plants  living  upon  them  indicated  a  Mediterranean 
temperature,  and  then  to  that  Arctic  period,  the  conditions  of  which  I 


APPENDIX. 


503 


have  just  been  discussing,  I  have  no  longer  to  call  for  your  assent  to  any 
inferences  of  the  geologist,  which  all  of  you  are  not  perfectly  competent  to 
understand. 

*'  To  convert  the  Alps  of  the  earliest  glacial  period  into  the  Alps  of  the 
present  day,  you  have  only  to  figure  them  to  yourselves,  as  raised  2000  or 
3000  feet  above  the  altitude  which  they  are  supposed  to  have  in  the  dia- 
gram last  exhibited.  All  their  main  features  remaining  the  same,  you 
would  then  have  before  you,  the  present  Alps  and  their  valleys  bathed 
by  lakes  and  rivers  instead  of  bays  ;  and  in  place  of  the  waters  sketched 
in  beyond  them  in  the  painting,  with  ice-bergs  floating  upon  them,  you 
will  then  have  dry  mounds  of  gravel,  sand,  and  blocks,  which  were  accu- 
mulated beneath  these  waters :  such,  in  a  word,  as  now  constitute  the  low 
hills  and  valleys  and  all  the  richest  land  of  Switzerland  and  Bavaria, 
where  man  has  replaced  the  rhinoceros  and  turtles  of  one  period,  and  the 
ice-bergs  of  another.  You  who  have  not  visited  this  noble  chain,  and 
who  wish  to  judge  of  its  gorges,  peaks,  and  precipices,  may  consult  the 
views  sketched  by  our  associate  Brockedon,  and  thus  have  Nature,  in  her 
present  mood,  brought  in  a  telling  manner  before  you.  But  those  of  you, 
•  who  really  wish  to  grapple  with  the  geological  wonders  of  former  days, 
may  look  at  the  flanks  of  the  Rigi  from  the  lake  of  Lucerne,  where  even 
from  the  deck  of  the  rapidly  passing  steamer,  you  may  see  how  that  great 
pile  of  pudding-stone,  every  pebble  of  which  has  been  derived  from  more 
ancient  rocks  in  the  chain,  has  been  lifted  up  from  beneath  the  waters  in 
the  manner  here  pictorially  represented  ;  whilst,  if  you  continue  the  same 
traverse  up  the  lake  to  Altorf,  you  will  pass  by  extraordinary  folds,  inver- 
sions, and  breaks  of  the  secondary  limestones,  and  of  the  older  Tertiary  or 
Nummulitic  rocks.  .  Such  a  doubling  or  crumpling  up  of  these  strata,  you 
may  then  perchance  agree  with  me  in  thinking,  was  in  a  great  measure 
the  result  of  lateral  pressure  between  two  great  masses ;  viz.  the  axis  of 
the  crystalline  rocks  of  the  chain  towards  the  south,  and  the  newly 
upraised  deposits,  of  which  the  Rigi  is  a  small  part  only  on  the  north. 
The  latter  having  been  intruded  upon  the  terrestrial  surface,  necessarily 
compressed  the  pre-existing  formations  into  a  smaller  compass.  If  more 
adventurous,  you  should  climb  to  the  peaks,  rising  to  8000  or  9000  feet 
above  the  sea,  and  flanking  the  central  summits,  you  may  there  satisfy 
yourself,  that  deposits  which  were  once  mere  mud,  formed  during  the  same 
time  as  our  slightly  consolidated  London  clay,  have  been  in  many  parts 
converted  into  schists  and  slates,  as  crystalline  as  some  of  the  so-called 
primary  rocks  of  our  islands ! 


1 


504 


APPENDIX. 


"  In  speaking  of  the  last  changes  of  the  Alps  as  stupendous,  I  know  it 
may  be  said  that,  in  reference  to  the  diameter  of  the  planet,  the  highest  of 
these  mountains  and  the  deepest  of  these  valleys  are  scarcely  perceptible 
corrugations  of  the  rind  of  the  earth.  But,  when  we  contrast  such  aspe- 
rities with  many  other  external  features  of  this  rind,  they  are  truly  stupen- 
dous. Let  the  observer,  for  example,  travel  over  vast  surfaces  such  as 
those  of  Russia,  where  he  cannot  detect  a  single  disruption — not  one  great 
fracture,  and  no  outbursts  whatever  of  igneous  and  volcanic  rocks,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  a  monotonous  and  horizontal  sequence  of  former  aqueous 
deposits,  which,  simply  dried  up,  have  never  been  disturbed  by  any  violent 
revolutions  from  beneath, — and  then  compare  such  features  with  the  ad- 
jacent Ural  mountains,  or  still  better  with  the  loftier  Alps,  and  he  will  be 
truly  impressed  with  the  grandeur  of  such  changes. 

*'  And  here  my  auditors  will  recollect,  that  even  beneath  and  around 
this  metropolis  they  can  be  assured,  by  finding  extinct  fossil  mammalia, 
that  such  also  have  been  the  changes,  though  on  a  less  striking  scale,  in  our 
own  country.  The  large  extinct  British  quadrupeds  necessarily  required  a 
great  range  for  their  sustenance.  They  had  doubtlessly  roamed  from  dis- 
tant tracts  to  our  lands  before  the  straits  of  Dover  were  formed  and  before 
the  region  of  Britain  was  broken  up  into  isles.  One  of  our  great  insu- 
lating dislocations  was,  I  conceive,  coincident  with  that  striking  pheno- 
menon in  the  Alps  on  which  I  have  tried  to  rivet  your  attention,  when  the 
first  glacial  and  icy  period  affected  so  large  a  portion  of  this  hemisphere, 
and  when  large  portions  of  our  northern  lands  formed  the  bottoms  of  an 
Arctic  sea.  But  such  tracts  were  bidden  to  rise  again  from  beneath  the 
waters  and  constitute  the  present  continents  and  islands  before  man  was 
placed  on  the  surface.  Our  race,  in  short,  was  not  created  until  the 
greater  revolutions  of  which  I  have  treated  had  passed  away. 

"  These  grand  dislocations  belong,  therefore,  distinctly  to  former  epochs 
of  nature,  and  their  magnitude  is  enormous  when  compared  with  any  thing 
which  passes  under  our  eyes,  or  has  been  recorded  in  human  history.  At 
the  same  time  geologists  have  shown  upon  clear  evidences,  that  during  the 
long  periods  which  were  repeatedly  interrupted  by  great  revolutions,  there 
was  a  constant  exhibition  of  diurnal  agencies  precisely  similar  to  those 
which  now  prevail  in  the  world.  In  those  elder  times,  rain  must  have 
fallen — volcanic  forces  must  have  been  active  in  scattering  ashes  far  and 
wide,  and  in  spreading  them  out  together  with  sheets  of  lava  beneath  the 
waters — gradual  movements  of  oscillation,  and  moderate  elevations  and 


APPENDIX. 


505 


depressions  must  also  have  occurred —  and  long  continued  abrasion  of  the 
sides  of  mountains  must  have  produced  copious  accumulations  of  *  debris  * 
to  encroach  upon  lakes,  the  overflow  or  bursting  of  which  may  have  steri- 
lized whole  tracts. 

"  All  such  ordinary  changes  of  the  surface  of  the  globe,  with  occasional 
slight  breaks  in  the  long  career,  were  doubtlessly  common  to  all  epochs. 
But,  whilst  no  such  operations  can  be  compared  as  to  effect  with  those 
phenomena  of  disruption  and  overturning  of  mountain  masses  which  have 
been  specially  dwelt  upon  this  evening,  so  also,  according  to  my  view,  it 
is  impossible,  that  any  amount  of  these  small  agencies,  though  continued 
for  millions  of  years,  could  have  produced  such  results. 

"  In  thus  attempting  to  shadow  out  in  the  space  of  little  more  than  an  hour 
the  chief  formations  and  transmutations  of  a  chain  like  the  Alps,  I  have 
probably  laboured  to  effect  what  many  persons  may  deem  impossible  ;  but 
I  have  thought  that  some  at  least  of  these  evening  discourses  should  awaken 
the  mind  to  the  larger  features  of  a  science,  the  details  of  which  must  be 
followed  out  by  a  careful  survey  of  nature.  I  would  beg,  therefore,  those 
persons  who  have  not  studied  geology  practically,  to  dwell  on  the  facts 
brought  forward,  and  to  believe  that  they  are  indisputably  and  clearly 
proven.  They  tell  us  unmistakeabiy  how  different  animals  and  vegetables 
are  entombed  in  these  vast  sepulchres  of  ancient  nature,  and  they  reveal 
to  us,  that  the  successive  inhabitants  of  each  creation  lived  during  very 
long  periods  of  time.  They  announce  to  us,  in  emphatic  language,  how 
ordinary  operations  of  accumulation  were  continued  tranquilly  during 
very  lengthened  epochs,  and  how  such  tranquility  was  broken  in  upon 
by  great  convulsions. 

"  Being  thus  led  to  ponder  upon  the  long  history  of  successive  races 
and  also  upon  some  of  the  most  wonderful  physical  revolutions  this  chain 
has  undergone,  we  cannot  avoid  arriving  at  the  belief,  that,  in  addition  to 
many  other  great  operations,  the  disruption  which  upheaved  the  middle 
and  younger  Tertiary  formations  from  beneath  the  waters,  and  threw 
them  up  into  mountain  masses,  accompanied  by  the  production  of  the  first 
great  arctic  period  known  in  the  history  of  the  planet,  was  a  change  of 
immeasurable  intensity.  That  change,  in  short,  by  which  a  period  of 
snow,  ice,  glaciers,  floating  ice-bergs,  and  the  transport  of  huge  erratics 
far  from  the  sources  of  their  origin,  suddenly  followed  a  genial  and  Medi- 
terranean clime!'* 


INDEX. 


Abberley  Hills,  Silurian  Rocks  of,  97,  132. 

Abb's  (St.)  Head,  view  of  cliff  near,  150. 

Aberdeen,  coast  section  near,  164. 

Abereiddy  Bay,  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  64. 

Abergavenny,  Old  Red  Sandstone,  244. 

Aberystwith,  Lower  Silurian  rocks,  70. 

Abich,  on  Devonian  rocks,  Mount  Ai*arat,  335. 

Acroculia,  230. 

Acton,  Mrs.  S.,  sketch  by,  81. 

Acton  Burnell  Hills,  Salop,  83. 

Acton  Scott,  82. 

Africa,  palaeozoic  rocks  in,  13. 

Agassiz,  on  Pterygotus  problematicus,  137. 
237.;  on  Devonian  (Old  Red  Sandstone) 
fishes,  245,  253.;  Permian  fishes,  313.; 
North  American  geology,  411.;  on  glacial 
phenomena,  482. 

Agger  and  Lenne',  Devonian  group  of,  369,  382. 

Agnostus  pisiformis,  a  trilobite  of  lowest  Silu- 
rian rocks,  92. 

Albert,  H.  R.  H.,  Prince,  457. 

Alison,  Sir  A.,  sketch  by,  150,  151. 

Alberbury,  Shrewsbury,  magnesian  limestone, 
300.  302. 

Almaden,  Spain,  quicksilver  mines,  397. 

Alps,  metamorphosis  of  tertiary  rocks,  3.;  pa- 
laeozoic rocks,  337.  407.;  and  Apennines, 
memoir  on,  406.;  changes  of.  Appendix  Q. 

Altai  Orientale,  by  Pierre  de  Tchihatcheff,  334. 

Alum  schists  and  slates  in  Norway  and  Sweden, 
with  trilobites,  fucoids,  and  graptolites,  47. 
318.  320. 

America  (South),  Silurian  strata,  14.  409. 
&c.;  (North),  Silurian  and  other  palgeozoic 
rocks,  14.  18.  20.  23.  279.  288.  410.;  suc- 
cession of  primeval  rocks,  408.;  United 
States,  palasozoic  rocks,  412.  et  seq.;  British 
North  America,  425.  428.;  gold  only  in  the 
ancient  rocks,  432. 

Ammonite,  first  appearance  of,  282. 

Ampelite  shale,  385.  387. 

Amphitherium  of  the  Stonesfield  ooHte,  466. 

Ancient  rocks,  first  traces  of  fossil  animals  in, 
17.  459.  etseq. 

Andes,  altered  and  igneous  rocks  of. — See  Cor- 
dillera, 18.  409. 

Angelin,  work  referred  to,  321. 

Angers,  France,  slates  of  (Llandeilo),  383.  385. 
387. 

Anglesea,  schists  and  slates  of,  Longmynd  or 
Bottom  rocks,  23.  25. ;  contorted  rocks  of,  24. ; 
Irish  equivalents  of,  165.  Appendix  D. 

Animal  life,  its  apparent  dawn,  5.  9. 459.  et  seq. 


Annelids  in  Lower  Silurian,  70.  199.;  of  Upper 

Silurian,  113.  233. 
Ansted,  D.  T  ,  "  Ancient  World,"  279.;  on  gold 

in  Wales,  434. 
Anthracite  in  Lower  Silurian  and  older  rocks,. 

38.  61.;  formed  of  Silurian  fucoids,  323. 
Anthracitic  schists  in  France,  385. 
Ant  stone,  "  Kramenzel-stein,"  373.  382. 
Apalachian  and  Alleghany  Mountains,  410. 424. 
Ararat,  Mount,  Devonian  rocks  of,  335. 
Arboreal  vegetation,  no  indication  of  in  chief 

Silurian  periods,  139.  473. 
Arbroath,  paving  stones  of,  247. 
Archangel,   Permian   deposits  near  to,  294.; 

Devonian  and  carboniferous  rocks  of,  329. 
Archegosaurus,  287. 

Archiac,  d',  and  de  Verneuil,  on  Rhenish  fossils, 

366.;  on  Spanish  fossils,  400. 
Arctic  Regions,  Silurian  rocks  and  fossils  of,  412. 

428,  429. 

Ardennes,  slaty  rocks  of,  367. ;  Lower  Devonian 
of,  369.  382. 

Arran,  Nicol  on  the  geology  of,  163. 

Arragon,  Silurian  rocks  in,  396. 

Arrowsmith,  map  of  the  gold  regions  of  Aus- 
tralia by,  453. 

Ashby  de  la  Zouch,  Permian  plants,  306. 

Asia,  Silurian  rocks,  13. 

Asia  Minor,  palasozoic  rocks  of,  335,  Appendix  N. 
Asturias,  coal  fields,  400. 
Atrypa,  188. 

Aveline,  memoir  and  section  by,  79,  80. 

Aushkul,  lake  in  South  Ural,  440. 

Austen,  R.  A.  C,  on  Devonian  fossils,  260.; 
the  Devonian  of  Germany,  381.;  the  Devonian 
of  the  Boulonnais,  390. 

Australia,  Silurian  fossils  in,  14.;  gold  of,  449.; 
first  printed  documents  concerning  gold  of, 
451.;  produce  of  gold.  Appendix  K. 

Aymestry  limestone,  or  middle  Ludlow  rock  of, 
130.  143. ;  fossils  of,  133. 

Ayrshire,  Silurian  rocks,  150.  157. 

Baggy  Point,  North  Devon,  section  at,  256. 

Bala  limestone  and  fossils  (Llandeilo),  10.  46. 
49.;  cystide^  of,  182.  Preface;  Appendix  B. 

Balmae  Head,  Upper  Silurian,  161,  162. 

Ballynahinch  Lake,  section  across,  169. 

Barr,  Staffordshire,  Caradoc  near,  99. ;  Trilo- 
bite, (Bumastus),  111. 

Barrande,  J.,  Preface,  on  Graptolites,  44.  47. 
321.  332. ;  classification  appUed  to  North 
Wales,  44. ;  on  Conularia  of  Bohemia,  196.; 
on  the  Silurian  Crustacea  of  Bohemia,  236. ; 


508 


INDEX. 


work  on  the  rocks  and  fossils  of  the  Silurian 
Basin  of  Bohemia,  340  —  349.;  additional 
notice  of  his  labours,  A ppend'ix  E. 

Barmouth,  Lower  Silurian  deposits,  31.  40. 

Barnstaple,  section  passing  bv,  2.56.  258. 

Basalt,  of  Comdon  and  Shelve,  58.;  eruptive 
ovei-flowing  coal  of  Clee  Hills,  273,  274. 

Bas  Boulonnais,  France,  Upper  Devonian^  390. 

Base  of  Silurian  rocks,  17.  459,  et  seq. 

Bassin  Silurien  de  la  Boheme. — (See  Barrande,) 
44.  340. 

Batrachians,  of  Carboniferous  period,  313. 

Batrachian  reptile  in  fossil  tree,  426. 

Bavin,  provincial  term,  133. 

Beaumont,  EHe  de,  on  dislocation  of  mountain 
chains,  362.  476.;  on  the  Palseozoic  rocks  of 
France,  383.;  on  the  Permian  rocks  of 
France,  393.  ;  on  parallel  directions  of 
mountain  chains,  426.;  on  catastrophes, 
Appendix  D. 

Beck,  Dr.,  on  graptolites,  47. 

Belgium,  Devonian  strata,  261.;  primeval  suc- 
cession, 336.;  Devonian  rocks,  371.;  Car- 
boniferous rocks,  375.;  table  of  the  older 
rocks,  382. 

Bellerophon,  in  Lower  Silurian,  195.;  in  Upper 
Silurian,  231. 

Belmez,  Spain,  coal  fields,  401. 

Ben  Gleniskv,  Connemara,  section  across,  169. 

Benthall  Edge,  Wenlock  fossils,  120. 

Ben  "Wvvis,  mountain,  250. 

Beresite.  gold  in  matiis  so  called,  440. 

Berezovsk,  Eussia,  Mammoth  remains,  442. 

Bemer,  Herr,  collector  of  Silurian  fossils  in  Ger- 
many, 354. 

Berwickshire,  Silurian  rocks,  150.;  Carboni- 
ferous rocks,  274. 
Bevrich,  M.,  geological  map  bv,  338. 
Beyrichia,  236. 

Bigsbv,  J.  J.,  on  X.  American  Geologv,  411. 
429. 

Binney,  E.  W.,  on  trails  and  holes  in  coal  strata, 

286.;  on  Permian  fossils,  302, 
Bins  of  Connemara,  Ireland,  168 — 171. 
Birds,  bones  of  in  greensand  and  chalk,  467. 
Birds-eye  limestone  of  America,  414. 
Bituminous  schist  formed  from  fucoids,  323. 
Bitumen,  in  cavities  of  ancient  rocks,  47.  and 

Appendix  C. 
Black  Mountain,  Old  Red  Sandstone  of,  242, 

243. 

Black  River  limestone  of  America,  414. 

Boblaye,  De,  on  ampelite  schists,  388. 

Bogoslofsk,  gold  near,  440. 

Bohemia. — (See  BaiTande,)  oldest  traces  of  Hfe 
in  the  primordial  zone  of  Bohemia,  Scandi- 
navia, Wales,  and  America,  9.  20.;  Trilobites 
of,  43.;  Graptohtes  in  Upper  Silnria,  47.; 
Silurian  rocks,  340,  et  seq.;  gold  only  in 
ancient  rocks  of,  432.  Appendix  E. 

Bolivia,  Silui-ian  rocks,  409. 

Bothnia  Gulph,  Lower  Silurian,  324. 

Bottom  Rocks  (Cambrian  of  the  Government 
Survey),  unfossiliferous  in  Great  Britain,  21.; 
of  Scotland,  151. ;  of  Ireland,  with  a  zoophyte, 


32.165.;  great  break  between  and  Silurian 
of  Ireland,  A ppendix  D. 

Bone  Well,  sketch  of  Upper  Ludlow  rocks,  134. 

Bone-bed  of  Ludlow  rocks,  143.;  with  fishes 
and  crastaceans,  237. 

Bos-aurochs,  fossil  and  living,  444. 

Boulogne,  Devonian  and  Cai-boniferous  fossils 
near  to,  390. 

Brachiopods  of  Lower  Silurian,  183 — 191,  ; 
Upper  Silurian,  221—225.;  Old  Red  Sand- 
stone, 260.  263.;  Carboniferous,  283.;  Per- 
mian, 308. 

Brachymetopus,  281. 

Bradnor  Hill,  Upper  Ludlow  rock,  140. 

Brand-erde,  or  burnt  earth,  58. 

Brazils,  gold  in  deep  mines,  454. 

Breadalbane,  Marquis  of,  gold  in  Scotland,  435. 

Brecknockshire,  Upper  Ludlow  rocks,  140.  ; 
ichthyolites  in  cornstone,  245. 

Brecon,  Lower  Silurian  slates,  75.;  Upper  Lud- 
low rocks,  125.  134.;  anticlinal  of  Ludlow 
rocks,  141.;  succession  of  strata  and  Fans 
of,  242. 

Breidden  Hills,  bedded  trap  and  section,  59,  60. 

Brickenden,  L.,  254. 

Bridgend,  Permian  conglomerate,  302. 

Brilon,  AVestpbaha,  sti'ata  inverted,  378. 

Brindgwood  Chase,  section  across,  126. 

Bristol,  magnesian  (Permian)  conglomerate,  301. 

Britain,  Great,  lowest  fossil  remains  in,  20.; 
gold  in,  433. 

British  Isles,  dissimilar  mineral  characters  of 
the  Silm-ian  rocks  of,  as  compared  with  those 
of  Eussia,  17.;  increase  of  limestone  in  as 
the  formations  become  younger,  48. ;  vertical 
dimensions  of  Silurian  rocks,  1  73.  ^ 

British  North  America,  palaeozoic  rocks,  427. 

Brittany,  Silurian  rocks,  145,  383.;  Devonian 
rocks,  391. 

Broccard  Castle,  81. 

Brocken,  the  (Hartz  Mountains),  363. 

Broderip,  W.  I.,  Phragmoceras  named  by,  128.; 
Didelphis  Bucklandi,  466. 

Brongniart,  Adolphe,  on  fossil  botany,  268. 280. ; 
on  Permian  plants,  298.  305. 

Brown,  Robert,  his  Psaronites,  307. 

Brown,  T.,  on  Permian  fossils,  302. 

Bro^vn  Clee  Hills,  cornstone  of,  244. 

Buch,  Leopold  von,  application  of  Silurian 
classification  to  Eussia,  Preface;  on  the 
cystideje,  181.;  on  the  Hartz  and  Ehenish 
provinces,  363,  370.;  on  the  geology  of 
Australia,  450.;  on  the  Alps,  476. 

Buckland,  Eev.  W.  (Dean  of  Westminster), 
suggestion  to  the  author,  6.;  Bridgewater 
Treatise,  469. 

Builth,  Ludlow  rocks  near  to,  140.;  igneous 
rocks  of,  45.  57.;  Llandeilo  formation  in 
contact  with  Upper  Silurian,  90. 

Bumastus  Barriensis,  111. 

Bunter-sandstein,  division  of  in  Germany,  298; 
300. 

Busaco,  Portugal,  Silurian  rocks,  404. 
Cader  Idiis,  Lower  Silurian  and  trap  rocks  of, 
32.  39.;  section  across,  77. 


INDEX. 


509 


Gaer  Caradoc,  views  of,  26.  81.;  trap  rocks  of, 
81. 

Caermarthen,  faiis  of,  242.;  carboniferous  rocks, 

270,271. 
Cairnsmuir,  granite,  162. 
Cairn-Ryan,  graptolite  slates,  1  ^6. 
Caithness,  flagstones  and  ichf  .yolites  of,  248. 

250.  2.53. 

Calamites  in  Old  Bed  Sandstone,  255.  265. 
Calcareous  rocks,  chief  seats  of  former  life,  465. 
Caledonian  canal,  valley  of,  250.;  railroad, 

Silurian  rocks,  1 55. 
California,  gold,  450.  455.  458. 
Calvert,  John,  on  gold  rocks  of  Britain,  436. 
Cambrian,  term  when  and  how  applied,  Pre- 
face, 7,  8.  10.  25.;  rocks  with  fossils  first 
named  Lower  Silurian,  Preface,  26.  63. 
Cambridge  Museum,  pala30zoic  fossils  of,  10. 
Canada,  Upper,  Silurian  rocks,  15.  410.;  gold 
in  Lower  Silurian,  458. ;  thickness  of  Devonian 
rocks  in,  418.;  Lower,  section  across,  424; 
geological  map  of,  by  Mr.  Logan,  425. 
Cantyre,  rocks  in,  163,  164. 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  fossiliferous  rocks,  13,; 
depth  of  the  sea  between  and  Cape  Horn 
478.  ^ 
Caradoc  (Caractacus),  king  of  the  Silures,  6. ; 

sandstone,   connection   with  the  Llandeilo 
.  flags,  50.  90.;  formation  described,  78.  et 
■  562-. ;  relations  of  to  Upper  Silurian,  82.  Ap- 
jpendixA,  B ;  modern  aspect  of  sandstones  of  in 
-  Shropshire,  83.;  Lower,  fossils  of,  86.;  Upper, 
,  fossils  of,   88.;    and   Llandeilo  formation 
united,  88.;  of  Malvern  Hills,  95.  (Upper), 
sandstone  at  May  Hill  and  Huntley,  97.;  at 
Lickey  Hills  and  Barr,  99.;  conglomerates 
of  Old  Radnor,    Howler  Heath,  &c.  95. 
104.  ;   sandstone,   equivalent   of   in  Nor- 
mandy, 387. 
Carboniferous  series,  unconformable  within  it- 
.  self,  51.;   strata  unconformable  to  Scotch 
Silurian,  162.;  limestone  of  S.  Welsh  coal 
basin,  242.;  of  Devonshire,  256.;  era,  vege- 
tation and  general  order  of,  268,  269,  270., • 
.  of  France   crystalline    and    slaty,  '  269,  j 
limestone  and  fossils  of  Britain,  271  272* 
•  273.   282.;  rocks,  Ireland,  275.;  reptiles^ 
,  287.;   Upper   Fauna,   279—285,;  Lower 
Fauna,  281,;  with  Devonian  rocks  in  Russia, 
330.  333,;  system,  lowest   members  only 
developed  in  Russia,  332, ;  rocks  of  Thu- 
ringia,  359.;  the  Rhine,  375.;  France,  391.; 
Spain,  400.  402.;  Flora,  types  of  ceasing  in 
the  Permian  era,  407. ;  rocks,  United  States, 
418.;  insects  first  appear  in,  284.  466.; 
period,  succeeded  by  violent  changes,  480.; 
Asia  Minor,  Appendix  N.  ' 
Cardigan,  Silurian  rocks  of,  76. 
Cardiola,  227. 

Carinaria  allied  to  Bellerophon,  196. 
Caermarthen,  Upper  Silurian,  125.  139.  141.; 

Lower  Silurian,  33.;  thickness  of  Llandeilo 

limestone,  52. 
Caernarvonshire,  base  of  paleozoic  deposits,  23. ; 

lowest  rocks,  33. 


Carneddau,  bedded  igneous  rocks,  57.;  eruptiv^ 
trap,  and  altered  Llandeilo  flags,  61. 

Carpathian  mountains,  crystalline  rocks,  336. 

Carrickfergus,  salt  of  and  trial  for  coal  near,  277. 

Carthagena,  mines  in  Lower  Silurian  lime- 
stones, 397. 

Casiano  de  Prado,  on  the  Silurian  and  other 
palaeozoic  rocks  in  Spain,  395—401.;  traces 
a  great  extent  of  Silurian  rocks  in  Spain,  Ap-i 
pendix  G. 

Cawdor,  Earl  of,  272. 

Cephalaspis,  fossil  fish  in  old  red  sandstone,  2451 

Cephalopods  of  Lower  Silurian,  197. ;  of  Upper 
Silurian,  231.;  ancient  forms  of,  310;  the 
scavengers  of  the  Silm-ian  seas,  471. 

Ceratite,  282. 

Cestracionts,  284. 

Charpentier,  J.  de,  on  the  glacial  period,  482. 
Chasy  limestone,  of  America,  414. 
Cherbourg,  palseozoic  rocks,  384. 
Cheney  Longville,  Caradoc  sandstone,  82. 
Cheviot  Hills,  152. 
China,  Devonian  fossils,  14. 
Chlorite  slates,  23.  ^ 
Chondrites,  42. 

Christiania  (Norway),  Silurian  succession,  320. 

Church  Stretton,  Salop,  81. 

Cidaris  (Sea  urchin),  308. 

Clarke,  Rev.  W.  B.  on  the  paleozoic  rocks  of 
Australia,  14.;  gold  in  Australia  discovered 
and  described  by,  450,  452. 

Cleavage,  slaty,  in  Silurian  and  older  rocks,  33. 
34, ;  in  Devonian  rocks,  259. ;  rare  in  car- 
boniferous rocks,  269.  ;  not  uncommon  in 
carboniferous  rocks  of  Ireland,  276. 

Clee  Hills,  distant  view  of,  26. ;  succession  of 
strata  near,  242. ;  (Salop),  carboniferous  rocks 
of,  273. 

Clent  Hills,  301. 

Climate,   during  the  pala?ozoic  rocks,  463.  ; 

warmer  in  primeval  times,  1.  477. 
Clinton  group,  of  America,  159. 
Clun  Forest  (Shropshire)  tilestones,  139. 
Clymenia  (Devonian)  limestone,  263.  356.  371. 

382. 

Coal,  absurd  searches  for  in  Lower  Silurian,  61. 
93,;  basin  of  South  Wales,  244,;  Forest  of 
Dean,  244.;  anthracitic  in  Pembroke,  258,,- 
Island,  north  of  Ireland,  277.  ;  measures, 
thickness  of  in  S.  Wales,  278.;  fossil  Limulus' 
of,  287.  ;  insects,  shells,  fishes,  and  ferns  of, 
284.  ;  its  relations  to  the  British  Permian 
rocks,  301,  302.  ;  fields  Upper,  wanting  in 
Russia,  334.;  wasteful  search  for  in  Siluriari 
schists  of  France,  388. 

Coalbrookdale,  Wenlock  shale  at,  111.;  car- 
boniferous strata  of,  284.  ' 

Cobrales  (Spain),  carboniferous  limestone  of,  400. 

Cobadonga  (Spain),  mountain  limestone,  400.  ' 

Cocccsteus,  fossil  fish  of  Scottish  Old  Red  Sand- 
stone, 252,;  of  Devonian  rocks  in  Germany, 
371.;  of  Devonian  rocks  in  Russia,  328.  * 

Coleman,  Rev,  W.  H.,  Permian  plants  detected 
by,  306. 

Collomb,  M.,  and  de  Verneuil  on  Spain,  396., 


610 


INDEX. 


Colmers  end,  Woolhope  limestone  at,  110. 

Colquhoun,  Colonel,  on  Mexican  gold,  449. 

Combe  Martin  (N.  Devon),  260. 

Comus  wood,  Ludlow,  126. 

Conditions,  primeval,  of  the  earth's  surface,  473. 

Conglomerates,  in  the  Silurian  rocks  of  Wales, 
70.;  of  Malvern  hills,  94.;  in  the  Silurian 
rocks  of  Ayrshire,  160. 

Coniston  limestone,  equivalent  of  Llandeilo  lime- 
stone, 146.  147.;  grits,  equivalent  of  Caradoc 
sandstone,  147. 

Connemara,  Silurian  rocks,  168 — 171.;  Bins  of 
altered  Lower  Silurian?  171. 

Constantinople,  Silurian  and  Devonian  rocks 
near,  335. 

Continents,  aboriginal,  mostly  submerged,  475. 
Conularia,  196.  231. 

Conybeare,  Eev.  W.  D.,  geology  of  England  and 
Wales,  6. 

Copper  ore,  veins  of  penetrating  from  Longmynd 
rocks  into  Pentamerus  limestone,  27.;  veins 
of  at  the  Longmynd,  38. ;  at  the  Stiper  stones, 
39.;  in  Lower  Silurian,  53. 

Coprolites  m  Upper  Ludlow  rock,  142.  238. 

Corals,  of  Wenlock  shale,  113.  ;  of  Wenlock 
limestone,  119.;  Lower  Silurian,  178.;  pa- 
Iseozoic,  unknown  in  present  seas,  210.;  Upper 
Silurian,  212.  215.  ;  Devonian,  256.  260. 
371.;  carboniferous,  282.  ;  Permian,  308. 

Coral  reefs,  evidences  of  contiguity  of  land,  472. 

Corbieres,  palseozoic  formations,  394. 

Cordier,  Baron  L.,  rcport  of,  409. 

Cornbrook  coal  basin,  273. 

Cordillera,  Silurian  rocks,  14.  409.  ;  term  why 
applied  to  the  range  of  eastern  Australia, 
450. 

Cork,  carboniferous  rock,  276. 

Corndon,  Salop,  Lower  Silurian  schists,  28.;  Hill, 
sketch  of,  57.;  Upper  Caradoc  near,  82. 

Cornstone,  of  Old  Eed  Sandstone,  244. ;  fragm.ents 
of  fishes  in,  245.;  of  Murray  Firth,  251.;  of 
the  Permian  deposits,  301. 

Cornulites,  of  Lower  Silurian,  200. 

Cornwall,  Lower  Silurian  and  Devonian  of,  145. 
260.;  inversion  of  strata,  145.  379.;  gold  in, 
434. ;  tin  miners  of,  recommended  by  the  au- 
thor to  dig  for  gold  in  Australia,  451. 

Corton,  Upper  Caradoc,  90. ;  Lower  Wenlock 
(or  Woolhope  limestone),  103. 

Cotta,  B.,  on  the  geology  of  Saxony,  351. 

Cossatchi  Datchi,  hills  of,  441. 

Coul-beg,  mountain  of  west  coast  of  Highlands, 
249. 

Coul-more,  mountain  of  west  coast  of  Highlands, 
250. 

Crania,  in  Lower  Silurian,  187. 

Creation,  progress  of,  460. ;  of  different  succes- 
sive races,  468,  469. 

Credner,  Herr,  map  of  Thuringia,  299.  360. 

Criffel,  granite  hills  of,  162. 

Crinoids  of  Lower  Silurian,  1 80. ;  of  Upper  Silu- 
rian, 219. ;  rare  in  Permian  strata,  308. 

Cromarty,  fossil  fishes  of,  251. 

Crustacea,  of  Lower  Silurian,  200.;  of  Upper 
Silurian,  234.;  of  Devonian  rocks,  264. 


Crustacea,  gigantic  traits  of  in  Lower  Silurian' 
413. 

Crossopodia,  annelid  in  Lower  Silurian,  199. 
Cruziana  (Bilobites),  in  England,  42. ;  in  Lower 

Silurian  of  Spain,  396. 
Cuenca,  fossils  near,  399. 
Culm,  or  fractured  stone  coal,  Pembroke  and 

Devon,  258,  259.;  slash  of,  in  Pembroke, 

275. 

Cumberland,  graptolite  schists,  47.  ;  Silurian 
rocks,  145.;  Devonian  rocks,  257. 

Cumming,  Lady  Gordon,  on  fishes  of  Old  Red 
Sandstone,  251. 

Cuvier,  Baron,  on  the  succession  of  vertebrata 
468.  ;  Old  Red  fishes  described  by,  253. 

Cwm-eisen-isaf  (N.  Wales),  gold  at,  434. 

Cwm  Cwyn,  section  across  the  hill  of,  79. 

Cwm  Dwr  (Brecknockshire),  junction  of  Silu- 
rian and  Old  Red  Sandstone,  141. 

Cyclas,  in  Old  Red  Sandstone,  254. 

Cyclopteris,  plant  of  Old  Red  Sandstone,  255. 

Cyrtoceras,  genus  of  cephalopod,  197. 

Cytheropsis,  a  bivalve  Crustacean,  236. 

Cystideffi,  of  Lower  Silurian,  181.;  of  Upper 
Silurian,  217. 

Dago,  island  of,  327. 

Dale,  Owen  D.— (See  Owen)  works,  15.  422. 

Dartmoor,  eruptive  granite,  section  to,  256. 

Darwin,  C,  Silurian  fossils  and  works,  15.  409. 

Davidson,  T.  on  Devonian  fossils  in  China,  14.; 
on  Silurian  brachiopods,  176.  222.  389. 

Davis,  E.,  Lingula  in  oldest  Silurian  beds  dis- 
covered by,  44. ;  on  fossils  of  Lower  Wenlock, 
105. 

Dawson,  on  coal-fields  and  a  reptile  therein,  426. 

Dean,  Mr.  A.,  gold  found  by,  433. 

Dean,  Forest  of,  carboniferous  rocks,  270.:  coal 
basin  of,  244. 

Dechen,  H.  von,  works  of,  338.  378. 

Delanoue,  geological  map  by,  390. 

De  la  Beche,  Sir  H.  T. — (See  Dedication,  Pre" 
face,  Appendix^  On  the  Silurian  rocks  of 
Wales,  8. ;  on  fossiliferous  Cambrian  being  the 
equivalent  of  Lower  Silurian,  8.;  and  asso- 
ciates on  unconformity  of  stratification,  50. ; 
on  a  fault  at  Musclewick  Bay,  65.  ;  sanc- 
tions the  Silurian  classification,  138.  168; 
on  iron  oxides.  241.;  on  Devonian  rocks,  258.; 
sanctions  the  term  Permian,  292. 

Desor,  on  American  azoic  rocks,  20.  411. 

Denbighshire,  slaty  Wenlock  shale.  111.;  al- 
tered mudstones,  101. 

Dendrerpeton  Acadianum,  287. 

Denudarion,  valley  of,  118. 

Derbyshire,  coal  field,  270.;  development  of  car- 
boniferous limestone,  271.;  thickness  of  coal 
strata,  273. 

Devon,  North,  section  across,  256. 

Devonian  rocks,  formerly  merged  in  *  Grau- 
wacke',  6.;  term  why  apphed,  11.;  rocks  of 
Britain,  241.;  fossils  in  Ireland,  255.;  rocks 
described,  256.  263.;  term  proposed  by  Sedg- 
wick and  Murchison,  257.  ;  of  Devon  and 
Cornwall,  257.;  of  South  Devon,  259.  ;  of 
Rhenish  provinces,  261. 365.;  shells  of  Lower, 


INDEX. 


511 


261.;  trilobites  of,  262.;  shells  of  Upper, 
263.;  equivalents  in  Germany,  264.;  terres- 
trial plants  of,  265.;  or  Old  Red  Sandstone  of 
Eussia  with  salt,  295.3  27.;  and  carboni- 
ferous rocks  in  Russia,  330.;  of  Germany, 
335.;  of  Saalfeld,  357.;  Lower,  or  '  Spirifer 

,  Sandstein'  of  Germany,  367.;  Upper  of  the 
Rhine  and  Belgium,  371.  373.;  of  France, 
(Lower),  389.;"(Upper),  390.;  Spain,  396.; 
United  States,  417.;  fishes  of  mostly  void  of 
osseous  vertebra?,  462. 

Devonshire,  gold  found  in,  434. 

Dicotyledons,  rare  in  coal  flora,  278. 

Die-earth,  or  Wenlock  shale,  111. 

Diggings  (gold),  at  Soimanofsk  mines,  Russia, 
442.;  at  jZarevo  Alexandrofsk,  sketch,  444.; 
"  wet"  and  *'  dry"  of  the  mines  described, 
449.;  California,  458. 

Dingle  Bay,  Silurian  fossils,  167. 

Diploceras,  198. 

Dnieper  river,  coal  field  between  it  and  the  Don, 
332, ;  Silurian  and  Devonian  strata  on  the, 
335. 

Dolgelly  fossils,  42.;  gold  near  to,  433. 
Dolomite,  term  inapplicable  in  classification,  304. 
Dol-y-frwynog,  gold  near,  434. 
Donegal,  crystalline  rocks  of,  173. 
Donetz,  coal-field  of  (South  Russia),  280.  333. 
Don  River,  coal  field  between  it  and  the  Dnieper, 
332. 

Down,  schists  of,  166. 

Downshire,  Marquis  of,  trial  for  coal  by,  277. 
Downton  Castle  Stone,  (Ludlow),  138.;  oldest 

traces  of  arboreal  vegetation  in,  139. 
Drammen  River,  section  across,  319. 
Drift,  containing  Mammoth  bones,  the  oldest 

detritus  containing  gold,  440. 
Dublin  Bay,  geology  of,  165. 
Dudley,  effects  of  combustion  of  coal  at,  58.; 

limestone  identical  with  that  of  Wenlock, 

114.  ;  seen  from  the  Wren's  nest,  116.; 

limestone,  117.;  crinoidea,  219. 
Duff,  P.,  on  reptile  of  Old  Red  Sandstone,  254. 
Dufrenoy,  P.  A.,   on  the  palaeozoic  rocks  of 

France,  383.  394. 
Dumfries,  Silurian  greywacke  of,  149.;  bottom 

rocks  of,  151. 
Dumont,A.,  work  referred  to,  364.;  Tableau  des 

Terrains  compared,  381,382. 
Dunker,  W.  and   H,  von,  Meyer  Palasonto- 

graphica,  371. 
Durham,  coal  strata,  278.;  Permian  beds,  303. 
Dwina  River,   (Russia  in  Europe),  Permian 

sections  on  the  banks  of,  294. 
Dynevor  Park,  view  from,  69. 
Earl  Windsor,  a  memoir  by,  450. 
Eastnor  Obelisk,  Caradoc  sandstone,  95. 
Ecculiomphalus,Pteropod  in  Lower  Silurian,  196. 
Edeiraion,  section  across  vale  of,  79. 
Edwards,  Milne,  on  Corals,  179.  209. 
Egeberg,  (Norway),  section  across,  320. 
Egerton,  Sir  P.  de  Grey,  on  fossil  fish,  284. 
Ehrenberg,  G.,  referred  to,  316. 
Eifel,  Devonian  strata  of  the,  369.;  limestone, 

371.;  inversionin  the, explained,  377.;  shells 


of,  their  equivalents  ]  in  America,  417.;  lime- 
stone, a  centre  of  animal  life,  465. 

Ekaterinburg,  underground  mining  for  gold, 
440. ;  gold  shingle  near,  445. 

Elgin,  Old  Red  Sandstone  reptile,  254. 

Encrinites,  and  their  food,  230. 

Englehardt,  collection  of  fossils,  351,  352. 

Englemann,  on  Texas,  20. 

Enniskillen,  carboniferous  rocks  of,  276. 

Enniskillen,  Earl  of,  his  collection  of  ichthyo- 
htes,  284.  287. 

Epynt,  forest  of,  128. 

Erbreich,  his  labours,  378. 

Erman,  Adolf,  explorer  of  Siberia,  317.;  map 
of  the  gold  fields  of  the  world,  447.  454. 

Erratics,  transported  by  icebergs,  482.  Appen- 
dix Q. 

Escar,  local  Irish  terai  for  drift,  1 72. 

Euomphalus  of  Lower  Silurian,  193.;  of  Upper 
Silurian,  229. 

Europa  (Spain),  mountain  limestone,  400. 

Evans,  Rev.  J.,  on  fish  bed  of  the  Upper  Lud- 
low rock,  137. 

Falkenberg  (Prussia),  carboniferous  fossils,  338. 

Falkland  Islands,  Silurian  fossils  at,  15.  409. 

Fans  of  Brecon  and  Caermarthen,  sketch  of,  243. 

Faults,  in  N.  Wales,  54.;  at  Musclewick  Bay, 
64.;  great  in  America,  425.;  in  the  Alps, 
Appendix  Q. 

Fauna,  Lower  Silurian,  205.;  Upper  Silurian, 
207.  et  seq.',  Devonian,  263.;  Lower  carboni- 
ferous, 281.  et  seq.;  Upper  ditto,  279.;  Per- 
mian, 307. 

Featherstonhaugh,  G.  H.,  reports  by,  411. 

Felspar  porphyries  stratified,  57.;  rocks  (Lower 
Silurian)  at  Marringtoii  Dingle,  55.;  asso- 
ciated with  gold,  456. 

Felspathic  ash  of  Lower  Silurian,  53. 

Fermanagh  (county  of),  Landeilo  fossils,  1 66. 

Festiniog,  volcanic  grit,  53.;  slates,  44. 

Fifeshire,  Old  Red  Sandstone  and  carbon iferou.'j 
in,  247. 

Fishes  of  Upper  Ludlow  rock,  137.  142.;  ab- 
sent in  Lower  Silurian,  205.;  defences  of  in 
Upper  Ludlow  rock,  238. ;  of  Upper  Ludlow, 
the  most  ancient  of  their  class,  239.  460.;  of 
Old  Red  Sandstone,  251.;  carboniferous  rock.^, 
277,  281.  284.,-  Permian,  312.;  and  arboreal 
vegetation  contemporaneous,  461.;  of  the 
Devonian  period,  462.;  argument  derived 
from  their  absence  in  the  lower  primeval 
rocks,  471. 

Fisher,  Dr.  G,,  palaeontology  of  Russia,  291. 

Fitzroy,  Sir  C,  dispatches  on  gold,  453. 

Flaxley,  bone  beds  near  to,  237.;  ichthyolite  in 
lowest  beds  of  Old  Red  Sandstone  near,  245. 

Fleming  (Dr.  A.),  on  fossils  of  the  Upper  Pun- 
jaub,  14. 

Fleming,  the  Rev.  Dr.,  on  the  geology  of  Fife- 
shire, 247.;  on  plants  in  the  Old  Red  Sand- 
stone of  Shetland,  255,  256. 

Fletcher,  T.  W.,  collection  of  Silurian  fossils,  234. 

Flintshire,  coal  field  of,  270. 

Floetz-lehrer  Sandstein  (Germany),  the  equi- 
valent of  millstone  grit,  274.  376. 


512 


INDEX. 


Flora,  Permian  flora  of  Germany  and  Russia 

identical,  297.;  great  primeval,  the  som-ce  of 
.  coal  deposits,  267.  280.;  peculiar  Devonian 

type  of  in  Germany,  358. 
Florence,  macigno  of,  135. 
Footmarks,  supposed  impressions  of  in  Lower 

Silurian,  are  marks  of  shell  fish,  205. 
Footprints  of  the  Creator,  work  by  Hugh  Miller, 

250. 

Forbes,  Edward,  on  Lower  Silurian  of  North 
Wales,  &c.,  8. ;  on  Old  Red  Sandstone  plants, 
255.;  his  classification,  468.;  on  submarine 
knowledge,  478.;  on  coloured  fossils,  ^jj- 
pendix  F. 

Forbes,  James,  on  glacial  phenomena,  482. 

Forest  of  Dean,  coal  basin  of,  244.;  carboni- 
ferous limestone  of,  270. 

Forfarshire,  164.;  Upper  Silurian?  247. 

Fossils,  earliest  primeval  system  of,  23.;  Old- 
hamia  antiqua,  32.;  of  Lingula  flags,  &c., 
42 — 44. ;  Lower  Silurian  graptolites,  46. ;  of 
the  Llandeilo  formation  of  South  Wales,  68. ; 
of  Lower  Silurian  Sandstones  of  South  Wales, 
72.;  of  Lower  Caradoc,  86,  87,  88.;  of 
Upper  Caradoc,  88.;  trilobites  of  Lower 
Wenlock  or  Woolhope  limestone,  108.;  co- 
rals of  Wenlock  limestone,  119 — 121.;  of 
Ludlow  rocks,  129.  133.  135,  136.;  of  tile- 
stones  or  transition  beds,  138.;  Cornwall, 
145.;  Scotch  Silurians,  157.;  Lower  Silu- 
rian zoophytes,  178.;  crinoid,  180.;  cysti- 

,  deans,  181.;  starfish,  182.;  orthides,  184.; 
brachipods,  185 — 189.;  lamellibranchiata, 
191,;  gasteropoda,  193.;  heteropod  and  ptero- 
pod  mollusca,  196.;  cephalopoda,  197.  199.; 

.  annelids,  199.;  trilobites,  201.;  Trinucleus 
concentricus  distorted,  203.;  trilobites,  204.; 
of  the  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  207.;  corals,  210 
— 213.;  bryozoa,  215,  216.;  cystideas,  217.; 
crinoideaof,  219.;  starfish,  221.-  brachiopods, 
222.  224.;  lameUibranchiata,  225,  226.; 
cephalopods,   231.;   Crustacea,  234,  235.; 

,  ichthyolites,  238.;  Devonian,  or  Old  Red 
Sandstone  fishes,  252,  253.;  reptile,  254.; 
plant,  255.;  shells  of  Lower  Devonian,  261.; 
shells  of  Upper  Devonian,  263.  ;  carboni- 
ferous Limulus  rotundatus,  281.;  coral,  282.; 
various,  283. ;  insect,  shells,  and  fern  from  the 

.  coal,  284,  285. ;  Upper  limestone  of  the 
coal,  285,  286.;  Permian  plants  and  shells, 
306—309.;  Permian  fishes,  312.;  Asaphus 
cornutus,  324.;  Orthoceras  duplex,  326. 

Foster  and  Whitney,  on  azoic  rocks  of  Lake 
Superior,  20. 

Fournet  (M.)  and  Graff,  their  memoir  on  anoma- 
lous disposition  of  rocks  atNefiiez,France,393. 

France,  conformity  of  Lower  Silurian  and 
Upper  palaeozoic,  51. ;  Lower  Silurian  of 
145.;  palasozoic  rocks  altered,  316.  383.; 
Silurian  rocks  in,  383. ;  lowest  Silurian  life 
in,  386.;  Upper  Silurian  rocks  wanting,  389.; 
Lower  Devonian  rocks,  389. ;  carboniferous 
rocks,  391.;  Permian  rocks,  393. 

Franconia,  Devonian  rocks  of,  355.  373. 

Freestone  of  the  Caradoc  formation,  82. 


Fucoids  in  Lower  Silurian,  36.  38.  318.;  with 

anthracite  schists,  323.  Ajypendix  C. 
Fucoid  bed  in  Upper  Ludlow  rock,  136. 
Fusion,  granite  once  in  a  state  of,  18. 
Fusulina3,  Foraminifera?,  333. 
Galloway,  Silurian,  149. 

Galway,  Silurian,  169.;  metamorphic  Silurian, 
171. 

Ganoid  fish  of  Old  Red  Sandstone,  253. 
Garneau,  Fox,  History  of  Canada  by,  411. 
Garza,  Naranjoy,  on  supposed  Permian  beds  in 
Spain,  401. 

Gaspe  Limestone,  Upper  Silurian,  Canada,  424. 

Gasteropoda,  Lower  Silurian,  192.;  not  abun- 
dant in  Upper  Silurian,  229.;  number  dimi- 
nish in  Permian  strata,  310. 

Gatley  (Ludlow),  section  across,  126. 

Gedre,  Devonian  schists,  394. 

Geinitz,  H.  B.,  on  graptolites  in  Germany,  47.; 
on  palasozoic  rocks  of  Saxony,  354.  et  seq. 

Geinitz  and  Gutbier,  on  Permian  rocks  and  plants 
in  Saxony,  292.  297.;  on  the  Rohte-todte- 
hegende,  298. 

Gelli  Hills,  section,  61. 

"  Geognostische  Beschreibung  der  Eifel,"  by 
Steininger,  369. 

Germany,  Central,  graptolites  in  Lower  Silu- 
rian, 47.;  crustaceans  in  Devonian  rocks  of, 
264.;  fossil  plants,  280.;  Zechstein  of,  297.; 
Permian  rocks  of,  297.  300. ;  palaeozoic 
rocks  altered,  316.;  primeval  succession  in, 
336.;  Upper  palaeozoic  rocks,  339.;  gold  in, 
436. 

Gerville,  M.  de,  fossil  collection  of,  384.  389. 
Girard,  Dr.,  on  parts  of  Westphalia,  376. 
Girvan,  Ayrshire,  Lower  Silurian  rocks  in,  157 

—160.  172. 
Glacial  period,  482. 

Glaciers,  no  evidence  of  in  early  geological 

periods,  482. 
Glamorgan,  carboniferous  rocks  of,  270. 
Glocker,  Prof.  (Breslau),  collections  of,  340. 
Gloucester,  railroad  cutting  near,  237. 
Glyptocrinus,  Lower  Silurian  crinoid,  180. 
Gneiss,  Silurian  strata  reposing  on,  22.  318. 
Go-gofau  (S.  Wales),  gold  mines  of,  71.;  gold 

near,  433. 

Gold  found  in  the  older  strata  and  igneous  rocks 
only,  16.  53.  431. 455. ;  of  Merionethshire,  36.; 
of  Scotland,  155. ;  in  Britain,  433. ;  Ural  Moun- 
tains, 439.;  superficial  distribution  indicated, 

444.  ;  when  the  rocks  were  impregnated  with, 

445.  ;  search  for  in  the  solid  rock  often  pro- 
fitless, 448.  453.;  of  Australia,  449.;  will  be 
exhausted  in  each  new  auriferous  tract,  as 
formerly  in  the  Old  World,  456.;  in  lead  and 
copper  ores,  456.;  fear  of  its  depreciation  in 
reference  to  silver  unwarranted,  457. 

Goldfuss,  Prof.,  his  works  alluded  to,  371. 
Goleugoed  (S.  Wales),  rare  species  of  trilobite, 
74. 

Goppert,  Prof.,  on  land  plants,  268.;  on  fossil 

vegetables,  278 — 280. 
Gorran  Haven,  Cornwall,  Lower  Silurian,  144. 
Gossan,  gold  matrix,  434,  435. 


INDEX. 


513 


Gothland  (Sweden),  Silurian  corals  of,  215.; 

fossils  equivalents  of  those  of  Wenlock  and 

Dudley,  319. 
Graham  Island,  56. 

Grammysia,  genus  in  Upper  Silurian,  227. 

Granite,  strata  altered  by,  18.;  Silurian  strata 
reposing  on,  22.  318.;  intruded  at  Anglesea, 
24,;  gold  in,  452. 

Graptolites,  exclusively  in  the  Silurian  system 
of  life,  46.;  chief  position  in  Britain,  47.; 
schists  at  Abereiddy  Bay,  64.;  in  Wenlock 
shale,  113.;  of  Skiddaw  slates,  146.;  in  Silu- 
rian of  Scotland,  151.;  in  Upper  Silurian, 
208.;  Sweden  and  Norway,  318.;  Silesia, 
Appendix  M.-^  Bohemia, 343.;  Saxony,  351. 
seq. ;  Thuringia,  &c.,  354.  et  seq. ;  France, 
387.;  Spain,  397.  et  seq.;  Portugal,  405.; 
America,  409.  415.  et  seq.,  Appendix  D. 
Grauwacke,"  a  mineral  term,  geologically  in- 
appropriate, 359. 

Gravel,  gold  drifted  into  heaps  of,  449. 

Greenough,  G.  B.,  geological  map  of  England  by, 
6.  24. 

Greenstone  of  Breidden  hills,  60. ;  of  Old  Rad- 
nor, 61.;  has  altered  Silurian  strata,  104. 

Greifenstein,  Pentamerus  conglomerate,  368. 

Gretton,  Lower  Silurian  fossils  abundant,  98. 

Grey,  Sir  George,  on  gold  of  New  Zealand,  458. 

Greywacke  oldest,  or  bottom  rocks  of  Longmynd, 
North  Wales,  23.  et  seq.  ;  of  Bray  Head,  Dub- 
hn,  31,  32.,  Appendix  T>;  of  St.  David's,  62.; 
Scotland,  150,  150.  et  seq.;  Bohemia,  342.  et 
seq. ;  America,  425.  et  seq. 

Grieston  slates,  trilobites  of,  153. 

GrilBths,  R.,  geological  map  of  Ireland,  164.; 
carboniferous  rocks  of  Ireland,  176;  Silurian 
ditto,  165.  276. 

Griffithides,  trilobite  in  lower  carboniferous  lime- 
stone, 281.  311. 

Guadarrama  (Spain),  geology  of  the,  396. 

Gurmaya  Hills  (Russia),  sketch  of,  295. 

Gutbier,  on  fossil  plants,  306. — See  Geinitz. 

Hag] ey  Hills,  sketch  of,  116.;  park,  Hereford, 
142.;  park,  Worcestershire,  301. 

Haime  Jules,  on  Silurian  corals,  179.  209. 

Hales  Owen,  section  near,  301. 

Hall,  James,  work  alluded  to,  15.  18.;  on  the 
geology  and  palceontology  of  New  York,  413. 
419.  420.;  United  States,  417. 

H  ant  er  Hill,  section  and  sketch, -geology,  104, 
105. 

Hargreaves,  Mr.,  Australian  gold  diggings,  452. 
Harkness,  Prof.  R.,  on  the  Silurian  rocks  of  Scot- 
land, 151.  155.  162.  435. 
Harlech,  unfossiliferous  grit,  23.  28. 
Harpton  Court,  seat  of  Sir  T.  F.  Lewis,  104. 
Hartz  mountains,  Devonian  rocks,  363. 
Haverfordwest,  Lower  Silurian,  68. 
Haughmond  Hill,  25. 

Hausmaun,  Prof.  J.  L.,  works  referred  to,  363. 
Haute  Loir€,  carboniferous  rocks,  392. 
Haxwell,  lowest  Wenlock  rocks  at,  103. 
Hay,  Ludlow  rocks  near,  126.;  section,  243. 
Heaphy,  C.,  gold  diggings  in  New  Zealand,  458. 
Heat,  theory  of  a  central,  1.;  and  electricity 


producing  slaty"  cleavage,  34.;  internal  ra- 
diation of,  one  cause  of  former  temperature 
of  the  earth,  477. 

Helderberg  division.  Upper  Silurian,  416. 

Heliolites,  (Porites),  Wenlock  coral,  120. 

Helmersen  and  Hotfman,  work  referred  to,  317. 

Helmersen,  Col.,  geological  map  by  and  account 
of  bituminous  schist,  323.;  on  Devonian  of 
Russia,  332, 

Herefordshire,  part  of  Siluria  of,  6.;  Silurian 
strata  little  altered  in  parts  of,  19,;  Beacon, 
sketch  of,  92,;  Old  Red  Sandstone,  242.; 
ichthyolites  in  cornstone,  245. 

Hergest  Ridge  near  Kingston,  105.  140. 

Heteropod  mollusca  in  Lower  Silurian,  196. 

Hibbert,  Dr.,  work  referred  to,  355. 

Highlands,  rocks  of  high  antiquity,  23.;  moun- 
tains of  west  coast  of,  249. 

Himalaya,  Silurian  and  pateozoic  rocks  in,  13. 

Hindostan,  carboniferous  rocks  in,  13,  14. 

Hingenau,  Prof,  von,  publication  by,  340. 

Hirnant  limestone  (Lower  Silurian),  50. 

Hitchcock,  Prof.,  on  the  geology  of  Massachu- 
setts, 412. 

Hoffman,  Colonel,  on  gold  in  Siberia,  440.  456. 
Hollies  limestone,  equivalent  of  Woolhope,  96. 
Hollies'  farm,  86. 

Holly  Bush  sandstone,  bottom  rocks  Malvern,  95» 
Holopella,  genus  in  Lower  Silurian,  194. 
Holopea,  genus  in  Lower  Silurian,  194. 
Holoptychius,  genus  of  fossil  fish  in  Old  Red 

Sandstone,  245. 
Holyhead,  metamorphosed  strata,  24. 
Homm.aire  de  Hell,  on  Devonian  of  Persia,  335. 
Hook  Point,  Old  Red  Sandstone  of,  66. 
Hooker,  Dr.  Joseph,  on  Upper  Ludlow  plants^ 

238. ;  on  Devonian  plants,  255. 
Hope  Bowdler,  sketch  of,  81. 
Hopkins,  W.,  on  changes  of  climate,  4. 
Horderley,  84. 

Horeb  Chapel,  Brecknockshire,  tilestone  of,  14L 
Horner,  Leonard,  on  the  Malvern  Hills,  96. 
Howler's  Heath,  Caradoc  sandstone,  95. 
Hudson  Bay,  Upper  Silurian,  429. 
Hudson  river  group,  American  Lower  Silurian, 
415. 

Humboldt^  Baron  A.  von,  on  Permia,  291.;  on 
Russia,  316.;  on  the  Andes,  408,  409.;  on 
gold,  447.  456,  457.;  on  silver.  Appen- 
dix L. 

HuntlyHill,  Upper  Caradoc,  97.;  fish  bed,  143, 
Huron  Lake,  423. 

Hutton  and  Lindley,  Fossil  Flora,  280. 

Hymenocaris  vermicauda,  crustacean  in  Lower 
Silurian,  42.  204.  474. 

Jacob's-stones,  shelly  limestone  of  Caradoc,  84. 

Jameson,  Prof.  Robert,  on  the  transition  rocks  of 
Scotland,  149. 

Icebergs,  transporters  of  erratic  blocks,  482. 

Ichthyolites  of  Upper  Ludlow,  143.;  of  Old  Red 
Sandstone,  245. ;  clear  indicators  of  the  age 
of  rocks,  246.;  of  Caithness,  248.;  Murray 
Firth,  251.;  Lower  carboniferous,  281.;  Per- 
mian rocks  in  Germany,  299. 

Jermyn  Street  Museum,  Dedication,  181.  198. 

L 


514 


INDEX. 


Igneous  rocks,  Silurian  strata  altered  by,  20.; 
deposits  affected  by,  46,;  associated  with 
Lower  Silurian,  52. ;  bedded  with  Lower  Si- 
lurian, 57.;  traversing  Lower  Silurian,  81. 

Ilfracombe,  section,  256.;  limestone,  260. 

Insects,  first  appearance  in  the  carboniferous 
rocks,  466. 

Inverness-shire,  Old  Red  Sandstone,  251. 

Inversions,  in  Cornwall,  144.;  in  the  Eifel,  377.; 
South  of  Brilon,  378. ;  Germany  and  Belgium, 
379.;  France,  394.;  America,  424,  eiseg-.; 
Alps,  497. 

Johnston,  James,  natural  history  of,  377. 

Jourdan,  M.  and  de  Verneuil  on  carboniferous 
rocks  of  France,  392. 

Ireland,  lowest  or  bottom  rocks  contain  a  Zoo- 
phyte, 31,  32.;  (south)  graptolites  of  Lower 
Silurian  rocks,  47.;  Silurian  rocks,  164.; 
bottom  rocks  in,  165.;  (north)  Lower  Silu- 
rian, 171.;  fossils  in  Old  Ked  Sandstone,  255.; 
carboniferous  rocks,  275.;  New  Red  Sand- 
stone, 277.;  gold  in,  435.;  unconformity  at 
base  of  Lower  Silurian,  493.  Appendix  D. 

Ireleth  slates,  Cumberland,  equivalents  of  Wen- 
lock,  148. 

Iron,  sulphuret  of  and  mineral  springs,  61.; 
red  colour  of  rocks  derived  from,  250.;  in 
Caradoc  group  in  Normandy,  387. 

Ithon  river,  80. 

Itier,  Jules,  on  Chinese  fossils,  14. 

Jukes,  J.  B.,  discourse,  p.  vii.;  section  by,  79.; 

on  Woolhope  hmestone  at  Hay  Head,  110.; 

Irish  Silurian,  168.;  Permian  deposits,  301.; 

Newfoundland,  410. ;  Australian  geology,  451. ; 

unconformity  in  Ireland,  493. 
Jurassic  dolomite  of  Alps,  304.  Appendix  Q. 
Kama  river,  (Russia)  Permian  deposits,  294. 
Katchkanar,  Ural  Mountains,  view  from,  438. 
Kazan,  (Russia)  Peruvian  deposits,  294. 
Keilhau,  Professor,  Gsea  Norvegica  referred  to, 

320. 

Kelly,  John,  on  Irish  Silurian  rocks,  173. 

Kenley,  Caradoc  of,  83. 

Kerry,  (Ireland),  Silurian  rocks  of,  167. 

Keuper,  marl  and  lias  of,  299,  300. 

Keys  End  Hill,  Malvern  Hills,  98. 

Keyserling,  Count  A.  von,  on  the  geology  of 

Russia,  5.  291.  327.  passim;  on  Devonian 

of  Germany,  340. 
Kidd,  Dr.,  62. 
Killarney,  lakes  of,  167. 
Killery,  harbour,  section  at,  169. 
Kilkenny,  coal  of,  277.;  Devonian  fossils  found 

by  Government  surveyors  at,  255. 
King,  Mr.,  on  rocks  in  Missouri,  20. 
King,  Professor,  on  Permian  deposits  and  fossils, 

303.  306. 

Kington,  trap  rocks  near,  1 04. ;  Lower  Ludlow 
rocks  of,  128.;  Upper  Ludlow  near,  140. 

Kircudbrightshire,  Silurian  rocks,  149.  161. 

Koninck,  L.  de,  on  Devonian  fossils,  371.;  car- 
boniferous fossils  of  Belgium,  375. 

Knockakesheen,  (Ireland)  granite,  169. 

Knocktopher,  Devonian  fossils,  255. 

Krocklc\en,  SweJen,  section  across,  319. 


Kutorga,  Professor,  map  by,  325. 
Kwangsi,  China,  Silurian  fossils  from,  14. 
La  Sarthe,  Lower  Devonian  limestones  of,  389. 
Lamelhbranchiata    of  Lower    Silurian,  191,; 

Upper  Silurian,  225.;  rare  in  Permian,  309.; 

carboniferous,  309. 
Lammermuir  Hills,  Lower  Silurian,  1 54. 
Lancashire,  Silurian,  145.;  coal  strata,  273. 
Landslip,  of  Palmer's  Cairn,  woodcut,  131. 
Lapland,  oldest  rocks  of,  317. 
Lawley,  the,  sketch  of,  81. 
Le  Play,  mineral  sketch  of  the  Sierra  ilorena, 

395, 

Lead  ore  in  Lower  Silurian,  53, 

Lead  Hills,  (Scotland)  gold  in,  155,  435. 

Lepta;na  of  Lower  Silurian,  186. 

Lerwick,  fossil  plants  of  Old  Red  Sandstone,  255. 

Leuchtenberg,  H.  L  H,  the  Duke  of,  181, 

Lewis,  Sir  f,  F.,  Right  Hon.,  referred  to,  104.' 

Lewis,  G.  C,  referred  to,  104. 

Lewis,  Rev.  T.  T.,  Preface,  on  Caradoc  Sand- 
stone in  Brampton  Bryan  Park,  89. ;  Wenlock 
limestone,  115.;  corals,  120.;  on  Ludlow  fish 
bed,  137.;  on  Aymestry  limestone,  130. 

Lickey  Hills,  Upper  Caradoc  at,  99.;  conglome- 
rate of,  301.;  quartz,  Caradoc  sandstones 
fused  into,  99, 

Lime,  rare  in  the  earliest  deposits,  40. ;  increases 
in  higher  part  of  Lower  Silurian,  46,48.; 
wanting  in  Silurian  of  South  Wales,  74. 

Limestone  in  Caradoc  sandstone,  82.;  altered 
and  amorphous,  103.;  Dudley,  Crinoidea  of, 
219. ;  Silurian  altered  into  marble,  320. ;  highly 
fractured,  331.;  of  the  Eifel,  371.;  in  Ame- 
rican bottom  rocks,  426.;  conical,  altered 
hillocks  of,  in  Russia,  441,  442. 

Limulus,  of  coal,  281.;  Pterygotus  problematicus 
allied  to,  237.  282.  414.;  of  the  Permian 
beds,  311. 

Lindley  and  Hutton,  fossil  flora  of,  280. 

Lingula,  flags  of  N.  Wales,  31.;  Davisii,  42.; 
first  discovered  by  Mr.  E.  Davis,  44.;  flags, 
zone  in  Siluria  and  N.  Wales,  45.;  parallel  of 
Pembrokeshire,  63.;  of  Cader  Idris,  77.; 
Malvern,  92. ;  '  Zone  Primordiale '  (Bohemia), 
342.;  in  Sweden,  321  ;  in  North  America, 
415.  422.  425.;  thickness  of,  175.;  Lower 
Silurian  Lingula?,  187,;  Upper  Silurian  ditto, 
224, 

Linley  Hills,  37, 

LinuiBus,  on  Cystideans,  181.;   on  Gothland 

Corals,  214. 
Linton,  North  Devon,  section  at,  256. 
Little  Ross  Head,  Scotland,  Upper  Silurian,  162. 
Lituites,  in  Lower  Silurians,  198. 
Llampeter  Felfry,  45.  68. 

Llanberis,  Bottom  rocks,  28.;  pass  of,  sketch,  29. 

Llandegley,  Llandeilo  formation  at,  45. 

Landrindod,  igneous  sti'atified  rocks  of,  57.  ; 
mineral  springs  of,  62.;  Landeilo  formation, 
near  in  contact  with  Upper  Silurian,  90. 

Llandeilo  rocks,  10.;  flags,  of  Corndon  and 
Shelve  district,  26.;  Snowdon  strata  of  that 
age,  30. ;  formation  described,  45. ;  limestone, 
49.  68.;  formation,  where  conformable  to  Ca- 


IMDEX. 


515 


.  radoc,  50.;  formation,  order  of,  52.;  metalli- 
ferous, 53. ;  flags  interstralified  with  volcanic 
grits,  57.;  schists,  Musclewick  Bay,  65.; 
town  of  and  flags,  69.;  section  near,  73.; 
schists,  supporting  Caradoc  sandstone,  79.; 
formation,  junction  beds  of  and  Caradoc,  80. ; 
formation,  break  between  and  the  Caradoc 
local,  81.;  united  with  Caradoc,  88.;  flags, 
where  unconformable  to  Upper  Silurian,  90. ; 

■  equivalent  in  Sweden,  319.;  equivalents  in 
France,  383.  ;  limestone,  a  centre  of  animal 
life,  465. 

Llandewi  Felfry,  section  at,  46.  49.  68. 

Llandovery,  gold  near,  433. 

Llandrindod,  Llandeilo  flags  near,  45.  ;  mineral 

springs,  62. 
Llangadock,  section  near,  73. 
Llanwrtyd,  mineral  springs,  62. ;  wells,  sketch, 

75. ;  view  from  near,  243. 
Lloyd,  Dr.,  on  Upper  Ludlow  fish-bed,  137. 
Lloyd,  Col.,  fossils  from  the  Peruvian  Andes, 

477.;  on  silver  in  S.  America,  457. 
Loch  Erne  Head,  Scotland,  gold  near,  435. 
Loch  Scavig,  hypersthene  rocks,  104. 
Lockerby,  graptolitic  schists,  155. 
Logan,  W.  E.,  reports  on  Canada,  15.  20.;  on 

casts  of  fossils,  205.;  on  coal  plants,  278.; 

map,  sections,  and  survey  of  Canada,  411.418. 

424.  425. 

Long  ]\Iountain,  Montgomeryshire,  128. 

Longmynd  mountain,  bottom  rocks  of,  7. ;  Cam- 
brian rocks  of  Wales  identified  with,  23.  25.; 
view  of  and  section,  26,  27,  28.  62, ;  direction 
of,  45.;  rocks  of  same  age  in  Scotland,  149.; 
conglomerates  in,  160.;  rocks  ofL-eland,  165.; 
vast  thickness  in  Shropshire,  174.;  equivalents 
in  France,  383.;  in  Bohemia. 

•Lonsdale,  Preface^  v.;  corals  described  by,  120. 
209.  282.;  fossils  of  South  Devon,  257. 

.Loriere,  de,  and  de  Verneuil,  on  Spanisli  Silurian, 
398. 

Lothians,  section  across,  152. 

Lovens,  works  on  Swedish  fossils,  320.;  sub- 
marine researches  of,  478. 

Lough  Corrib  (Ireland)  Silurian,  168. 

Lough  Erne,  carboniferous  rocks,  276. 

Loxonema  in  Upper  Silurian,  230. 

Ludlow,  Upper,  102.  133.;  formation,  general 
character  of,  124.;  castle,  sketch  of,  125.: 
Lower,  102.  127.;  passing  into  the  Wenlock 
shale,  126.;  promontory,  section  across,  126.; 
Lower,  fossils  of,  127.  129.  ;  limestovie 
(Aymostry),  130.  143.  ;  rocks,  sketch  of, 
134.;  rocks,  fucoid  bed,  136.;  fish  remains 
of,  137 — 139.;  rocks,  thickness  of,  175.; 
fossils  of,  215.  et  seq. 

Lugg,  river,  Aymestry  limestone  near,  132. 

Lyell,  SirC,  Manual  of  Geology,  248.  279.;  on 
reptile  of  the  coal,  289.;  map  of  North  Ame- 
rica, 410.;  travels  in  North  America,  426.; 
Elements  of  Geology,  466. ;  theory  of  climate, 
479. 

Lyons,  coal  fields  of,  391. 
Maam   (Ireland),  Upper  and  Lower  Silurian 
fossils  mixed,  170. 

L 


M'Callum,  Alexander,  of  GIrvan,  247. 

Macigno,  Italian  tertiary  beds  compared  with 
Upper  Ludlow,  135. 

Macgillicuddy's  Reeks,  Old  Red  Sandstone,  167. 

M'Coy,  Frederick,  Pnjf.,  on  fossils  of  the  Cam- 
bridge Museum,  10.;  May  Hill  fossils,  98.; 
Upper  Ludlow  fishes,  137.;  Silurian  fo.ssils  of 
Scotland,  159.;  of  Ireland,  165—176.;  sy- 
nopsis of  Woodwardian  Museum,  228. ;  Upper 
Silurian  Crustacea,  236.;  on  coal  reptiles, 
287.;  Silurian  fossils,  485.  491.  492. 

Macculloch,  Dr.  J.,  on  the  Western  Islands,  250. 

IMacleay,  W.,  Annelids  described  by,  70. 

Maclurea  Logani,  193. 

Madrid,  geological  map  of  province,  396. 

Magnesian  limestone  equivalent  of  the  Zechstein, 
12.  296.  303,  304.;  Prof.  Sedgwick  on,  303.; 
in  Lower  Silurian  of  America,  304.  422.;  a 
centre  of  animal  life,  465. 

Malvern  and  Abberley  Hills,  memoir  on  (J.  Phil- 
lips), 8.;  black  schists  equivalents  of  the 
Lingula  beds  of  North  Wales,  92. 

Malvern  Hills,  Lower  Silurian  of,  and  view  of, 

92.  ;  absurd  trials  for  coal  in  black  schists, 

93.  ;  section  to  Ledbury,  94. ;  raised  in  a 
solid  state,  26.;  Silurian  succession,  Holly- 
Bush  sandstone,  Olenus  black  shale,  &c,. 
95.  ;  Woolhope  limestone,  109. ;  Wenlock 
shale,  111.  ;  Wenlock  limestone,  115. ;  Lower 
Ludlow  rock,  128.;  Aymestry  rock,  132.; 
Upper  Ludlow,  140. ;  succession,  242.;  recent 
discoveries  at,  Aj^pendixO. 

]\Limmalia,  first  evidences  of  in  Triassic  group, 
466.;  abundant  in  Tertiary  deposits,  467. 

Mammatt's  Geological  Facts,  278. 

Mammoth  remains  in  auriferous  gravel,  443. 
445. 

Manchester,  coal  strata,  286  ;  Permian,  302. 

Mangerton  (Ireland),  Old  Red  Sandstone,  167. 

Mantell,  Dr.  G.  A.,  description  of  Telerpeton 
Elginense,  254. 

Map  of  Siluria  and  Wales,  Preface,  p.  v\. passim; 
of  the  palajozoic  formations,  475. 

Marbres  Griottes  (altered  limestones)  of  the  Py- 
renees, Devonian,  394. 

Marcou,  Jules,  geological  work  and  map  by, 
411.  426. 

Marden  Hill,  Aymestry  rock,  132. 

MarloesBay,  Silurian  rocks,  65,  66,  67.  125. 140. 

Marmora,  Gen.  A.  della,  on  Siluiian  rocks  in 
Sardinia,  13.;  map  by,  405. 

Marrington  Dingle,  woodcut,  55. 

May  Hill,  Caradoc  formation,  97.;  Lower  Wen- 
lock (Woolhope  limestone),  109.;  Wenlock 
limestone,  115.;  Aymestry  rock,  133.;  Upper 
Ludlow  and  fish  bed,  142,  143.;  succession 
of  strata,  242.;  fish  remains  in  Old  Red 
Sandstone,  245. 

Mealfourveny,  Inverness-shire,  250. 

Medina  sandstone  (America),  420. 

Megahcthys  Hibberti  of  the  coal,  281. 

Meifod  rocks,  Lower  Silurian,  50. 

Memoirs  of  Geological  Survey  alluded  to  8.  et 
passim. 

Mcnai,  straits  of,  25.;  lowest  zone  of  life,  35. 


610 


INDEX. 


Jleneghini,  Prof,,  on  fossil  plants  of  Italy  and 

Sardinia,  406. 
Merioneth,  base  of  deposits  in,  23. 
]\[erioiietbshire,  gold  in,  36. ;  Cai-adoc  formation 

in,  78. 

Metaraorphism,  change  by  means  of,  18,  19.  ; 

of  formations,  21. 
Metamorphosed  strata,  near  Holyhead,  24.;  Si- 
lurian, 163. 
Mexico,  gold  not  found  in  deep  mines,  449. 
Miask  (Ural),  gold  near,  443. 
Midsummer  Hill  (Malvern),  felspar  rock,  93,  94. 
Milford  Haven,  Old  Eed  Sandstone  of,  246. 
^Miller,  Hugh,  works   referred    to,  11.;  his- 
torical sketch  by,  149.;   on  fishes  of  Old 
Eed   Sandstone,  240.;   description   of  the 
Pterichthys,  251.;  footprints  of  the  Creator, 
252.;  plants  and.  shells  in  Old  Eed  Sand- 
stone, 253,  254. 
Millstone  (Sweden),  re-aggregated  granite  of 

Silurian  age,  318. 
Millstone  grit,  representative  of  in  Devonshire, 
259.  ;  at  Cornbrook  coal  basin,  273.;  Ireland, 
276.;  its  representative  in  Germany,  376.; 
in  Spain,  400. 
Milne  Edwards,  on  Silurian  corals,  179. 
Milton.— (see  Ludlow  Castle,)  126. 
Mineral  features  not  persistent,  48.;  veins  in 
Lower  Silurian,  53.;  springs  resulting  from 
decomposition  of  sulphuret  of  iron,  61. ;  changes 
in  carboniferous  rocks,  275.;  conditions  of 
former  geological  epochs,  465. 
Mississippi,  transportation  of  vegetable  matter 

by,  279. 
Missouri,  Silurian  of  the,  18. 
Mitchell,  Sir  T.,  on  Australia,  451. 
Moel  y  Golfa  (Breidden  Hills),  59. 
Moel  Wyn,  igneous  rocks  and  slates  of,  44. 
!Modiolopsis  in  Lower  Silurian,  191.  226. 
Moffat,  Silurian  greywacke,  149. 
Moldau  Eiver  (Bohemia),  344. 
Mondego  Eiver,  Portugal,  404. 
Montgomery,  Silurian  strata,  19. 
Montgomeryshire,  Cambrian  rocks  are  mere 
extensions  of  Lower  Silurian,  8.;  bedded  vol- 
canic rocks,   55.;    stratified  felspar  rocks, 
55.;  Caradoc  formation  in,  78.;  borders  of, 
section,  80. 

Monitor,  animal  allied  to  in  the  Permian,  463. 

Monmouth,  carboniferous  rocks,  270. 

Moore,  J.  C.,  on  Silurian  of  Scotland,  156. 

Moravia,  palaeozoic  rocks  of,  340. 

Morris,  Prof  John,  and  Sir  E.  I.  Murchison  on 
palaeozoic  rocks  of  Saxony.  &c.,  351.;  onPer- 
niianflora,  298,  299.;  and  Sir  E.  L  M.,  on 
Thuringian  coal  strata,  359. 

Moscow,  carboniferous  limestone,  532. 

Moselle  river,  rocks  of,  364. 

Mountain  limestone,  a  centre  of  animal  life,  465. 

Mudstone,  term  how  applied,  41.;  near  Cader 
Idris,  77.;  provincial  name  for  incoherent 
Silurian  rocks,  1 00. ;  Upper  Silurian  altered, 
101. 

Munster,  Count,  palajontological  works,  354. 
Muschelkalk,  a  centre  of  animal  life,  465. 


Murchison,  Lady,  sketches  by,  59.  69.  92. 116. 
271,  272. 

Murchison,  Sir  E.  I.,  former  opinions  of.  Preface^ 
9.  274.;  on  Silurian  rocks  of  the  Ural  chain, 
13.;  Memoir  in  London  and  Edinburgh  Phil. 
Mag.  19.;  Eussia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural 
mountains,  19.  11.  17.  38.  293.  295.  317.  et 
passim;  de  Verneuil  and  Eamsay,  North 
Wales,  54. ;  map  for  the  Society  for  the  Dif- 
fusion of  Useful  Knowledge,  63. ;  J.  Kelly,  on 
Irish' Silurian,  173.;  term  Permian  proposed, 
291.':  and  Prof  Nicol,  78.;  and  Prof  Sedg- 
wick, on  the  Geology  of  Devonshire,  257.  259. 
260.  264.;  Prof.  Sedgwick,  on  pala3ozoic  rocks 
in  Saxony,  361.  378.;  and  Prof  Morris,  on 
German  Permian  flora,  298,  299.  360.;  and 
Prof  Sedgwick,  on  the  Thuringerwald,  350.; 
and  Prof  IMorris  on  Thuringian  coal  strata, 
360. ;  Memoir  by,  on  the  Alps  and  Apennines, 
406.;  and  Prof  Nicol,  170.;  changes  of  the 
Alps,  Appendix  Q. 

Murchisonia,  of  Silurian,  193.  ;  Devonian,  261. 

Muschelkalk,  in  Triassic  group,  299.;  diagram 
of  succession,  300. 

Musclewick  Haven,  65. 

Museum  of  Geological  Sumy,  Preface,  44. 181. 
198. 

Mynydd  Epynt,  Brecon,  Upper  and  Lower  Silu- 
rian, 75.  118.  243. 

Mynydd  Bwlch  y  groes,  75. 

]\Iynydd  Mynyllod,  section  across,  79. 

Mynydd  Aberedu,  section  across,  91. 

Myrianites,  in  Lower  Silurian,  199. 

Mytton  dingle  (Salop),  38. 

Nant  y  Moen,  lead  ores  of,  71. 

Nash  Scar,  amorphous  limestone  of,  103. 

Nassau,  Upper  Devonian  of,  372. 

Nauniann,  Prof,  igneous  rocks  mapped  by,  354.; 

on  geology  of  Saxony,  351, 
Nefiiez,  apparent  anomaly  of  rocks  explained, 

393.  495. 

Nehou  (Nonnandy),  Devonian  fossils  of,  389. 

Neozoic,  secondary  and  tertiary  groups,  469. 

Nereites,  of  Lower  Silurian,  199.  352.  et  seq. 

Neva  river  (Eussia),  322. 

Nevin,  Mr.  (Waterford),  Silurian  fossils,  167. 

New  Brunswick,  Silurian,  410. 

Newcastle,  coal  field  of,  279. 

Newfoundland,  Silurian  I'ocks,  410. 

Newton  Bushell,  Devonian  limestone,  260. 

New  South  Wales,  reports  on,  452. 

New  York,  palaeozoic  deposits  of,  413. 

New  Zealand,  gold  diggings  at,  458. 

Niagara  group,  representative  of  Wenlock  lime- 
stone, 217.;  rocks  of  Upper  Silurian,  416. 

Nicol,  Prof.  J.  on  the  Silurian  of  Scotland,  149. 
151.  154.;  on  metamorphosed  Silurian,  163.; 
and  Sir  E.  I.  Murchison,  170.;  on  anthracitic 
plants.  Appendix  C. 

Nils  Hill,  quarries  of,  38. 

Nilsson,  Prof  S.,  work  referred  to,  320. 

Nodules,  in  Upper  Silurian,  101. 

Noeth  Griig,  section  at,  72. 

Norfolk  Island,  Araucaria  of  resembling  coal 
plants,  278. 


INDEX. 


517 


Normandy,  equivalents  of  Caradoc  beds  in,  387. 
North  America,  (see  America). 
North  Devon,  section  across,  256.  258. 
North  Foreland,  section  at,  256. 
North  Hill,  (Malvern,)  sketch  of,  92.;  igneous 
rocks  of,  95. 

North  Pembroke,  Cambrian  rocks,  now  ascer- 
tained to  be  Lower  Silm-ian.  63. 

Northumberland,  development  of  carboniferous 
limestone  in,  27.;  coal  field,  270.;  carboni- 
ferous limestones  of,  274.  279. 

North  Wales,  nomenclature  of  rocks  in,  8.;  the 
organic  remains  similar  to  those  of  St.  Peters- 
burg, 18;  Silurian  strata,  metamorphic  in, 
19.;  rocks,  equivalent  of  the  Longmynd, 
Shelve  Corndon,  and  Stiper  stones,  25. 
128.;  West  Shropshire  succession,  39.;  lime- 
stone feebly  developed  in,  49.;  epitome  of, 
in  Radnorshire,  58. ;  Caradoc  formation,  78.; 
Upper  Silurian  of,  101.;  gold  in,  433. 

Norway,  succession  of  Paljeozoic  rocks  in,  319. 

Norwood,  Dr.,  territory  examined  by,  421. 

Nottingham,  Permian  beds,  303. 

Nova  Scotia,  fossil  reptile  and  land  shell  in  coal, 
287.;  Silurian  of,  410.;  coal  formation  of, 
426. 

Nucula,  in  Lower  Silurian,  191. 

Nummulite,  the  Fusulinaa  of  the  carboniferous 

limestone,  prototypes  of,  333. 
Obolus,  species  of  (allied  to  Lingula,)  187. 
Ochotsk,  sea  of,  Silurian  rocks  traced  to,  1 3. 
Oldham,  Prof.  T.,  zoophyte  in  bottom  rocks 

detected  by,  32. 
Oldhamia  antiqua,  sketch  of,  32.  165. 
Oesel  Island,  of  Upper  Silurian,  327. 
Old  Padnor,  Silurian  strata,  altered  by  greenstone, 

61.;  Caradoc  of,  89.;  altered  limestone  and 

trap,  103. 

Old  Red  Sandstone,  11.;  overlying  Silurian,  at 
Hookpoint,  66.:  of  Britain,  241.;  escarp- 
ment of  Black  Mountain,  242.;  decomposition 
of,  forming  rich  soil,  244.;  England  and 
Wales,  245.;  Scotland,  246.  253.;  Forfarshire, 
section  across,  248.;  Hugh  Miller  on,  249.; 
fishes,  250,  254.;  shells,  254.;  reptile,  254.; 
plants,  254.;  freshwater  shells  and  tree  ferns 
in  Ireland,  255.;  of  Devon  and  Cornwall,  557. 

Olenus,  one  of  the  earliest  tribolites,  41.;  shale, 
Malvern  Hills,  95. 

Olmutz,  Devonian  fossils  near,  340. 

Olonetz,  Russian  government,  carboniferous 
limestone  of,  332. 

Omallus,  d'Halloy  Pene'en,  12.;  works  of,  364. 

Onchus,  fossil  fish  in  Upper  Ludlow,  239.;  in 
Old  Red  Sandstone,  245.;  Dewii,  421. 

Onega,  Lake,  Russia,  Devonian  of,  329. 

Onny  River,  Caradoc  sandstone  on,  84.;  section, 
126. 

Onondaga  Rocks,  (America,)  Upper  Silurian,  416. 
Oolitic  group  of  rocks,  animal  remains  of,  466. 
Oporto,  Lower  Silurian  Rocks,  402.;  granite  of, 
403. 

Orbicula,  in  Lower  Silurian,  187. 
Orbigny,  d',  on  the  palasozoic  rocks  of  the  Andes, 
14.  292.  408. 

L 


Ord  of  Caithness,  250, 

Order  of  Upper  Silurian  rocks,  102. 

Orenburg,  Russia,  Permian  salt  of,  295. 

Organic  remains,  oldest,  5.;  registered  from 
their  apparent  dawn,  9.  ;  of  Llandeilo 
and  Caradoc  essentially  the  same,  81.;  of 
Lower  Silurian,  176.;  of  Permian  or  Old  Red 
Sandstone,  251.  263.;  of  carboniferous  strata, 
280.;  Upper  Silurian,  287.;  Permian.  305. 
et  seq. 

Oriskany  sandstone  (America),  equivalent  of 
Rhenish  lower  Devonian,  374.  417. 

Orkney  Islands,  Old  Red  flagstones  of,  250, 

Orthis,  in  Lower  Silurian,  184.;  in  Upper  Silu- 
rian, 223,  224. 

Orthoceras,  in  Upper  Silurian,  112.  232.;  abun- 
dant in  Lower  Ludlow,  128.;  in  Lower  Si- 
lurian, 197.;  last  met  with  in  the  Carboni- 
ferous series,  282. 

Orthonota  (Cypricardia,  Sil.  Syst.)  in  Lower 
Silurian,  192.;  in  Upper  Silurian,  226,  227. 

Osersky,  Colonel  A.,  translator  into  Russian  of 
Russia  and  the  Ural  Mountains,  317.  325. 

Oswestry,  coal  field  of,  270. 

Owen,  Dr.  Dale,  Trilobites  described  by,  343.; 
geology  of  North  America,  304.  321. 

Owen,  Prof.  Richard,  on  footmarks  in  Potsdam 
sandstone,  205. ;  reptile  of  the  coal,  287.  ;  Per- 
mian reptiles,  302.  313.  497.;  on  gigantic 
crustacean  of  Lower  Silurian,  413;  homology 
of  the  vertebrate  skeleton,  461.;  British  fossil 
mammalia,  466. 

Ousel  Wood,  sketch  of,  105. 

Oeynhausen,  C.  von,  referred  to,  338.  ;  geo- 
gical  map  by,  379. 

Pacht,  Raimund,  on  the  Devonian  fossils  of 
Russia,  332. 

Paillette,  A.,  Devonian  rocks  of  Spain,  396. 

Palmer's  Cairn,  landslip  of,  131. 

Pala30chorda,  a  period  of  Lower  Silurians,  42. 

PaIa30ntographical  Society,  176. 

Palajozoic  rocks,  first  era  of  life.  Preface,  vi., 
9 — 11. ;  at  Anglesea,  24.;  cleavage  in  rocks 
of  that  age,  35. ;  system  divided  into  upper 
and  lower:  (see  Rocks),  310.;  period,  the  Per- 
mian system  the  close  of,  315.;  Alps  and 
Poland,  337.;  formations,  map  of,  475. 

Pander,  C.  H.,  on  Platydolenites,  323. 

Paradoxides,  one  of  the  earliest  trilobites,  41.; 
Forchammeri,  43. 

Parennes,  France,  section  across,  385. 

Pattison,  S.  R.,  on  gold  in  Cornwall,  434. 

Patella,  in  Lower  Silurian,  123. 

Pebble  beds,  evidences  of  the  contiguity  of  the 
land,  472. 

Peebles-shire,  section  of,  1 52. 

Pegwyn  Fawr,  section  acrass,  80. 

Pekin,  coal  fields  of,  14, 

Pellico,  M,,  Lower  Silurian  of  Murcia,  397. 

Pembrokeshire,  Llandeilo  formation  in,  49.  ; 
Lower  Silurian  of,  63 — 68, ;  Upper  Silurian 
of,  141,;  Carbonlfe^rous  rocks  of,  270,  271. ; 
general  order  in,  272. 

Pennant,  Col,  Douglas,  slate  quarries,  31. 

Peneen,  local  geological  term,  305. 


518 


INDEX. 


Pentamerns,  limestone,  8G.  98.  102.;  Knlghtii 
in  Lower  Wenlock,  106.  132.;  in  Lower  and 
Upper  Silurian,  190.  223. 

Pentland  Hills,  greywacke  of,  154. 

Pentland,  J.  B.,  on  Trilobites  in  the  Andes,  408. 

Perm,  city  of,  deposits  near,  294. 

Permia,  region  of  Piussia  furnishing  tlie  name 
of  a  group  of  strata,  12.  193. 

Permian,  origin  of  the  term  as  applied  to  the 
highest  gronp  of  primeval  deposits,  12.  289, 
290.;  relations  of  to  coal  strata,  270.;  rocks, 
changes  of  the  surface  before  deposited,  289. ; 
connected  with  the  carboniferous,  291.;  name, 
whence  derived,  291. 

Permische  system  in  Sachsen,  292. 

Permian  deposits,  salt  springs  in,  295.;  rocks  of 
Russia,  292.  300.;  Fanna  and  Flora,  299.; 
general  succession  of,  300.;  of  Germany,  297. 
300.  339.;  base  of  in  Britain,  300.';  rela- 
tions to  coal  (section),  301.:  sauroid  reptiles 
of,  301.;  position  of,  in  Shropshire,  302.; 
Flora,  305.;  Fanna,  307.;  shells,  309.; 
fish,  312.;  deposits  chse  of  primeval  life, 
315.;  rocks  of  France,  393.;  Fauna  and 
Flora  resembling  the  carboniferous,  463. 

Perthshire,  Scotland,  limestone  rocks  in,  1 64. 

Petchora,  North  Russia,  Devonian  strata  of, 
331. 

Petherwin,  Devonian  rocks  of,  256.  263. 

Phascolotherium.  fossil  Marsupial.  466. 

Phillips,  Prof.  John,  on  the  Malvern  and  Abberley 
hills,  8.  93.  95.  96,  97.  176.:  Oleni  dis- 
covered by,  43.  92.;  ancient  trilobites  dis- 
covered by,  92.;  division  between  ITpper  and 
Lower  Silurian,  110.;  thickness  of  Wenlock 
shale.  111.;  Wenlock  limestone,  115.;  Lower 
Ludlow  rock,  128.;  Upper  Ludlow,  140.; 
fish  bed  at  Pyrton  passage,  143.;  on  Lamelh- 
branchiata,  228.;  fossils  of  Devonian  rocks, 
258.;  Lancashire  coal  field,  274.;  Permian 
fossils,  292. 

Phillipsia,  trilobite  in  the  carboniferous  lime- 
stone, 311. 

Phrygia  and  Thrace,  gold  only  in  ancient  rocks 
of,  432. 

Phyllopod,  a  rare  crustacean  of  that  order  in 
Lower  Silurian,  42.;  crustacean  of  that  tribe 
in  Upper  Silurian,  236. 

Pilton,  Devonian  rocks  of,  256. 

Planet,  hvpothesis  concerning  the  origin  of  our, 
1.5. 

Plants,  land,  earliest  in  Upper  Silurian,  139. 
238.;  in  Old  Red  Sandstone,  245.  255. 

Plants.  teiTestrial  of  Devonian,  265.;  of  the  car- 
boniferous era,  268. ;  forming  coal,  277.;  Per- 
mian, 306. ;  fossil  of  the  Devonian  and  Car- 
boniferous rocks  in  Germany,  358,  359. 

Platinum,  in  the  Ural  mountains,  439. 

Permian  debris,  no  gold  in,  446. 

Platydolemites,  fragments  of  trilobites,  323. 

Pleurorynchus,  in  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian, 
192.'225. 

Plymouth,  limestones  of,  260. 

Poille,  section  across,  385. 

Poland,  palaeozoic  rocks  of,  337. 


Polarity,  doctnne  of  its  relation  to  the  distribn- 

tion  of  generic  types,  468. 
Poltimore  mine,  Devonshire,  gold  in,  434. 
Pomeroy,  Tyrone,  geology  of,  by  Col.  Portlock,  164. 
P(5n-sandstein  (Germany),  an  equivalent  of  the 

lower  limestone  shale,  376. 
Pontefract,  Yorkshire,  Permian  beds,  305. 
Pontesbury,  38. 
Pontesford',  25.  26. 

Pontefract  rock,  equivalent  of  the  Rothe-todte- 
liegende,  303. 

Porphyries,  felspar,  stratified,  57. 

Porphyry,  once  in  a  state  of  fusion,  18. 

Portlock,  Col.  J.  E.,  on  Silurian  fossils  of  Ty- 
rone, 176.;  Irish  Lower  Silurian,  229. 

Portugal,  Silurian  rocks  in,  13.;  palaeozoic  rocks 
altered,  316  ;  paleozoic  rocks  in,  403. 

Posidonomya  Becheri,  274.  375,  376.;  lime- 
stone, Devon,  carboniferous  limestone,  259. 

Potsdam  sandstone,  North  America,  lowest  strata 
containing  Silurian  fossils,  20  ;  Lingula  of, 
41.;  Lower  Silurian,  413.  422. 

Powerscourt,  waterfall  of,  165. 

Povris  Castle,  Silurian  rocks  near,  59. 

Prague,  the  Silurian  System  around,  341.; 
stands  upon  Lower  Silurian,  343. 

Pratt,  S.  P.,  on  geology  of  Spain,  398. 

Presteign,  Caradoc  of,  89,  90.;  Woolhop  - 
stone  at,  103. 

Prestwich,  J.,  on  fossils  of  the  coal,  285. 

Primary  rocks  in  Scandinavia  and  North  Ame- 
rica, 20. 

Primeval  conditions  of  the  earth's  surface,  471. 

480. ;  strata,  wide  spread  of,  475. 
Protozoic,  or  first  era  of  life,  1 1 . 
Prout,  Dr.,  his  analysis  of  Upper  Ludlow  copro- 

lites,  238. 

Prussia,  carboniferous  rocks  of,  274.;  palaeozoic 
rocks  of,  337.;  Silurian  rocks  of,  496. 

Psaronius,  a  tree  fern  of  Permian  age,  307. 

Pterichthys,  fossil  fish  of  Old  Red  Sandstone, 
woodcut,  251. 

Pteriuea,  in  Lower  Silurian,  191.;  in  Upper  Si- 
lurian, 225 

Pteropods,  Upper  Silurian,  231.;  of  WerJock 
shale,  112.;  in  Lower  Silurian,  196. 

Pterotheca,  in  Lower  Silurian,  196. 

Pterygotus,  at  Hagley  park,  (Hereford,)  142.; 
in  the  Upper  Caradoc  of  Malvern,  237.;  in 
Silurian  rocks  of  Bohemia,  346.;  problema- 
ticus,  crustacean  of  Upper  Ludlow,  142.;  in 
Arbroath  paving-stones,  247. 

Ptvchacanthus,  fossil  fish  in  Old  Red  Sandstone, 
245. 

Pyrenees,  palaeozoic  formations  of,  394. 

Pyrton  passages,  fish  bed,  143. 

Quartz  sandstone  altered,  20.;  of  Lickey,  (Ca- 
radoc sandstone  altered),  99. ;  Caradoc  sand- 
stone of  Salop  changed  into,  83. ;  associated 
with  gold,  71,  456.  447. 

Radnor,  Silurian  tract  of,  6.;  volcanic  grits  in, 
45.;  Forest,  Silurian  rocks  of,  80.  lOO.  125.; 
Old,  Upper  Caradoc  conglomerates,  89. ;  Old, 
amorphous  limestone  and  trap  of,  103.  105.; 
succession  of  strata  in  county  of,  242. 


INDEX. 


519 


Kaglcath  Hill,  sketch  of,  81. 

Ramsay,  Prof'.,  Lower  Silurian  rocks  of  North 
Wales  identified  with  those  of  Salop,  Preface, 
8.  19.;  section  on  map  prepared  by,  28.  54.; 
memoirs  in  Geological  Journal,  79.;  Permian 
rocks  of  England,  301.;  additional  observa- 
tions, Appendix  B. 

Eastrites  peregrinus,  woodcut,  46. 

Eatlinghope,  26. 

Eeise  nach  dem  Ural,  317. 

Eeptile  of  Old  Eed  Sandstone,  254. ;  of  coal 
strata,  287. ;  of  the  Permian  rocks  of  Eussia, 
297.  ;  Permian  strata,  313. 

Ehayader,  Lower  Silurian  sandstones,  70. 

Elienish  Provinces,  Devonian  rocks,  order  of 
older  rocks  in,  365.  382. 

Ehine,  greywacke  of  compared  with  Devonian 
sti-ata,  ,256. ;  crustaceans  in  Devonian  of, 
264. ;  rocks  of,  364. ;  ascending  series  on, 
369.;  Upper  Devonian  of,  371.;  Carbonife- 
rous of,  375.  ;  sands  slightly  auriferous,  436. 

Ehynconella  in  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian, 
189.  222. 

Eibeiro,  Carlos,  Silurian  rocks  in  Portugal,  404. 

Eichardson,  Sir  J.,  narrative  of  Arctic  expedition, 
411. ;  rocks  of  Hudson's  Bay,  426. 

Eichter,  E.,  of  Saalfeld,  351.  ;  plants,  &c.  dis- 
covered by,  358. ;  on  Silurian  and  Devonian 
of  the  Thiiringerwald,  357.  et  seq. 

Eothenberg,  Devonian  of,  358. 

Eiesen  Gebirge  (S.  of  Breslau),  Palajozoic  rocks 
of,  338. ;  Permian  rocks  of,  339. 

Eiley,  Dr.,  on  Permian  reptiles,  301. 

Eingerigge  (Norway),  section  across,  320. 

Eipple  marks,  in  Lower  Silurian,  38. 

Eipon  (Yorkshire),  Permian  sandstones,  303. 

Eocks,  oldest  crystalline  effects  of  great  heat,  2. ; 
nuclei  of  the  oldest  sedimentary  deposits,  21. ; 
general  order  of  the  primeval,  woodcut,  22.  ; 
oldest  sedimentary  in  England,  28. ;  igneous, 
near  mineral  veins,  53.  55. ;  Lower  Silurian 
and  eruptive,  61.  77. ;  palaeozoic  of  Alps  and 
Apennines,  407. ;  carboniferous,  418. 

Eocky  Mountains,  Silurian  rocks  of,  18.  409. 
427. 

Ebemer,  Adolf,  on  the  Hartz,  362,  363. 
Ebemer,  Ferdinand,  on  Ehenish  rocks,  368.  370. 

371.  et  seq.;  on  American  Silurian  rocks,  409. 
Eogers,  Prof.  Henry  D.,  on  formation  of  coal,  288. ; 

section  by,  424. 
Eogers,  Profrs.  H.  and  W.,  United  States,  379. 

423. 

Eose,  Gustav,  on  Eussia,  316.  447.;  mineral 
chai-acters  of  rocks  in  Prussia,  338. 

Eoss,  county  of  Scotland,  250. ;  railroad  cutting 
to,  237. 

Eotch,  provincial  term  for  mudstone,  101. 
Eothe-todte-liegende  (Lower  Permian  deposit), 

12. ;  Flora  of,  297,  298. ;  succession  of,  300. 
Eoundstone  Bay  (Ireland),  section  across,  169. 
Eowley  Hills,  basalt  of,  116. 
Eoxburghshire,  section  across,  152. 
Euppersdorf,   Permian  rocks   and   fishes  of, 

315.  339. 

Russell,  Lord  John,  address  at  Leeds,  250. 


Eussia,  types  of  British  Lower  Silurian,  9. ; 
Silurian  rocks,  their  sequence  in  an  unaltered 
state,  15. ;  oldest  deposits  only  partially- 
hardened,  17,  ;  forming  level  plains  in,  19.  ; 
Cystidete  of,  19.  181.  ;  Silurian  strata  un- 
solidified,  34. ;  organic  remains  of  Old  Red 
Sandstone  identical  with  those  of  Scotland 
and  Devon,  264.  ;  southern  steppes  of,  280. ; 
Permian  rocks,  292.  300.  ;  primeval  rocks 
of,  322.;  Lower  Silurian,  323. ;  Upper  Silu- 
rian, 325.;  Devonian,  327.  332.;  Carbonife- 
rous, 333,  334. 

"  Eussia  in  Europe,  and  the  Ural  Mountains," 
5.  9.  11.  17.  138.  293.  295. ;  work  translated 
into  Russian,  317. 

Saalfeld,  Germany,  Lower  Silurian  of,  353  ;  De- 
vonian, 339.  357. 

Saarbriick  (Rhenish  Bavaria),  coal  reptile  of, 
287. 

Sabero  (Spain),  coal  apparently  in  Devonian 
rocks,  400. 

Sable',  section  to,  385. 

St.  Abb's  Head,  view  of,  151. 

St.  Bride's  Bay  (Pembroke),  Lower  Silurian,  65. 

St.  David's,  Longmynd  rocks,  62. 

St.  Omer,  beds  of  coal  near,  390. 

St.  Petersburg,  rocks  same  age  as  those  of 
Snowdon,  18.;  Lower  Silurian,  322. 

Salt  in  Permian  deposits,  295. 

Salter,  J.  W.,  contributions  to  this  work.  Preface 
and  passim ;  on  fossil-bearing  rocks  of  N. 
Wales,  8.  ;  Cruziana  and  Hymenocaris  de- 
scribed by,  39. ;  on  Silurian  encrinites,  113. ; 
organic  remains  of  the  Lower  Silurian,  176. 
et  seq.  ;  Upper  Silurian,  207,  et  seq.  ;  on 
North  American  fossils,  421.;  table  of  fossils 
common  to  Lower  and  Upper  Silurian,  Ap- 
pendix A. 

Sanchez,  Eusebio,  on  Spanish  geology,  397. ; 
Sandberger,  F.,  works  on  fossil  remains,  264. 

345.  365.;  (the  brothers)  on  slaty  rocks,  369. 

371. 

Sandstone,  Lower  Silurian,  51.  71. 
Sardinia,  Silurian  and  other  palaeozoic  rocks,  13. 
405. 

Sarthe,  anthracite,  392. 
Savi,  P.,  memoir,  406. 

Saurians  Carboniferous,  313. ;  Permian,  313.  ; 
abundant  in  the  Oolitic  group,  466  ;  Ap- 
pendix P. 

Saxony,  Permian  tree  ferns  of,  309.;  Silurian, 
Devonian,  Carboniferous,  and  Permian  rocks, 
12.  349,  et  seq. ;  contains  no  Upper  Silurian, 
361. 

Scandinavia,  oldest  traces  of  life  in,  9.  15.  20. 
43.  317.  321. 

Schists  altered  into  slates,  20.  ;  contorted  at 
Anglesea,  24.;  black,  of  Malvern,  92.;  in  the 
Highlands  of  Lower  Silurian  age?,  163.  248. 

Schleitz,  geological  changes  near,  354. 

Schrenk,  A.  G  .,  on  Upper  Silurian  of  Eussia, 
326. 

Schultz,  M.,  on  rocks  in  Gallicia,  395. 
Scotland,  south  of,  Silurian  rocks  and  fossils,  47. 
149,  et  seq.  ;  section  of  Silurian  rocks,  152. ; 


520 


INDEX. 


Old  Red  Sandstone  of,  246.  253.  :  gold  in, 
435. 

Secondary  rocks,  gold  wanting  in,  432.  ;  suc- 
cession of,  464,  et  seq.,  Appendix  Q. 

Sections,  general  order  of  primeval  rocks,  22.  ; 
unconformity  of  Longmynd  to  Pentamerus 
limestone,  27.;  from  the  Longmynd  across  the 
Stiper  Stones  and  Lower  Silurian,  29. ;  Bar- 
mouth (Lingula  Flags),  40. ;  Llandewi  Felfrey 
(Llandeilo  Flags),  49.  ;  and  Llandeilo  flags 
with  volcanic  grits,  57.  ;  across  the  Breidden 
Hills,  60. ;  Abereiddy  Bay,  64.  ;  Llandeilo 
schists  in  Musclewick  Bay,  65.  ;  Llandewi 
Felfry  (Llandeilo),  68. ;  Lower  Silurian  to 
Old  Red,  Noeth  Griig,  72.;  Lower  Silurian  to 
Old  Red  (Llangadock),  73. ;  Llandeilo  (Lower 
Silurian  to  Carboniferous),  73.  ;  Cader  Idris 
(Lower  Silurian),  77. ;  Llandeilo  schists  con- 
formable to  Caradoc  Sandstone,  79,  80.;  from 
Upper  Caradoc  to  Old  Red  Sandstone,  82. ; 
Presteign  (Upper  Caradoc  and  Lower  ,Wen- 
lock),  90,  103.;  Builth,  90,  9L  ;  from  Mal- 
vern to  Ledbury  (Lower  Silurian  to  Old  Red), 
94. ;  General  order  of  Upper  Silurian,  1 02 ;  al- 
tered limestone.  Nash  Scar,  103.;  Kington  (trap 
and  Silurian),  104.  ;  Wren's  Nest  (Dudley), 
117.;  across  the  Ludlow  promontory,  126.  ; 
Brecon  Anticlinal,  141.;  Silurian  Rocks  S.  of 
Scotland,  152.  ;  across  the  Bins  of  Conne- 
mara,  169.;  from  Upper  Silurian  to  the  South 
Welsh  coal-field,  243.';  across  the  Old  Red 
Sandstone  of  Forfarshire,  248.  ;  across  N. 
Devon,  256.  ;  general  order  of  carboniferous 
rocks  in  the  central  and  southern  parts  of 
England,  270.  ;  Pembrokeshii  e  (succession 
of  strata),  272.  ;  across  Cornbrook  coal- 

•  basin,  273.  ;  slash  of  culm,  275.  ;  on  west 
flank  of  the  South  Ural  Mountains,  296.  ; 
showing  relations  of  Permian  rocks  to  coal, 
301.;  Permian  rocks  in  Shropshire,  302.; 
lowest  Silurian  of  Sweden  (two  diagrams), 
318.;  from  Lower  Silurian  to  Old  Red  Sand- 
stone in  Norway,  319,  320.  ;  Lower  Silurian 
cliffs  at  Waiwara,  Russia,  324. ;  Valdai  Hills, 
Russia,  328. ;  across  the  Silurian  basin  of 
Bohemia,  342.;  inversion  of  rocks  in  the  Eifel, 

377.  ;  inverted  strata  at  Brilon,  Westphalia, 

378.  ;  Silurian  succession  of  France,  385. ; 
succession  in  the  United  States,  424.;  suc- 
cession in  Lower  Canada,  424.;  gold  diggings 
in  the  Ural  Mountains  (three  diagrams),  442. 
444,  445.;  ideal,  showing  the  formation  and 
distribution  of  gold,  449. 

Sedgeley  (Staffordshire),  Lower  Ludlow  of,  130. ; 

.    Aymestry  rock  of,  133. 

Sedgwick,  Adam,  Rev.,  term  Cambrian  how  em- 
ployed hj,  Pi'eface,  7 — 25.;  N.  Wales  and 
Cumberland,  10 — 30.;  on  the  paleozoic  fos- 
sils of  the  Cambridge  museum,  10.  177.;  the 
north  Welsh  mountains,  19.;  slaty  cleavage, 
34. ;  structure  of  mineral  masses,  34. ;  Tre- 
madoc  slates,  44. ;  Hirnant  limestone,  49.  ; 
separation  of  Caradoc  beds  at  May  Hill,  98. 
104.;  the  inversion  of  rocks  in  Cornwall, 
145,;  Silurians  of  Cumberland,  146.  et  seq.; 


classification  of  Old  Red  Sandstone,  254.;  anJ 

Murchison  on  the  geology  of  Devonshire,  257. 

259,  260.  264.;  culm  rocks  of  Devon,  276.; 

Permian  rocks  described  by,  305.  392. ;  on 

the  Thiiringerwald,  350. ;  and  Murcliison  on 

the  paljBOzoic  rocks  of  Saxony,  361.  378.;  on 

Rhenish  provinces,  365.  377. 
Selkirk,  Earl  of,  Silurian  fossils  collected  by, 

182.  208. 
Selkirkshire,  section  across,  152. 
Selwyn,  A.  R.  C,  maps  and  sections  by,  54. ; 

on  Australian  gold,  458. 
Seraphim,  crustacean  of  Old  Red  Sandstone,  237. 
Sergiefsk  (Russia),  baths  of,  296. 
Serra  de  Busaco,  Silurian  rocks  of,  404.;  de 

Mucella,  Silurian  rocks  of,  404. 
Sertularia,  46. 

Severn  river,  Permian  deposits  near,  270. 

Seville,  coal  fields  of,  401. 

Shangai  (China),  Devonian  fossils,  14. 

Sharpe,  D.,on  Silurian  rocks  of  Britain,  Preface; 
on  Silurian  rocks  in  Portugal,  13.  402.;  on 
slaty  cleavage,  35.  256.;  on  Silurian  rocks  of 
Cumberland,  148.;  on  palaaozoic  rocks  of 
America,  374.  415.;  Devonian  rocks  of  the 
Rhine  and  Belgium,  381. 

Shelve,  Lower  Silurian  schists  14,000  feet  thick 
(section  of)  28,  29.  39.;  volcanic  grits,  45.; 
lead  veins  in  Lower  Silurian,  53. 

Shetland  Isles,  Old  Red  Sandstone  plants,  255. 

Shrewsbury  and  Ludlow  railroad,  84.;  coal  strata 
near,  286. 

Shropshire,  early  researches  in,  6,  7.  ]  hills  of 
Silurian  rocks  little  altered,  19.;  igneous 
rocks,  effects  of,  20. ;  Longmynd  and  Silurian 
rocks  of,  23.  26.;  bottom  rocks  of,  26.;  lowest 
rocks  of,  void  of  fossils,  31.;  lowest  zone  of 
animal  life  in,  35. ;  (west)  N.  Wales  identi- 
fied with,  39. ;  Corndon  and  Shelve  district, 
39 — 45.;  equivalents  of  the  Lingula  flags, 
41.;  volcanic  rocks  in,  55. ;  volcanic  grits  in, 
55.;  Caradoc  formation  in,  81,  et  seq.;  Cara- 
doc of,  88. ;  thickness  of  Silurian  rocks,  1 74. ; 
coal  field  of,  270.;  position  of  Permian  rocks 
in,  301. 

Shucknall  Hill  (Hereford),  Upper  Ludlow  rock, 
142. 

Shurman,  Dr.B.  F.  (for,  read  Shumard,  American 

geologist),  421. 
Siberia,  crystaUine  palceozoic  rocks,  334. ;  gold 

of, 

Sidlaw  Hills,  rocks  of,  section,  247. 

Sierra  Morena,  in  Spain,  Lower  Silui'ian  rocks, 

396. ;  Almagrera,  lead  and  silver  ores,  397. ; 

Cantabrica,  Devonian  rocks,  399. ;  Nevada, 

Silurian  rocks,  409. 
Sierras  Gata  and  Francia,  Appendix  G. 
Silesia,  Palaeozoic  rocks  analogous  to  those  of 

Moravia,  340. ;  graptolites  recently  found, 

Appendix  M. 
Sille'  le  Guillaume,  France,  section,  385. 
Silliman,  Prof.,  works  by,  412. 
Silver,  deep  veins  of,  457. 
Silures,  an  ancient  British  people,  6. 
Siluria,  Preface  and  introductoiy  view  and 


INDEX. 


621 


origin  of  name,  1 — 6. ;  design  of  the  work,  9. 
Silurian  system  established.  Preface,  10.; 
rocks,  base  of,  17.  ;  external  forms  of,  20. ; 
Lower,  Cambrian  rocks  identified  with,  Pre- 
Jace,  26.;  rocks  contain  lowest  fossils  of 
North  Wales,  43.  ;  Lower,  with  interpolated 
trap,  61.  ;  of.  Pembroke  and  Carmarthen, 
62. ;  of  Marloes  Bay,  66. ;  break  between 
Upper  and  Lower,  81. ;  Lower,  unity  of, 
87. ;  Upper,  rocks,  where  unconformable  to 
Llandeilo  flags,  90. ;  Lower,  of  Malvern 
Hills,  93. ;  rocks,  Malvern  Hills,  95.  ;  pas- 
sage from  Lower  to  Upper,  97.  ;  IJpper, 
general  character  and  section  of,  100 — 102.  ; 
Silm-ian  of  Cornwall,  145.  ;  of  Scotland,  and 
section  of,  149.  152.  ;  metamorphosed,  Scot- 
land, 163.,  Ireland,  171.  ;  of  Ireland,  165— 
172.  ;  British,  thickness  of  rocks,  173.  175. ; 
fossils  originally  described  by  J.  De  C.  Sow- 
erby  and  J.  W.  Salter,  176.  ;  Lower,  rocks, 
organic  remains,  and  woodcuts,  176 — 206.  ; 
corals  originally  described  by  W.  Lonsdale, 
179.;  Upper,  organic  remains  (woodcuts), 
207 — 240.  ;  Lower,  of  America,  dolomitic, 
304.  ;  Scandinavia,  321.  ;  Eussia,  323.  ; 
Upper,  Eussia,  325.  ;  Silurian  rocks,  Bo- 
hemia (see  Barrande),  341.  349. ;  in  France, 
381.  383.  387.;  Spain,  397.  etseq.  ;  Por- 
tugal, 402.  ;  Sardinia,  405. ;  South  America 
and  United  States,  408—423. ;  British  North 
America,  423 — 430.  ;  Lower,  of  Australia 
and  the  Ural,  chiefly  auriferous,  452. ;  de- 
posits offer  no  signs  of  arborescent  vegetation, 
473,  474. 

Skiddaw,  graptolites  of,  146. ;  schists,  part  of 
Lower  Silurian,  149. 

Skomer,  Isles  of,  66. 

Skye,  hypersthene  rocks,  104. 

Slash,  local  term  for  troughs  of  broken  coal,  275. 

Slates,  best  roofing,  31. ;  Snowdon,  Lower  Si- 
lurian fossils,  72. 

Slaty  cleavage  and  bedding,  woodcut,  34. ;  cleav- 
age coinciding  with  laminaj  of  deposit,  64. 

Smith,  T.  Assheton,  grand  slate  quarries  of,  31. 

Smith,William,  the  father  of  English  geology,  303. 

Smyth,  Warington,  on  British  gold,  433.  435. 

Snowdon,  slates  and  fossils  of,  9,  25,  28,  29, 
30,  31.  39. 

Soimanofsk,  Ural,  gold  diggings,  442. 

Sondley,  Salop,  Caradoc  sandstone,  83. 

South  America,  Silurian  and  other  palasozoic 
rocks  of,  14.  408.  et  seq. 

South  Devon.  Devonian,  259.;  Lower  Silurian 
rock,  260.' 

South  Stack  light-house,  Anglesea,  view  of,  24. 

South  Wales,  Silurian  rocks  little  altered,  19.; 
Silurian  rocks  of,  62.  et  seq. 

South  Welsh  coal  field,  224.  270.  278. 

Sowerby,  J.  De  C,  on  fossils  of  the  Silurian 
System,  Preface,  138.  176. 

Spain,  Silurian  rocks  of,  13.;  palssozoic  rocks 
altered,  316.;  pateozoic  rocks,  395.;  Silurian 
rocks,  397.;  Devonian  rocks,  399.;  carboni- 
ferous rocks,  400 — 402. ;  and  Portugal,  fron- 
tiers, Silurian  rocks,  Appendix  G. 


Spaniards,  fail  in  extracting  gold  from  deep 

mines,  448. 
Spha^ronites,  181. 

Spirifer,  genus,  very  rare  in  Lower  Silurian, 
188.;  sandstein  (Germany),  Lower  Devonian, 
367. 

Spitzbergen,  palasozoic  fossils  of,  335. 
Stackpole  Cliffs,  carboniferous  limestone,  271. 
Stanner  Hill,  Eadnorshire,  hypersthene  rocks  of, 

89.;  rocks,  view  from,  105. 
Stansbury,  Captain,  exploration  of  the  lake  of 

Utah,  18.  423. 
Steensfiord  (Norway),  section  across,  319. 
Steininger,  Prof.,  work  by,  369. 
Stephen,  G.  M.,  on  Australian  minerals,  453. 
Steppes,  Eussian,  carboniferous  rocks  of,  280. 
Stevenson,  W.,  on  Silurian  and  Old  lied  of 

Dunse  alluded  to,  154. 
Stigmaria,  roots  of  sigillaria,  278. 
Stinchar  river,  Scotland,  Silurian  rocks,  157. 
Stiper  stones,  Shropshire,  lowest  Silurian,  7.  27.; 

section  across,  29.;  views  of,'  37.;  altered 

Silurian  sandstone,  36.;  Cruziana,   a  raro 

fossil  of,  39. 
Stonehaven  (Scotland)  coast  section  of,  164. 
Strachey,  Captain  E.,  on  rocks  and  fossils  of 

the  Himalaya,  14. 
Strata,  ascending  order  o^  23. ;  mere  thickness 

of  no  test  of  age,  93. 
Strathmore,  section  across,  248, 
Strickland,  H.  E.,  discovers  Agnostus  pisiformis 

in  Malvern  schists,  43.  92.;  on  Pterygotus 

problematicus,  142.;    Pterygotus  in  Upper 

Caradoc  of  Malvern,  237.;  lamentable  death 

of,  245. 

Strike  of  Silurian  rocks,  101.  and  passim. 
Stringocephalus,  Limestone,  Devon,  256. ;  Ehe- 

nish  provinces,  369.  382. 
Strophomena,  of  Lower  Silurian,  188.;  of  Upper 

Silurian,  223. 
Strzelecki,  Count,  work  on  Australia  alluded 

to,  14.;  gold  discovered  by,  in  Australia,  450. 
Stutchbury,  S.,  on  Permian  reptiles,  301.;  re- 
ports on  New  South  Wales,  452. 
Studer,  Prof.  B.,  Geologic  der  Schweiz.  476. 
Stumps  Wood,  Woolhope  limestone,  97. 
Sudeten  Mountains  (Germany),  340. 
Suilvein,  mountain  of  Highlands,  249. 
Superior,  Lake,  North  America,  423. 
Superposition,  criterion  of  age  of  rocks,  48. 
Surveyors,  geological,  of  government  sections  bv, 

Preface,  23,  24.  28,  60.  98.  109, 
Sutherland,  Dr.,  Journal  of  Captain  Penny's 

Arctic  voyage,  428. 
Sutherland,  sketch  by  the  late  Countess  of,  249; 

mountains  of,  250. 
Sweden,  trilobites  in  Lower  Silurian,  44.321.; 

alum  slates,   47.   318.;   fucoid  sandstone, 

38.   321.;  Lower  Silurian  (sections),  318. 

Upper  Silurian,  322. 
Syenite,  Hanter  Hill  (Kington,  Eadnorshire), 

104.;  of  Ural  Mountains  with  gold,  440. 
Symonds,  Eev.  W.  S.,  on  recent  discoveries  near 

Malvern,  496. 
System.    See  Silurian,  28. 


522 


INDEX. 


Systems,  Upper  and  Lower  Palaeozoic  explained, 
310.  464. 

Syzran  (Russia),  Carboniferous  limestone,  333. 
Tagus,  gold  of  the,  432. 
Tan-y-bwlch,  volcanic  grits  of,  53. 
Tartary,  mountain  chains,  14. 
Tate,  G.,  carboniferous  flora,  377. 
Tchihatcheff,  Pierre  de,  work  on   the  Altai 

mountains,  334.;  palaeozoic  rocks  of  Asia 

Minor,  Appendix  N. 
Tchussovaya  river,  gorge  of,  330. 
Telerpeton  Elginense,  reptile  of  the  Old  Red 

Sandstone,  254. 
Teme  river,  banks  of,  125. 
Tentaculites,  Lower  Silurian,  200. 
Terebratula,  Silurian,  now  called  Rhynconella, 

138,  183. 

Tertiary  deposits,  gold  wanting  in,  432.;  formed 
when  the.  earth  approached  to  its  present  out- 
line, 478.;  great  dislocations  posterior  to, 
Appendix  Q. 

Teviotdale,  unfossiliferoas  greywacke,  151. 

Texas,  Silurian  rocks,  409. 

Theca,  Lower  Silurian,  196.;  Upper  Silurian, 
231. 

Thelodus  parvidens.  Upper  Ludlow  fish,  238. 

Thomson,  Prof.Wyville,  on  Silurian  of  Scotland, 
159.;  Arctic  fossils,  428. 

Thornbury,  Permian  conglomerate,  302. 

Thornielee  slates,  graptolites,  153. 

Thuringia,  Silurian  and  Devonian  rocks,  353. 
355.;  Lower  carboniferous  rocks,  359.;  con- 
tains no  Upper  Silurian,  361.  373. 

Thiiringerwald,  gold,  436. 

Tilestones,  Upper  in  Silurian  beds,  138.;  fossils 
of,  139.;  oldest  traces  of  vegetation  in,  139. 

Turbo,  common  in,  230.;  Upper  Ludlow  fossils, 
242. 

Tin-y-coed,  Radnorshire,  useless  search  after 
coal,  61. 

Tin,  found  in  Cornwall  and  Australia,  400.  453. 
Titterstone  Clee,  (Salop)  basaltic,  125.;  carbo- 
,    niferous  rocks,  273. 
Toledo  mountains,  Lower  Silurian,  396. 
Tarentaise,  apparent  intercalation  of  belemnites 

with  coal  explained,  407. 
Tongueland,  (Kircudbrightshire),  porpliyiy  of, 

162. 

Torquay,  Old  Red  Sandstones,  260. 
Towy,  vale  of,  69. 

Tracks  made  by  marine  worms,  199. 
Trachyderma,  wrinkled  tubes  of  annelids,  233. 
Trails  of  animals,  evidences  of  contiguity  of  land, 

472.  474. 
Transmutation  of  strata  by  heat,  1 8. 
Trap  of  Corndon  Hills,  57. ;  bedded  with  Lower 

Silurian,  woodcut,  57. 
Tree  ferns  in  Old  Red  Sandstone,  265. 
Tremadoc,  rare  crustaceans,  40. 
Trenton  limestone  (America),  Lower  Silurian, 

413. 

Trewerne  Hills,  Upper  Ludlow,  140.;  section 
across,  243. 

Trias,  the  fauna  and  flora  different  from  those  of 
Permian,  299- 


Trias,  bone  bed,  466. 

Triger,  M.,  geological  map  by,  384. 

Tri nucleus  concentricus,  60. 

Trilobites,  the  earliest  crustaceans,  41,  42.;  of 
St.  Bride's  Bay,65.;  Lower  Wenlock,  or  Wool- 
hope  limestone,  108.;  Wenlock  shale,  112. ; 
Lower  Silurian,  201.;  common  in  Wenlock 
limestone,  122.  235.  ;  Silurian  of  Scotland, 
58.  ;  Silurian  of  Ireland,  166.  ;  Devonian, 
262.;  distorted  by  slaty  cleavage,  35.;  Upper 
Silurian,  233.  ;  last  appearance  in  carboni- 
ferous limestone,  281.;  Devonian,  346.;  me- 
tamorphosis, 349. ;  wanting  in  Permian  strata, 
311.  ;  Sweden  and  Norway,  318.  ;  Russia, 
324.;  Bohemia,  342.;  Thuringia  and  Saxony, 
351.;  Rhenish  Provinces,  368.  382.;  France, 
386.;  Spain,  397.;  Portugal,  404.;  America, 
408.  et  seq. 

Tuffnell,  H.,  Right  Hon.,  Old  Red  fossil  plants, 
255. 

Turritella,  (see  Holopella),  192. 

Turkey,  in  Europe,  general  sketch  of  its  older 
rocks,  336. 

Valdai  Hills,  ravine  of  the  Belaia,  328. 

Valenciennes,  coal  field  of,  391. 

Valentia,  island,  167- 

Vallongo  (Portugal),  coal  field,  402. 

Valorsine,  palaeozoic  rocks,  407. 

Vegetation,  oldest  traces  of,  139.  267.  ;  ideal 
view  of  that  of  the  coal  period,  268.  ;  De- 
vonian, 358. ;  and  fishes  contemporaneous, 
461. ;  palEeozoic  uniformity  of,  477. 

Veinstones  of  gold,  449. ;  of  silver,  457. 

Verneuil,  Ed.  de,  contribution  to  this  work.  Pre- 
face  ;  Russia  and  the  Ural  Alountains,  5.  7. ; 
on  Permian,  291.  322.;  palccozoic  rocks  of 
America,  374.  417.  et  seq.;  on  Silurian  rocks 
of  France  and  Spain,  384.  393.  et  seq. 

Vertebrated  animals,  not  called  into  existence  in 
the  greater  portion  of  the  Silurian  jjeriod,  205. 
239.  460. 

Vichy,  carboniferous  rocks  near,  269. 

Victoria,  (Australia),  gold  fields  of  with  tin, 
453. 

Virgularia,  allied  to  graptolites,  46. 
Unger,  Professor,  on  Upper  Devonian  plants, 
358. 

Ungulite  schists  (Russia),  324. 

United  States,  rocks,  18.;  Devonian  rocks  of, 
417.;  gold  in  Silurian  rocks,  458.;  Silurian 
rocks  and  geological  succession  in,  15.  415. 
etseq.;  Devonian  rocks  of,  416.;  works  on 
the  geology  of,  412. 

Univalve  shells.  Upper  Silurian,  229.;  Lower 
Silurian,  195. 

Volborth,  on  Echino-encrinites,  181. 

Volcanic  grits,  45.  57.;  and  Llandeilo  flags, 
woodcuts,  57.;  submarine  dejections  during 
Caradoc  period,  85. 

Volcano,  submarine,  of  Lower  Silurian,  56. 

Volga  river,  Permian  rocks,  269.  293.;  carbo- 
niferous limestone,  333. 

Voltzia,  a  Pennian  plant,  299. 

Vosges,  mountains,  Permian  beds  of,  393. 

Ural  mountains,  Silurian  rocks  of,  10.;  Permian 


INDEX. 


523 


deposits  on  West  flank  of,  294,  295.;  section 
of  the  West  flank  of,  296. ;  carboniferous  lime- 
stone on,  333.;  gold  of,  437.  et  seq.;  meta- 
morphosed Silurian  and  Devonian,  view  from, 
437,  438.;  Lake  of  Aushkul,  441.;  when  it 
became  chiefly  auriferous,  447.;  parallel  be- 
tween and  the  Australian  mountains,  452. 

Uraster  obtusus,  Lower  Silurian  star  fish,  182. 

Usk,  Lower  Ludlow,  rocks  of,  128.;  Aymestry, 
rocks  of,  133.;  Upper  Ludlow  of,  140.;  Wen- 
lock  limestone  of,  115.;  Old  Red  Sandstone 
near,  244. 

Utah,  Great  Salt  Lake  of,  18. 

Utica  Slates,  Silurian  rock  of  America,  415. 

Waiwara,  (Gulf  of  Bothnia),  cliffs,  324. 

Waldenberg,  Silesia,  Devonian  and  carboniferous 
of,  338. 

Wales,  lowest  rocks  of,  void  of  fossils,  see  N. 
and  S.  Wales,  31.;  crystalline  rocks  of,  34.; 
thickness  of  Silurian  strata  in,  174. 

Walkers  earth,  producing  landslips,  127.  131. 
Waterford,  Lower  Silurian,  165, 166. 

Water  break  its  neck,  Ludlow  rock,  125. 

Wathen,  Mr.,  memoir  by,  453. 

Wealden,  secondary  freshwater  group,  467. 

Weaver,  T.,  on  geology  of  Ireland,  164,  167. 

Wellfield,  Builth,  section  near,  91. 

Welsh  Pool,  59.;  prismatic  dyke  at,  60. 

Wenlock  Edge,  views  of,  26.  113.;  (Lower) 
Woolhope  limestone  at  Gorton,  near  Presteign, 
103.;  lower  limestone  shale,  102,  103,  111.  ,• 
fossils  of,  1 11.;  limestone,  114.;  thickness  of! 
118.;  corals  of,  119—123. 

Westgarth,  Mr.,  on  Victoria,  Australia,  453. 

Westmoreland,  Silurian  rocks,  145. 

Westphalia,  Devonian  rocks  at,  372. 

Wexford,  Lower  Silurians  of,  166. 

Whewell,  Rev.  Dr.  W.,  sketch  by,  117. 

White  Sea  (Russian),  Devonian  strata  of,  329 

Whiteway  Head,  section  across,  126.;  sketch 
of  escarpment,  1 30. 

Wicklow,  LowerSilurian,  165.;  mountains,  1 68. ; 
Earl  of,  his  nuggets  of  Irish  gold,  435.;  gold 
in  Lower  Silurian  schists,  435. 

Wigmore,  valley  of,  denudation  of,  12. 

Wigton,  Silurian  of,  149.  157. 

Williams,  Rev.  Stewart,  74. 

Wilson,  Mr.  S.  S.,  Californian  gold  rocks,  458. 

Windermere,  Upper  Silurian,  148. 


Winstanston  (Salop),  84. 
Wissenbach,  slates  of,  368. 
Witham  ,  H.,  on  fossil  vegetables,  278. 
Wolverhampton,  270. 

Woodwardian  Museum,  Cambridge,  177.  181. 

Woolhope  limestone,  96,  97.;  position  of,  102.; 
limestone  altered,  103.;  section  across  the 
valley  of,  and  descriptions,  106,  118.  142.; 
Lower  Wenlock  limestone  described,  107.; 
fossils  in  limestone  of,  107,tl08.;  in  Radnor- 
shire, 108.;  Malvern  and  May  Hill,  109.; 
Lower  Lickey  Hill,  Worcester,  110.;  Ludlow 
Rocks,  128.  132.;  fish  bed  of  Upper  Ludlow, 
142.  ' 

Worcester  Beacon  (Malvern),  view,  92. ;  igneous 
rocks,  95. 

Wormes  (island  in  Baltic)^  Upper  Silurian,  327. 

Wrae  Hill,  Scotland,  fossils  of,  149.;  parallel  of 
Llandeilo  limestone,  153. 

Wrekin,  the,  felspathic  trap  rocks,  83.  85. 

Wren's  Nest,  Dudley,  south  end  view  and  sec- 
tion, 117. 

Wye  (river),  igneous  rocks  near  Builth,  61.; 
Lower  Silurian  sandstone  on,  70.;  Upper 
Ludlow  rocks,  140.;  Old  Red  conglomerate  in 
gorges  of,  244. 

Wyld,  W.,  memoir  and  map  on  gold,  453, 

Wynn,  Sir  Watkin,  his  monument,  79. 

Xiphosura,  crustacean  allied  to  Pterygotus,  237. 

Yat  Hill,  Radnor,  altered  rock  of,  104. 

Yorkshire,  Silurian  rocks,    145.;   coal  fields, 

270.  ;  development  of  carboniferous  limestone' 

271.  273.;  Permian  rocks,  303. 

Zarevo  Alexandrofsk,  (gold  diggings,  Ural),  444. 

Zechstein,  limestone  in  Permian  rocks  of'  Ger- 
many, 291.  300.  ;  equivalent  of  magnesian 
limestone  of  England,  303.  ;  wanting  in 
France,  393. ;  the  centre  of  Permian  life,°465. 

Zoantharia,  corals,  209. 

Zone,  lowest  containing  animal  life  in  Great 
Britain,  35.  ;  Primordiale,  Barrande  (Bohe- 
mia), equivalent  of  Lingula  Flags,  342.;  in 
Sweden,  321.;  in  America,  413.  422.  425. 
et  seq. 

Zoophyte  oldest,  Oldhamia  antiqua,  in  bottom 

rocks  of  Ireland,  32. 
Zoophytes,  Lower  Silurian,  woodcuts,  32.  177, 

178.;  Upper  Silurian,  209.;  the  first  created' 

animals,  459. 


THE  END. 


London: 


A.  and  G.  A.  SpottiswoodE, 
New- street- Square. 


I 

I 


ANNKI.IDA  &  CRHSTACEA. 


Pl.l, 


PLATE  I. 


(The  figures  in  this  and  the  following  plates  are  all  transferred  from  the 
original  engravings  m  the  "Silurian  System."  In  every  case  where  the  old 
names  have  been  changed  in  accordance  with  the  modern  nomenclature,  the 
name  used  m  the  original  work  is  inserted  m  brackets,  for  the  purpose  of 
reference.) 

LOWER  SILURIAN  CRUSTACEA. 

Fig.  1.  TENTACULITES  ANNULATUS,  Schlotheim.  a,  portion  magnified. 
Acton  Scott,  Shropshire. 

2.   ,  the  same.   Interior  casts  in  sandstone. 

(T.  scalaris.) 

3.  ASAPHUS    TYRANNUS,  Murch.    Tail   of  a  young  specimen. 

Llandeilo. 

4.  The  largest  specimen  known.    Same  locality.    The  original  of 

this  figure  is  in  the  British  Museum.  It  is  a  mould  in  sand- 
stone of  the  exterior  ornamented  surface. 


a 


PLATE  11. 


LOWER  SILUHIAN  CRUSTACEA. 

Fig.   1.   ASAPHUS  TYRANNUS,  Murch.   Tail,  and  two  thorax  segments, 
of  a  moderate-sized  inc^vidual.  Llandeilo,  Caernaarthenshirc. 

2.   ASAPHUS  POWISII,  Murch.    Body  and  tail  of  full-sized  speci- 
men. Welshpool, 

3,4.   HOMALONOTUS  (Asaphus)  VULCANI,  Murch.    Cornden  Hill, 
Shropshire. 


L  ■© WEM    ^  H  IL TLJ m  I A  M . 


PLATE  HI. 


LOWER  SILURIAN  CRUSTACEA. 

Pig.  1.   OGYGIA  (Asaphus)  BUGHII,  Brongniart.   Builth,  Radnorshire, 

2.  Hypostome,  or  upper  lip  of  ditto,  fixed  to  the  underside  of  the 

head.  Llandeilo. 

3.  A  very  young  specimen.   Builth.   (Trinucleus  Asaphoides.) 

4.  OGYGIA  (Asaphus)  CORNDENSIS,  Murch.    From  near  the  flanks 

of  the  Cornden  Hill,  Shropshire.  The  figure  (4)  is  omitted,  it 
apphes  to  the  right  hand  specimen,  at  the  top  of  the  plate. 

5,6.   ENCRINURUS    (Calymene?)    PUNCTATUS,    Briinmch.  Upper 
Caradoc  sandstone,  Bogmine,  Shropshire. 

7.  CALYMENE  (Asaphus)  DUPLICATA,  Murch.   Wilmington,  Salop. 

8.  AGNOSTUS  McCOYII,  Salter.   (A.  pisiformis.)    Builth,  Radnor- 

shire.   Natural  size,  and  the  head  magnified. 


a  2 


PLATE  lY. 
LOWER  SILURIAN  CRUSTACEA. 

Fig.   1.   STYQINA  (Ogygia)  MURCHISON^,  Mvircb.    Mount  Pleasant, 
Caermartheu. 

2.  4,  5.   TRINUCLEUS  CONCENTRICUS,  Eaton.   (T.  Caractaci.) 

Welahpool. 

3.  Portion  of  fringe,  highly  magnified. 

6.  TRIN.  LLOYDII,  Murch.   Llangadock,  Caermarthenshire. 

7.  TRIN.  FIMBRIATUS,  Murch.  Builth. 

8.  TRIN.  RADIATU3,  Murch.  Welshpool. 

9,  10.   AMPYX  (Trinucleus)  NUDUS,  Murch.   Builth,  Radnorshire. 

11,  12.   PHACOPS    CONOPHTHALMUS,   Bosck.     (Head    of  Asaphus 
Powisii,  Sil.  Syst.)   Horderley,  and  Acton  Scott,  Shropshire. 

13,  14.   ILL^NUS  PEROVALIS,  Murch.   N.  E.  end  of  the  Corndcn  IIill, 
Shropshire. 


CRUSIACEA  PI.  1'. 


PLATE  VI. 


LOWER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPODA. 

.     1,  2.   ORTHIS  TESTUDINARIA,  Dalman.   Horderley  ;  Meifod, 

3, 4.   ORTHIS  (Terebratula)  UNGUIS,  Sow.   Horderley  and  Cheney 
Longville,  Shropshire. 

5.  O.  ELEGANTULA  (canahs),  Dalman.   Meifod  ;  Bala. 

6.  O.  (Spirifer)  ALATA,  Sow.   Mount  Pleasant,  Carmarthen. 

7, 8,  9.  ORTHIS  CALLIGRAMMA,  Dalm.  (Spirifer  phcatns,  Orthis 
callactis,  O.  virgata.)  LlandoTery ;  Horderley  ;  Bala.  Fig.  8.  is 
from  Upper  Caradoc  beds,  Shropshire. 

10.  O.  RADIANS,  Sow.   Near  Builth. 

11.  O.  ACTONI^,  Sow.   Acton  Scott,  Shropshire  ;  Bala. 

12.  O.  PLABELLULUM,  Sow.   Hopesay,  Shropshire  ;  Bala. 

13,  14.   LEPT^NA  SERICEA,  Sow.   Bala  ;  Whittingslow  and  Horderley, 
Slirop shire ;  Meifod;  Llandovery. 

15.   L.  TRANSVERSALIS  (duplicata),  Dalm.      Robeston  Wathen, 
Pembrokeshire. 


HHACHXOPOJJ.4 


PI.  6. 


JD  C  uov^erhf 


PI  .  7. 


PLATE  YIL 


LOWER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPODA. 

Fig.  1.   STROPHOMENA  EXPANSA,  Sow.     (Orthis  expansa,  and  O. 
Pecten.)  Meifod. 

2.  STROPH.  COMPRESSA,  Sow.   Upper  Caradoc,  Hope  Quarry 

Shropshire. 

3.  S.  (Leptaena)  TENUISTRIATA,  Sow.   Gmlsfield,  Welshpool. 

4.  ORTHIS   ALTERNATA,  Sow..  Cheney  Longville,  Shropshire; 

Bala. 

5.  STROPHOMENA     (Leptsena)    COMPLANATA,    Sow.  Acton 

B-urnell,  Shropshire. 

6,  7.   S.  (Orthis)  GRANDIS.    Soudley  and  Acton  Scott,  Shropshire; 
Bala. 


a  4 


PLATE  VIIL 


LOWER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPODA. 

1,  2,  3.  PENTAMERUS  OBLONGUS,  Sow.   Uppermost  Caradoc,  Shrop- 
shire ;  Llandeilo  flags,  Llandovery,  &c.,  in  S.  Wales. 

4.   Broader  variety  of  the  same  (P.  leevis).  The  Hollies,  Shropshire  ; 
in  Upper  Caradoc. 

5,  6, 7.   PENTAMERUS  (Atrypa)  UNDATUS,  Sow.   Llandovery ;  and 
Pembrokeshire. 

8.   P.  (Atrypa)  GLOBOSUS,  Sow.   Gorllwyn  fach,  Llandoveiy. 

9,10.   P.  (Atrypa)  LENS,  Sow.     Llandovery;  in  Llandeilo  flags. 
Lickey  Quartz,  Bromsgrove  (Upper  Caradoc). 

11.   Portion  of  ditto  (Spirifer  J  laevis).   Upper  Caradoc,  May  Hill. 


LO-TEM    SIILTLJISil  AH. 

BRACHIOPODA 


n.8. 


J.D  CSowwiy. 


PLATE  IX. 

LOWER  SILURIAN  BIVALVE  AND  UNIVALVE 
SHELLS. 

Fig.     1.   MODIOLOPSIS  or  MODIOLA  (Avicula)  ORBICULARIS,  Sow. 
Horderley,  Shropshire. 

2.  MODIOLOPSIS?  (Avicula)  OBLI QUA,  Sow.  Soudley,  Shropshire. 

3.  NUCULA  LiEVIS,  Sow,   Pensarn,  near  Caermarthen. 

4.  NUCULA?  (Area)  EASTNORI,  Sow.   Upper  Caradoc,  Malverns. 

5, 6.  NUCULA?   SUBiEQUALIS    (Area   Eastnon),    McCoy.  Same 
locality. 

7.  PLEUROTOMARIA  ANGULATA,  Sow.   Mandinam,  Llandovery. 

8,  TURBO  ?  PRYCE^,  Sow.   Llandovery.   Same  locality. 


PLATE  X. 


LOWER  SILURIAN  UNIVALVES. 

Fig.     1.   HOLOPEA  (Littorina)  STRIATELLA,  Sow.  Horderley. 

2.  SCALITES  (Trochns)  LENTICULARIS,  Sow.   Old  Storridge  Hill., 

Worcester ;  Upper  Caradoc. 

3.  MACROCHEILUS    (Buccin-um?)     FUSIFORME,    Sow.  Upper 

Caradoc,  Nash  Scar,  Presteign. 

4    HOLOPELLA  (Torritella)  CANCELLATA,  Sow.  Llandovery. 

5.  BELLEROPHON    PERTURB ATUS,  Sow.     (Euomphalus  tenui- 

striatiis.)   Middleton,  Cornden  Hills. 

6.  EUOMPHALUS  CORNDENSIS,  Sow.   Leigh  Hall,  Cornden.  (a, 

magnified.) 

7.    BELLEROPHON  ACUTUS,  Sow.  Horderley. 
8,  9-.  BILOBATUS,  Sow.  Horderley. 


10.    (Euomphams)  PERTURBATUS,    Sow.  Pensarn, 

Caermarthen,  in  Llandeilo  flags.    (See  also  fig.  5.) 


J^D  C.  Smreriy 


I,  ©  W  M  M     'S  t  JL  "iiJ  IE  i  A  , 

CP  PllAl.OPODA 


PI  11 


PLATE  XL 


LOWER  SILURIAN  CEPHALOPODA. 

1.  LITUITES  CORNU-ARIETIS,  Sow.  Var.  «,  placed  here  for 
comparison,  is  from  the  very  base  of  the  Upper  Silurian  at 
Gorton,  Presteign  ;  but  it  is  also  found  in  the  Upper  Caradoc 
of  Bogmine,  Shropshire,  and  at  Bala  in  Llandeilo  flags. 

3.  :  Var.  /3,  Cefn-y-Garreg, 

Llandovery ;  in  Llandeilo  flags. 

3.  LITUITES  (Nautilus)  UNDOSUS,  Sow.     Blaen-y-cwm,  Llan- 

dovery. 

4.  CyRTOCERAS  (Orthoceras)  APPROXIMATUM,  Sow.  Eastnor 

Park,  in  Upper  Caradoc. 


5.    DIPLOCERAS  (Orthoc.)  BISIPPIONATUM,  Sow.    Gorllwyn  fach, 
Llandovery. 


PLATE  XII. 


GRAPTOLITES  AND  "  INCERT^  SEDIS,"  LOWER 
SILURIAN. 

rig.     1.   DIDYMOGRAPSUS  (Graptolithus)  MUKCHISON^,  Bceck.  Llan- 
drindod  HiUa,  Radnorshire. 

2.  DIPLOGRAPSUS  (Grapt.)  FOLIACEUS,  Murch.   Meadow  Town, 

near  Shelve,  Shropshire.  Accompanied  by  the  small  ORBI- 
CULA  PORTLOCKI,  Geinitz. 

3.  GLYPTOCRINUS  sp.  Upper  Caradoc,  Nash  Scar,  Presteign. 

The  disjointed  stems  of  this  genua  are  very  common,  both  in 
the  sandy  portions  of  the  Llandeilo  flags,  and  m  the  Caradoc 
sandstone.   The  central  canal  is  always  very  large. 

UPPER  SILURIAN. 

4.  GRAPTOLITHUS  PRIODON  (Ludensis),  Bronn.   4a,  magmfied. 

Llanfair,  Welshpool. 

5.  SPONGARIUM    INTERRUPTUM   Milne  Edw.  (a  Calciphyte). 

Upper  Ludlow  Rock,  Birchen  Common,  Aymestry. 

6.  ISCHADITES  KONIGII,  Murch.   Probably  a  Cystidean.  Lower 

Ludlow  Rock,  Ludlow. 


PLATE  XIII. 
UPPEK  SILURIAN  CRINOIDEA. 

Fig.     1.   PERIECHOCRINUS    (Actmocrinus)    MONILIFORMIS,  Miller. 
Dudley. 

2.  Stem  and  pelvis  of  ditto. 

3.  Pelvis  of  CROTALOCRINUS  (Cyathocrinus)  RUGOSUS,  Miller. 

Dudley. 

4.  DIMER0CRINU3  ICOSIDACTYLUS,  Phill.  Diidley. 

5.  D.  DECADACTYLUS,  Phill.  Dudley. 


PLATE  XIY. 
UPPER  SILURIAN  CRINOIDEA. 

Fig.     1.   MARSUPIOCRINUS  CGELATUS,  Phill.  Dudley. 

3.   EUCALYPTOCRINUS  (Hypanthocrinus)  DEOORUS,  Phill.  Dud- 
ley.  2a,  outlines  of  the  pelvic  plates. 

3.  ICTHYOCRINUS  ?    (Actmocrinus)    GONIODACTYLUS,  Phill. 

Dudley. 

4.  CYATHOCRINUS  TESSERACONTADACTYLUS  (Actinocrinites 

simplex),  Hisinger  ?  Dudley. 

5,  6.    CYATH.  TUBERCULATUS,  Miller.  Dudley. 

7.   ICTHYOCRINUS  ?  (Actmocrmus)  ARTHRITICUS,  Phill.  Dudley. 
7^.,  a  few  joints  with  tentacles,  magnified. 

5.  ICTH.   (Cyathocrinus)  PYRIFORMIS,  Miller.  Dudley. 
9.   ACTINOCRINUS  RETIARIUS,  Phill.  Dudley. 


PI  14^. 


PI  15 


PLATE  XV. 


UPPER  SILURIAN  CRINOIDEA. 


Fig.  1,  2.   GLYPTOCRINUS  (Actinocrinus)  EXPANSUS,  PhiU,  Dudley. 

3.  ICTHYOCRINUS?  (Actinocrinus)  CAPILLARIS,  PhiU.    Pig.  3a, 

a  magnified  portion  of  the  finger,   Wenlock  and  Dudley. 

4.  Irregular  inverted  pyramid,  formed  in  the  mudstone  of  the 

Upper  Ludlow  Rock,  by  the  rotary  motion  of  Encrinite 
stems  (one  is  seen  at  the  extreme  left  hand  of  the  fossil)  m 
the  soft  micaceous  matrix :  see  p.  137.  (Cophinus  dubius,  Sil. 
Syst.)  Upper  Ludlow  Rock,  Ludlow. 


PLATE  XVI. 


UPPER  SILURIAN  ANNELIDA; 


Fig.     1.   SERPULITES  LONGISSIMUS,  Murch.  Ludlow. 

2.  SPIRORBIS  LEWISII,  Sow.  Natural  size,  on  the  inner  surface  of 
a  Lituites,  and  2a  magnified.  Wenlock  Limest.  Ledbury, 
Common  in  Upper  Ludlow  Rock. 

3  to  9.    CORNULITES  SERPULARIUS,  Schloth. 

3  to  7-  Are  of  the  nat\iral  size,  and  show  the  tubes  attached  in  twos  or 
threes  to  shells,  &c.  Fig.  8.  is  a  longitudinal  section  of  a  full 
grown  tube,  and  shows  the  cellular  structure  at  the  successive 
varices  of  growth. 

3a,  and  9.  Are  magnified  portions  of  young  tubes,  shewing  the  cuter 
striated  coat  covering  the  cellular  layers.  These  layers  are 
better  seen  in  fig.  10.  as  well  as  the  pits  left  by  them  on  the 
edges  of  the  internal  cast ;  also  the  impressed  longitudinal 
lines  running  down  the  inner  surface.  Malverns. 

11.  TENTACULITES  ORNATUS,  Sow.    Natural  size,  magnified,  and  a 
section.  Dudley. 


12.   T.  TENUIS,  Sow.  Natural  size,  and  magnified.  Usk,  Monmouth 
shire,  in  Upper  Ludlow  Rock. 


PI  16 


I 


CRUSTACEA. 


P1.17 


PLATE  XVTI. 


UPPER  SILURIAN  TRILOBITES. 

^■ig.  1.    CALYMENE  BLUMENBACHII,  Brongn.   W.  L .»  Dudley. 

2.   PHACOPS  (Asaphus)  CAUDATUS,  Brongn.   W.  L.  Dudley. 

t3  to  6.  P.  LONGICAUDATUS,  Murch.  W.  Sh.  Wistanstow  and  Burrmgton. 
Shropshire. 

7.  PROETUS  (Asaphus)  STOKESII,  Murch.   W.  L.  Dudley. 

8.  PROETUS— sp.   Wenlock  Limestone,  Ledbuiy,  Malverns. 

9  to  11.  ILLCENUS  (Section-Bumastus)  BARRIENSIS,  Murch.  10.  Side  View 
of  the  Head  and  Eye.  Woolhope  Limest.,  Barr,  Staffordshire ; 
Malverns,  &c. 

*  In  this  and  the  succeeding  pages,  U.  L.  stands  for  Upper  Ludlow  ; 
A.  L.,  Aymestry  Limestone  ;  L.  L.,  Lower  Ludlow  ;  W.  L  Wenlock 
Lunestone  ;  W.  Sh.,  Wenlock  Shale. 

t  Figs.  3  to  5  are  omitted  -  they  are  at  the  left  hand  upper  corner. 


b 


PLATE  XVIIL 


UPPER  SILURIAN  CRUSTACEA. 

F)g.  1.    PHACOPS  (Asaphus)  CAUDATUS,  Brongn.   W.  L.  Dudley. 

2,  5.   PHAC.  (Calymene)  DOWNINGI^,  Mmxli.   W.  L.  Dudley. 

3,  4.   Tails  of  young  Specimens,  (Asaphus  Cawdori,  and  A.  subcaudatu.s, 

Sil.  Syst.)  From  Ludlow  Rocks,  Pembrokeshire. 

6.    PHACOPS   STOKESII,   Milne   Edw.     (Calymene  macrophthalma.) 
W.  L.   Dudley  and  Wallsall. 

7.8.   ACIDASPIS  BRIGHTII,  Murch.    (8.  Paradoxides  quadiuiuucrouatus. 
W.  L.  Dudley. 

9.   ENCRINURUS  (Calymene)  VARIOLARIS,  Brongn.   W.  L.  Dudley. 

10.  CALYMENE  BLUMENBACHII,  Brongn.   W.  L.  Dudley. 

11,  C.    TUBERCULOSA,    Salter.     (C.    Blumenbachu  var.,    Sil.  Syst.^ 

W.  Sh.   Burrington,  Shropshire. 


I 


I 


PLATE  XIX. 


UPPER  Silurian:  TRiLOBiTEs,  and  other 

CRUSTACEA. 


igs.  1,  2.    LEPTOCHELES     (Onchus)    MURCHISONI,  McCoy.— spines  of  tnu 
Tail.  'Uppermost  Ludlow  Rock,  near  Ludlow. 

3.   LEPTOCHELES— sp.  frag-ment  of  tail  spina.   Same  locality. 

4,5.    PTERYGOTUS  PROBLEMATICUS,  Agass.    Portions  of  the  Carapace, 
nat.  size,  and  magnified.   Ludford,  in  the  '  Bone  Bed.' 

6.    Portion  of  the  Base  of  one  of  the  jaw-feet.    Same  locality. 

7  to  9.  UOMALONOTUS  KNIGHTIT,  (including  H.  Ludensis,  S.  Syst.)  Upper 
Ludlow  Rock,  Ludlow. 

LU,  11.  CHEIRURUS  (Paradoxides)  BIMUCRONATUS,  Murch.  10,  the  Bo  ay 
Segments  ;  and  11,  the  tail :  the  former  is  placed  in.  an  inverted 
position,  the  anterior  end  downwards.  (It  was  so  engraved  m 
the  original  work.)    Wenlock  Limestone,  Malverns. 


PLATE  XX. 


UPPER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPODA. 

1,  2.  ORBICULA  RUGATA,  Sow.    U.  L.,  Ludlow. 

3.  — —  STRIATA,  Sow.    U .  L.,  Delbury,  Shropshire.  ' 

4.  CRANIA  (Patella)  IMPLICATA,  Sow.    W.  L.,  Abberley. 

5.  LINGULA  LEWISII,  Sow.     A.  L.,  Mary  Knoh,  Ludlow. 

6.  L.  LATA,  Sow.    L.  L.,  Elton. 

7.  L.  ?  STRIATA,  Sow.     L.  L.,  near  Aymestry. 

8.  CHONETES  (Leptsena)  LATA.  Von  Buch.    U.  L.,  Ludlow. 

9.  ORTHIS  ELEGANTULA,  var.  ORBICULARIS.   (0.  orbicularis,  Sow.) 

Exterior  and  internal  cast.   U.  L.,  Ludlow. 

10.  ORTHIS   CALLIGRAMMA,  Dalm.    Var.   RUSTICA.  (O.  rustica,  S. 

Syst.)  W.  L.   Valley  of  Woolhope. 

11.  O.  LUNATA,  Sow.    Exterior  and  internal  casts  of  both  valves. 

U.  L.,  Ludlow. 

n.  O.  ELEGANTULA  (canahs),  Dalm.   W.  L.,  Dormington,  Woolhope. 

13.  O.  HYBRIDA,  Sow.    W.  L.,  Wallsall. 

14.  O.  BILOBA,  (smuata),  Lmn.    W.  L.,  Wallsall. 

15.  LEPTyENA  L.^VIGATA,  Sow.    W.  Sh.,  Bui-rington. 

16.  L.  MINIMA,  Sow.    Natural  size  and  magnified.    W,  Sh.,  Burrington. 

17.  L.  TRANSVERSALIS,  Dalm.    W.  Sh.,  Buildwas. 

18.  STROPHOMENA  (Leptsena)  ANTIQUATA,  Sow.    W.  Sh.,  Woolhope. 

19.  S.  (Leptcena)  EUGLYPHA.  Dalm.    W.  L.,  Dudley. 
-20.  S.  (LcpbtJini  DEPRESSA,  Sow.    W.  L.,  Dudley. 


► 


r 


r-1.21 

B  K  A  C  H  I     I'  {  )  D  A  . 


PLATE  XXI. 


UPPER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPOD A . 

Fig.    1.    SPIRIFER    PLICATELLUS,   Lmn.  var.  INTERLINEATUS, 
iin-erliiieatiis) .   A.  L.,  Aymestry. 

2.  SPIRIFER  PLICATELLUS  (radiatus),  Lirm.  W.  L.  Malverns. 

3.  S.  TRAPEZOIDALIS,  Dalm.   U.  L.,  Usk. 

4.  S.  CRISPUS,  Linn.    W.  L.,  Dudley. 

5,  6.    S.  ELEVATUS,  Dalm.  (octoplicatus).  W.  L.,  Abberlcy. 

7.   S.  ?  PISUM,  Sow.  W.  L  ,  Wallsall. 

S,  9.    PENTAMERUS   (Atrypa)  GALEATUS,  Dalm.    W.  L.,  Wenlock 
Edge;  Dudley;  Pembrokeshire. 

10.  P.  KNIGHTII,  Sow.   A.  L.  Downton  on  the  Rock ;  Sedgley. 

11.   var.  AYLESFORDII.  Same  localities. 

12,  13.    ATRYPA  RETICULARIS  (affinis),  Lmn.    A.  L.,W.L.,  Shropshne  ; 
May  Hill ;  Dudley,  &c.    Woolhopc  L.  Woolhopc. 


PLATE  XXII. 


UPPER  SILURIAN  BRACHIOPODA. 


] ,  2.   RHYNCHONELLA  NUCULA,  8ow.  (TerebretvQa  lacuuosa  &  T. 
nucula.)   U.  L.  Radnorshire  ;  Shropshire. 

3.  R.  (Terebrat )  PENTAGONA,  Sow.   U.  L.,  Delbmy,  Shropshire. 

4.  R.  BOREALIS,  Schloth.  (Terebrat.  lacunosa.)   W.  L.,  Wenlock 

Edge. 

5.  var.  DIODONTA  (Ter.  bidentata.)   W.  L.,  Dudley. 

6.  R.  (Ter.)  CRISPATA,  Sow.   Woolhope  hmestone,  Nash  Scar. 

7.  R.  (Ter.)  CREBRIC03TA,  Sow.   W.  S.,  Tynewjdd,  Llandovery. 

8.  ATRYPA  (Ter.)  CUNEATA,  Dalm.   W.  L.,  Dudley. 

9.  RHYNCHONELLA  (Ter.)  SPHCERICA,  Sow.   W.  S.,  Wallsall. 

10.  R.  DEFLEXA,  Sow.    (Terebr.  de^exa,  &  T.  mterphcata).   W.  L., 

Wenlock  Edge  ;  W.  S.,  Wallsall. 

11.  R.  (Ter.)  STRICKLANDI,  Sow.    W.  L.,  Longhope.  W.  S.,  Usk. 

12.  R.  (Ter.)  NAVICULA,  Sow.   A.  L.,  Ludlow  ;  Usk.   W.  S.,Builth. 

13.  R.  (Ter.)  WILSONI,  Sow.   A.  L.,  Aymestry. 

14.  TEREBRATULAI  L^VIUSCULA,  Sow.    W.  S.,  Tynewydd,  Llan- 

dovery. 

15.  RHYNCHONELLA  DIDYMA,  Sow.    (Ter.  didyma  &  T.  canalis)' 

U.  L.,  A.  L.,  Usk,  Abberley. 

16.  R.  (Atrypa)  OBOVATA,  Sow.   L.  L.,  Malverns. 

17.  R.  (Atrypa)  DEPRESSA,  Sow.   W.  S.,  Stumps  Wood,  Malverns. 

18.  R.  (Atrypa)  ROTUNDA,  Sow.   W.  L.,  Wenlock  Edge. 

19.  ATRYPA  (Ter.)  MARGINALIS,  Dalm.  (mcluding  T.  imbricata, 

W.  L.).   Wenlock,  &c. 
120.   ATHYRIS  TUMIDA,  Dahn.  (ten\nstriata\   W.  L.,  Malverns. 

21.  PENTAMERUS  (Atrypa)  LINGUIFER,  Soav.'    W.  Sh..  Stumps 

Wood,  Malverns  ;  WaUsall,  &c. 

22.  RHYNCHONELLA'  (Atrypa)  COMPRESSA,  Sow.  Woolhope  Lime- 

stone, Woodside  &  Nash,  Prestiegn. 


I 


V  'I^l^^M-R         ]L  U  M  If  A 

iAMEia^IBKANCHIATA. 


PLATE  XXIII. 

UPPER  SILURIAN  LAMELLIBRANCHIATA . 


1.  MODIOLOPSIS  (Pullastra)  COMPLANATA,  Sow.    U.  L.,  Nca.- 

Bridgnorth. 

2.  GONIOPHORA   (Cypricardia)   CYMB^EFORMIS,  Sow.     U.  L., 

Ludlow. 

3.  ORTHONOTA  (Cypricardia)  IMPRESSA,  Sow.   U.  L.,  Dcibury. 

4.  O.  (Cypric.)  UNDATA,  Sow.   U.  L.,  near  Aymestry. 

5.  O.  (Mya)  ROTUND  ATA,  Sow.   A.  L.,  Caynliam  Camp,  Ludlow. 

6.  (Two  figures,)  O.  (Cypricardia)  AMYGDALINA,  Sow.    U.  L., 

Ludlow,  &c. 

7.  Variety  of  Ditto,  (Cypricardia  retusa.  Sow.)   U.  L.,  Delbury. 

8.  O.  (Psammobia)  RIGIDA,  Sow.   L.  L.,  Garden  House,  Aj-mestry. 

9.  O.  (Cypricardia?)  SOLENOIDES,  Sow.   L.  L.,  near  Ludlow. 

10.  NUCULA  ANGLICA  (ovalis;,  D'Orb.    U.  L.,   Trewerne  Hills, 

Radnorshire. 

11.  CARDIOLA  FIBROSA,  Sow.    L.  L.,  Mary  Knoll  Dingle,  Ludlow. 

12.  0.  INTERRUPTA,  Broderip.    L.  L.,  Aymestry ;  Radnorshu-e,  &c. 

13.  C.  (Cardium)  STRIATA,  Sow.    A.  L.,  Aymestry. 

14.  MODIOLA  ANTIQUA,  Sow.  W.  Sh..  Glass  House  Hill,  E.  of  May 

Hill,  Gloucestershire. 

15.  PTERINEA  SOWERBYI,  McCoy.     (Avicula  reticulata),  A.  L., 

Croft,  Aymestry. 

16.  P.  LINEATULA,  D'Orb.    (Avic.  Imeata),  U.  L.,  Ludlow. 

17.  P.  (Avic.)  RETROPLEXA.  Wahl.    U.  L.,  Malverns 


PLATE  XXIV. 

UPPER  SILURIAN  GASTEROPODA. 

Fig.   1.   TURBO  CORALLII,  Sow.    U.  L.,  Radnorshire. 

2.  MURCHISONIA    (Pleurotoma)    ARTICULATA,    Sow.     U.  L., 

Ludlow. 

3.  LOXONEMA  SINUOSA,  Sow.    L.  L.,  Ayraestry. 

4.  TURBO  OCTAVIUS  (carinatus),  D'Orb.   U.  L.,  Trewerne  Hills, 

Radnorshire. 

5.  MURCHISONIA  (Plenrotomariaj  LLOYDII,  Sow.   L.  L.,  Shelder- 

ton ;  Aymestry. 

6.  PLEUROTOMARIA  UNDATA,  Sow.   L.  L.,  near  Ludlow. 

7.  MURCHISONIA  (Pleurotoma)  CORALLII,  Sow.   U.  L.,  Bradnor 

Hill,  Kington. 

S.   ACROCULIA  PROTOTYPA,  PhiU.   (Nerita  spn-ata).  Woolhope 
Limestone,  Presteign. 

9.  ACROC.  (Nerita)  HALIOTIS,  Sow.   W.  L.,  Ledbury 

10.  TURBO  CIRRHOSUS,  Sow.   W.  S.,  Wenlock. 

11.  EUOMPHALUS  CARINATUS,  Sow.    A.  L.,  Aymestry. 
Yl.  E.  DISCORS,  Sow.   W.  L.,  Wenlock  Edge. 

13.    E.  RUGOSUS,  Sow,    Same  locahty. 


i 


PLATE  XXV.  . 

UPPER   SILURIAN    GASTEROPODA,  PTEROPODA, 
AND  HETEROPODA. 

1.  NATICA  PARVA,  Sow.   U.  L.,  Fownhope,  Herefordshire. 

2.  EUOMPHALUS  SCULPTUS,  Sow.   W.  L.,  Ledbury. 

3.  E.  FUNATUS,  Sow.   W.  L.,  Wenlock  Edge. 

4.  E.  ALATUS,  Sow.    W.  S. 

5,  6.  BELLEROPHON  DILATATUS,  Sow.   W.  L.,  Burrington,  Ludlow. 

7.  B.  WENLOCKENSIS,  Sow.    W.  L.,  Croft,  Malvern. 

8.  B.  EXPANSUS,  Sow.    U.  L.,  Ludlow. 

9.  CYRTOLITES  ?  (Cyrtoceras)  L^VIS.   L.  L.,  Abberley. 

10.    CONULARIA  SOWERBYI  (quadrisulcata),  Sow.    The  figure  (10) 
13  placed  too  near  fig.  6.   W.  L.,  Wenlock  Edge. 


C 


• 


PLATE  XXVI. 
UPPER  SILURIAN  CEPHALOPODA. 

1.  ORTIiOCERAS  ANNULATUM,  Sow.   W.  L.,  Hay  Head,  Wallsall. 

2.  var.  FIMBRIATUM.    (O.  fimbriatum,  Sow.)  W.S. 

Aston,  May  Hill  ;  Malvcriis,  &c. 

3.  0.  ATTENUATUM,  Sow,    W.  S.,  Onny  River,  Shropshii^e. 

4.  O.  DISTANS,  Sow.   L.  L.,  near  Aj-mestry. 

5.  O.  NUMMULARIUS,  Sow.   W.  L..  Whitfield  Quarry,  Tortworih. 


J.D.  O.SoM  erh^ 


Sa  d- t>  IVut  JrMif  ktA 


PLATE  XXVIl. 
UPPER  SILURIAN  CEPHALOPODA. 

Fig.  1.    ORTHOCERAS  FILOSUM,  Sow.    L.  L.,  Lcmtwardane. 

2.    O.    GEEGARIUM,  Sow.   L.  L.,  near  Ludlow. 

3.  4.    O.  EXCENTRICUM,  Sow.   Woolhope  Limest.,  Old  Radnorshire. 

5.   ORMOCERAS   (Orthoceras)  BRIGHTII,  Sow.  -  broken  open. 
W.  L.,  Malvcms. 

The  Siphuncle,  shghtly  ma^milc.]. 


PLATE  XXVIII. 

UPPER  SILURIAN  CEPHALOPODA. 

Fig.  1,  2.   ORTHOCERAS  LUDENSB,  Sow.   L.  L.,  Ludlow. 

3.  O.   CANALICULATUM,  Sow.   W.  S.,  Ledbury. 

4.  O.  ANGULATUM  (virgatum),  Hismger.  L.  L.,  Mocktree  Forest. 

5.  O.  DIMIDIATUM,  Sow.   L.  L.,  Water-break-its-neck,  Radno 

Forest. 


lUFFJg  IE  SIJLnmJiAW. 

CJ- P  H  .A  T.OPOl)  A. 


PL  28. 


f 


PLATE  XXIX. 
UPPER  SILURIAN  CEPHALOPODA. 

Fig.     1.   ORTHOCERAS  BULLATUM  (or  stnatiim),  Sow.   U.  L.,  Ludlow. 

2.    O.  MOCKTREENSE,  Sow.   A.  L.,  Mocktree  Hays,  Shropshire. 

3,  4.    O.  IBEX,  Sow.    (Including  O.  articulatum.)   Near  Ludlow- 

5,  6.    O.  PERELEGANS,  Salter.    (Lituites  Ibex,  and  L.  articulatus.; 
L.  L.,  Elton,  fig.  5  ;  Shelderton,  fig.  '/. 

7.    O.  IMBRICATUM,  Wahl.   L.  L.,  near  Ludlow. 


PLATE  XXX. 
UPPER  SILURIAN  CEP?IALOPODA. 

1,     3.   PHRAGMOCERAS  mhoceras  or  Gon^ptoceras,  PYEIFORME, 
Sow.   L.  L.,  Lemtwardine. 

4.    P.   INTERMEDIUM  (arcuatum/S),  McCoy.   L.  L.,  Shelderton. 


CEPHA  J  OI'OT>A 


?130 


I, 


} 


1 


lUFFEM    g  HILUIFil  AH, 

C£  PHA  I.  OPODA. 


PI  .  31. 


PLATE  XXXI. 

'      UPPER  SILURIAN  CEPHALOPODA. 

I^ig.l.a.    PHRAGMOCERAS  NAUTILEUM,  Sow.    W.  S.,  Myddelton 
Caermartlien. 

3.  P.    ARCUATUM,  Sow.    L.  L.,  near  Ledbury. 

4.  P.  C0MPRE3SUM,  Sow.   L.  L..  near  Aymestry. 

5.  LITUITES  BIDDULPHII,  Sow.    W.  L.,  Ledbury. 
5.  L.  IBEX,  Sow.    L.  L.,  near  Ludlow. 


PLATE  XXXII. 

UPPER  SILURIAN  CEPHALOPODA. 

PHRAGMOCERAS  VENTRICOSUM,  Steininger.    L.  L., 
war  dine. 


I 


PI.  33 


C£PHALOPOI)A. 


PLATE  XXXIII. 


UPPER  SILURIAN  CEPHALOPODA. 


Figs.  1,  2,  3.    LITUITES  GIGANTEUS,  Sow.    L.  L.,  Mocktree  Hays. 

4.   LITUITES  ?  TORTUOSUS,  Sow.  L.  L.  ?  Between  Welshpool  and 
Berriew,  Montgomeryshire. 


d 


PLATE  XXXIV. 


UPPER  LUDLOW  ROCK  (TILESTONE). 

g.    1.   ONCHUS  MURCHISONI,  Agassiz.  A  true  fish  defence.  Tm  Mill, 
Downton. 

2.  LINGULA  CORNEA,  Sow.   Same  locality.  ^ 

3.  CUCULLELLA  CAWDORI,  Sow.  m  Upper?  Ludlow  Rock,  Fresh- 

water East,  Pembrokeshire. 

4.  PTERINEA  (Avicula)  RECTANGULARIS,  Sow.    Horeb  Chapel, 

Llandovery. 

5.  ORTHOCERAS  SEMIPARTITUM,  Sow.  (perhaps  a  Diploceras). 

Same  locahty.  - 
6.    O.  TRACHEALE,  Sow.    Same  locahty. 
7.   MODIOLOPSIS  (Pullastra)  LtEVIS,  Sow.    Horeb  Chapel. 
S.    BELLEROPHON  CARINATUS,  Sow.    do.  . 
9.   B.  TRILOBATUS,  Sow.  Felmdre,  10  m.  W.  of  Kmghton. 

10.  HOLOPELLA  (TiirriteUa)  CONICA,  Sow.   Horeb  Chapel. 
10a.   H.  (Turritella)  GREGARIA,  Sow.   Horeb  Chapel. 

11.  H.  (Turritella)  OBSOLETA,  Sow.   Horeb  Chapel ;  Felindre. 
12,13.   TROCHUS?  HELICITES,  Sow.  do. 

14.  TURBO  WILLI AMSII,  Sow.  do. 

15.  GONIOPHORA  (Cypncardia)  CYMB^FORMIS,  Sow.  Fehndre. 

16.  CUCULLELLA  (Cucullaea)  ANTIQUA,  Sow.    Horeb  Chapel. 

17.  C.  (Cucullaea).OVATA,  Sow.  do. 

18.  CHONETES  (Leptaena)  LATA,  Von  Buch.  do. 

19.  BELLEROPHON  MURCHISONI,  D'Orbigny?  (B.  stnatus).  do. 

20.  B.  EXPANSUS,  Sow.  Yoimg.  (B.  globatus).  Felmdre. 

21.  BEYRICHIA  (Agnostus)  TUBERCULATA,  Kloden.   Lodge  Banl-;, 

Downton. 


I 


PLATE  XXXV. 

FOSSILS,  CHIEFLY  FISHES,  OF  THE  UPPER 
LUDLOW  BONE  BED. 

Pig.  1.    Skm  of  SriiAGODUS,  Agass.— la,  and  2,  magnified  portions. 
3— S.    PLECTRODUS  MIRABILIS,  Agass.    Jaws  and  teeth,  natural  size 
and  magnified. 

9-12.    P.  (SCLERODUS)  PU5TULIFERUS,  Ag. 

13.  14.    ONCHUS  MURCHISONI,  Ag. 

15—17.    O.  TENUISTRIATUS,  Ag. 

13.   Shagreen  scales,  probably  of  Onchus  tenuistriatus,  (Thclodus 
parvidens,  Ag.)   The  stratum  is  chiefly  made  up  of  these. 

19,  20.   Indeterminable  fragments,  of  bony  texture. 

23—28.  Coprohtes  (probabl3*  of  Plectrodus),  and  containmg—Orthocci  as 
semipartitum,  fig.  22  ;  Encrmitc  stems,  fig.  23,  24 ;  Lingula 
cornea,  fig.  25  ;  Holopella  conica,  fig.  26;  Orbicula  ruguta, 
fig.  27  ;  Bcllerophon  expansup,  fig  28.— all  shells  of  the  Upper 
Ludlow  Rock. 

29.  ORTHTS  IJJNATA,  Sow.   Frequent  m  this  bed. 

30.  Seeds  or  spores  of  oomc  Cryptogamic  land-plant,  (Pr.  HuoI.cj  ;. 
All  the  above  are  from  the  Bone  bed  at  Ludford,  Ludlow. 


(I  2 


PLATE  XXXVL 


FISHES  OF  THE  OLD  RED  SANDSTONE. 

Fig.  1,  2.   ASTEROLEPIS.   Interior  arid  exterior  view  of  a  bony  plate  from 
the  head.  Elgin. 

3.   Bony  armo-ar  of  the  head  of  ASTEROLEPIS,  from  the  same 
locahty.   Eig.  3*  (wrongly  numbered  2*),  a  portion  magnified. 

4,  5.    ONCHUS  SEMISTRIATUS,  Agass.  Tenbury. 

6.    CTENACANTHUS  ORNATUS,  Ag,   The  imddle   portion   of  a 
dorsal  spine.    Sapey,  west  of  Worcester. 

7,  8.    ONCHUS  ARCUATUS,  Ag.  Bromyard. 

9.   HOLOPTYCHIUS  NOBILISSIMUS,  Ag.    One-third  the  natural 
length.    Clashbinnie,  Perthshire. 

10.  Ventral  scales,  natural  size. 

11.  HOLOPTYCHIUS  GIGANTEUS,  Ag.    Same  locality. 

12.  Under  side  of  the  scales. 

13.  Tooth  of  HOLOPTYCITIUS,  Elgin. 

14.  Dorsal    plate    of   COCCOSTEUS    (called    Cephalaspis  in  the 

'  Sil.  Syst.'),  Herefordshire. 

15,  15.*  Serrated   fish   defence?   PTYCHACANTHUS  ?    DUBIUS,  Ag. 
nat.  size,  and  magnified.  Herefordshire. 


PLATE  XXXVII. 

FISHES  OF  THE  OLD  RED  SANDSTONE. 

Figs.  1  to  3.  CEPHAIASPIS  LYELLII,  Ag.  Forfarshire. 

4.  Side  view  of  the  head. 

5.  Exterior  plates  or  scales  of  the  head,  highly  magmtied. 

6.  Scales  from  the  sides  of  the  body,  magnified. 

7.  Scales  from  the  flank. 

8.  Scales  from  the  sides  of  the  tail. 

_  9.  CEPII.   LEWISII,  Agass.   Whitbatch,  Shropshire. 

•  10.  CEPH.  LLOYDII,  Agass.  Herefordshire. 

10*.   A  portion  of  the  surface,  and  the  texture  of  the  under  layer, 
magnified. 

11.    CEPH.  ROSTRATUS,  Ag.   Head  with  the  outer  surface  removed. 
Whitbatch,  Shr'opshire. 


;3 


Date  Due 


■  8 

1995 

■ 

Library  Bureau  Cat.  no.  1137 


0E661.M95  S 

cm 

3  5002  00232  4841 

Murchison,  Roderick  Impey 

Siluria.  The  history  of  the  oldest  known 

GEOLOGY  USRARX 


19290
