Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death, Vol. 2 (Frederic W. H. Myers, 1903)
==========================================================
The second volume of Myers' 1903 masterwork; phantasms, dreams, and the survival evidence. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/humanpersonality02myer).

HUMAN    PERSONALITY


HUMAN    PERSONALITY

AND  ITS  SURVIVAL  OF
BODILY  DEATH


BY


FREDERIC  W.  H.  MYERS


Cessas  in  vota  precesque,

Tros,  ait,  Aenea,  cessas7    Neque  enim  ante  dehiscent
Adtonitce  magna  ora  damns. —  VIRGIL.

"Nay."'  quoth  the  Sybil,   "  Trojan!  -wilt  thou  spare
The  impassioned  effort  and  the  conquering  prayer  ?
Nay .'  not  save  thus  those  doors  shall  open  roll, —
That  Power  within  them  burst  upon  the  soul"


IN   TWO   VOLUMES

VOL.  II


LONGMANS,   GREEN,   AND    CO.

39  PATERNOSTER  ROW,  LONDON

NEW  YORK  AND  BOMBAY

1903

All  rights  reserved


LONGMANS,  GREEN,  AND  CO.


All  rights  reserved.


First  Edition,  February,  1 903
Reprinted,  March,  1903


CONTENTS


PAGB

SYLLABUSES         .  vii


CHAP.

-  VII.  PHANTASMS   OF    THE   DEAD  i

VIII.  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  .             .             .81

.     IX.  TRANCE,  POSSESSION,  AND    ECSTASY  .             .             .189

X.  EPILOGUE                                                      .  .     278

APPENDICES    TO    CHAPTER  VII 315

APPENDICES    TO    CHAPTER    VIII    .  .     400

APPENDICES    TO    CHAPTER    IX                    .  .             .             .500

INDEX                                                                          o  .             .             .629


SYLLABUSES
CHAPTER  VII

PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD

700.  From  the  actions  and  perceptions  of  spirits  still  in  the  flesh,  and  con-
cerned with  one  another,  we  must  now  pass  on  to  inquiry  into  the  actions  of
spirits  no  longer  in  the  flesh,  and  into  the  forms  of  perception  with  which  men
still  in  the  flesh  respond  to  this  unfamiliar  agency.

701.  There  has  been  no  clear  consensus  of  opinion  as  to  the  kind  of  evi-
dence which  ought  to  be  demanded  if  human  survival  is  to  be  proved.     My
object  is  to  make  that  evidence  at  once  clear  in  itself  and  continuous  with
knowledge  already  acquired.

702.  Considering  in  the  first  place  the  vague  term  "ghost,"  we  cannot
accept  the  popular  notion  of  a  ghost  as  "  a  deceased  person  permitted  by  Pro-
vidence to  hold  communication  with  survivors."

703.  What  we  must  rather  look  for  is  a  "  manifestation  of  persistent  per-
sonal energy,"  continuing  after  the  shock  of  death.     Such  manifestations  are
not  specially  likely  to  correspond  with  the  romances  of  popular  fancy.

704.  We  ought  rather  to  look  for  possible  analogies  to  such  cases  as  we
already  know  where  communication  has  been  effected  between  widely  different
phases  of  personality — as  between  wakers  and  somnambulists,  &c.

705.  And  reviewing  both  our  experiments  in  automatism  and  our  spon-
taneous phenomena,  we  find  in  each  group  three  main  classes  of  messages —
namely,  sensory  hallucinations,  emotional  and  motor  impulses,  definite  intellec-
tual messages.

706.  The  same  three  classes  meet  us  again  in  our  analysis  of  apparently
post-mortem  communications  also.

707.  Yet,  though  with  these  analogies  in  our  favour,  we  need  a  somewhat
close  discussion  of  the  conditions  which  a  visual  or  auditory  phantasm  is  bound
to  fulfil  before  it  can  be  regarded  as  indicating  primd  facie  the  influence  of  a
discarnate  mind.     Such  a  discussion,  based  mainly  on  the  time-relation  between
the  death  and  the  apparition,  is  here  quoted  from  Edmund  Gurney.

708.  Further  inquiry  into  the  limits  of  possible  latency  in  the  percipient's
mind  of  an  impression  received  from  a  still  living  agent.

709.  Consideration  of  special  cases   in  which  a  hallucination  occurring
shortly  after  a  death  already  known  might  possess  evidential  validity.

710.  Cases  of  recurrence  of  a  phantasm,  first  about  the  time  of  death  (the
death  being  unknown  to  the  percipient),  and  then  decidedly  after  the  death  had
occurred.


viii  SYLLABUSES

711.  Cases  where  the  phantasm  first  occurs  some  hours  after  death.     Exa-
mination of  the  hypothesis  of  latency  in  these  cases.

712.  It  will  be  seen  that  we  have  here  no  simple  problem  of  time-relations
between  death  and  apparition.     The  ghost  is  a  function  of  two  variables  :  the
incarnate  spirit's  sensitivity,  and  the  discarnate  spirit's  capacity  of  self-mani-
festation.     The   latter  of    these   two  factors   affords   the   easier   method    of
arrangement;   and   we   may   arrange    our    apparitional    communications   in   a
descending  series,  from  cases  showing  the  fullest  knowledge  or  purpose   to
cases  where  the  indication  of  intelligence  becomes  feeblest.

713.  We  may  begin  with  a  case,  anomakms    and  non-evidential,  which
claims  to  represent  the  subjective  sensations  accompanying  the  transition  from
earthly  to  spiritual  life.     713  A.  Case  of  Dr.  Wiltse.

714.  Repeated  apparitions  indicating  continuous  knowledge  of  the  affairs
of  earth  after  the  spirit's  departure ;  case  of  Mr.  Mamtchitch.     714  A.    Case
of  Miss  Adie.

715.  Single  apparitions  indicating  knowledge  of  some  post-mortem  fact,
such  as  place  of  burial,  &c.

716.  Similar  apparitions  implying  knowledge  of  the  affairs  of  surviving
friends.     Cases  of:  716  A.    Mrs.  P.     716  B.   Mr.  D.     716  C.   Mrs.  V.

717.  Cases  where  a  departed  spirit  seems  to  show  knowledge  of  the  im-
pending death  of   a  survivor;    case   of   Mr.    G.     Cases   of:     717   A.     Miss
Pearson.     717  B.  Mr.  Kingsbury.     717  C.  Captain  Norton.

718.  "  Peak  in  Darien  "  cases  ;  where  a  dying  man  perceives  as  spirits
certain  persons   of  whose   previous   death   he   was    not   aware.      Cases  of:
718  A.   Colonel .     718  B.  Colonel  Hicks.

719.  Cases  where  departed  spirits  manifest  their  knowledge  that  some
friend  who  survived   them   has   passed   into  the   spirit  world ;    case   of   Miss
Dodson.     Cases  of  :  719  A.  Mrs.  Smith.     719  B.  Mrs.  Palliser.    719  C.  Miss
Hawkins-Dempster.

720.  Case  of  Mrs.  Bacchus,  in  which  the  apparition  of  a  deceased  person
is  seen  in  the  house  where  the  dead  body  of  his  wife  is  lying.

721.  Cases  where  the  deceased  person  manifests  knowledge  of  some  fact
connected  with  his  own  earth-life,  especially  his  death  and  events  connected
therewith;  case  of  Miss  Conley.

722.  Cases  where  the  deceased  person  shows  knowledge  of  his  previous
relations  with  a  survivor  (case  of  Baron  von  Driesen)  ;  or  of  intentions  not
fulfilled.     Cases  of:  722  A.   Mrs.  Nery.     722  B.   Dr.  Binns.

723.  In  the  case  of  Mrs.  Storie,  previously  given,  there  are  indications  of
an  intelligence  other  than  the  decedent's  as  concerned  in  the  presentation  of
her  complex  dream.

724.  Cases  where  a  compact  to  appear,  if  possible,  had  been  made  before
death ;  the  compact  thus  forming  a  definite  fact  which  the  deceased  person
remembers.      Possible  mode   in  which   such   a   compact  may  tend  to  fulfil
itself.

725.  Instances  of  such  compacts  more  or  less  precisely  fulfilled.     725  A.
Case  of  Captain  Colt.

726.  Case  of  Mr.  Reeves,  in  which  the  deceased  person's  impulse  seemed
to  be  the  fulfilment  of  an  immediate  engagement.

727.  Further  cases    of    engagement  or   compact    fulfilled,   although   in
a  deflected  fashion;  that  is,  by  an   appearance  to   some   one   other  than  the


CHAPTER    VII  ix

special  person  to  whom  the  promise  was  made  ;  case  of   Countess   Kapnist.
Cases  of:  727  A.   Mr.  Bellamy.     727  B.   Miss  Money.

728.  Persistence  of  effort  on  the  part   of  the  deceased   person  (728  A.
Case  of  Mr.  Cabral)  ;  and  case  where  the  apparition  indicates  knowledge  of
the  deceased  person's  funeral.     728  B.  Case  of  Mrs.  B.

729.  Cases  where  a  vision  presents  to  a  survivor  the  aspect  of  the  chamber
of  death.

730.  Cases  where  the  condition  of  the  deceased  person's  body  is  thus
presented  ;  case  of  Mr.  D.

731.  Cases  where  there  are  successive  phantasmal  pictures  of  a  death  and
of  the  subsequent  arrangement  of  the  body.     731  A.  Case  of  Miss  Hall.

732.  Discussion  of  a  case  previously  given  (Mrs.  Green's)  where  there  is
apparently  a  mingled  telepathic  agency,  proceeding   both   from  the  departed
and  from  the  living,  and  presenting  the  scene  of  death.

733.  Cases  where  the  departed  spirit   seems  preoccupied  with  the   spot
where  his  bones  are  laid.    Cases  of  :  733  A.  Miss  Atkinson.    733  B.  Mr.  Tyre.

734.  Case  of  Mr.  Tandy,  where  the  departed  spirit  seems  to  be  aware  of
the  arrival  at  a  friend's  house  of  the  news  of  his  own  death.

735.  In  some  cases  depression  is  felt  by  the  percipient  from  the  time  of  his
friend's  death  until  the  news  thereof  reaches  him  ;  in  others  a  happy  vision
preludes  the  news.     735  A.   Case  of  Mr.  King.

736.  Further  cases  indicating  some  knowledge  of  this  kind  on  the  part
of  the  departed  spirit ;  case  of  Miss  Q.     Cases  of :     736  A.   Mrs.  Davies.
736  B.   Mr.  Cameron  Grant.     736  C.  Miss  M.

737.  Apparitions  which  communicate  no  definite  message.     These  may  be
subdivided  into  personal  and  local,  according  as  they  appear  to  be  intended  to
impress  special  survivors,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  seem  mere  recurrences  to
accustomed  haunts.

738.  Cases  where  a  spiritual  presence  appears   to   seek   out  a  surviving
friend.

739.  Similar   cases  where   the  deceased   person's  phantasm  appears  in
scenes   unfamiliar  to   him  while  on   earth.     Cases   of:   739  A.    Mr.  Elliott.
739  B.  Mrs.  Clark.     739  C.   Mr.  Keulemans.

740.  Occasional  appearance  of  phantasms  of  the  dead  (of  all  types)  to
several  persons  collectively.     740  A.  Case  of  Miss  W.

741.  Cases  where  the  impulse  prompting  to  appearance  may  have  been  at
once  personal  and  local;  case  of  Mr.  Letts.     741  A.  Case  of  Mrs.  Crans.

742.  Further  cases  of  appearances  to  friends  in  familiar  surroundings  ;  case
of  M.  Gore  Booth.     742  A.  Case  of  Mrs.  Judd.

743.  A  phantasmal  voice  giving  the  news  of  death.     743  A.  Case  of  Sister
Bertha.

744.  Cases  where  the  phantasmal  figure,  although  sometimes  recognised
by  acquaintances  in  a  familiar  scene,  may  be  thought  to  have  obeyed  a  local
rather  than  a  personal  attraction;  case  of  Mr.  Bard.     Cases  of  :  744  A.   Miss
Farquharson.     744  B.   Mr.  J.

745.  Apparitions  locally  conditioned,  or  hauntings.     Cases  of:  745  A.
General  Becher.     745  B.    Mrs.  M.     745  C.    Mr.    Husbands.     745  D.    Mrs.
Clerke.

746.  Such  apparitions  may  possibly  be  due  to  the  results  of  past  mental
action.


xii  SYLLABUSES

organic  modifications.     Cases  of :  817  A.     Dr.  N.     817  B  and  C.     Mrs.  Had-
selle.     817  D.     Lady  de  Vesci.

818.  The  inhibitory  impulses  may  sometimes  relate  to  exceedingly  trivial
matters.     Cases  of :  818  A.     Mrs.  Verrall.     818  B.     Mrs.  Elliott.

819.  Or  a  sudden  inhibition  may  be  combined  with  a  corresponding  im-
pulse; case  of  Dr.  Hodgson  finding  five-leaved  clover.     819  A.     Case  of  Dr.
Guebhard  finding  bifid  fern.

820.  Sometimes  the  impulse  may  conceivably  be  explained  by  a  subcon-
scious perception  or  interpretation. — Case  of  Mr.  Wyman.

821.  A  similar  case  where  the  sense  of  smell  may  have  played  a  part. —
Case  of  Mr.  C.  W.  Moses.     821  A.     Case  of  Mrs.  Gray.

822.  Another  case,  possibly  due  to  smell  or  sense  of  varying  resistance  in
the  air.— Mr.  Wait.

823.  A  similar  case,  perhaps  attributable  to  excessive  tactile  sensibility. —
Mr.  W.

824.  A  case  of  inhibition  which  seems  beyond  explanation  by  hyperaes-
thesia,  and  suggests  telaesthesia  or  spirit  guardianship. — £)r.  Parsons.

825.  We  next  come  to  cases  involving  massive  motor  impulses  to  various
actions.     Case  of  Mr.  Garrison.     825  A.     Case  of  Mr.  Skirving.

826.  Innate  predisposition  to  motor  automatisms  of  various  kinds.     Scheme
of  increasingly  specialised  motor  phenomena.     Rise   of  automatic  writing. —
Edmund  Gurney  and  W.  Stainton  Moses.     My  own  experience.

827.  Automatic  writing  a  mode  of  experiment  harmless  in  itself.

828.  Classification  of  contents  of  messages.

829.  Most  automatic  script  originates  in  the  automatist's  own  brain. — Mr.
H.  A.  Smith's  cases.

830.  Reference  to  anagrams  in  the  "  Clelia  "  case.     830  A.    The  "  Clelia  "
case.

831.  Case  of  Professor  Sidgwick's  friend.

832.  Mr.  Schiller's  case  (832  A) ; — appearance  of  fictitious  personalities,
although  neither  invited  nor  credited  by  the  automatist.     832  B.   Case  of  Sceur
Jeanne.

833.  Case   of  Madame  X.     An  unusual  combination  of  various   motor
automatisms.

834.  The  cases  just  described  lead  up  to   Professor  Flournoy's  case  of
"  Helene  Smith."

835.  Mile.  Smith  an  example  of  continuous  and  complex  subliminal  menta-
tion going  on  in  a  perfectly  healthy  and  normal  organism.

836.  Her  alleged  reincarnations.

837.  The  Martian  language.

838.  Reversion  to  previous  epochs  of  life.

839.  Possible  sport  of  spirits.

840.  Mile.  Smith's  "  teleological "  automatisms.

841.  Indications  of  supernormal  faculty.

842.  Possible  telepathy  from  the  dead.     The  Chessenaz  case.

843.  We  now  pass  on  to  cases  of  phenomena  much  more  clearly  super-
normal.    Telepathy  obtained  through  table-tilting.     Cases  of:  843  A.     Pro-
fessor Richet.     843  B.     Mr.  G.  M.  Smith.

844.  I   give  next  cases  of   automatic  writing,  the  first  of  which   (Mrs.
Moberley's)  shows  indications  of  telepathy.


CHAPTER    VIII  xiii

845.  Telepathic  cases  simulating  prophecy  ;  e.g.,  that  of  Miss  Summerbell.

846.  Answers  to  questions  written  correctly,  although   not  as  the  agent
supraliminally  intended;  case  of  Mr.  Allbright.

847.  Another  telepathic  case,  involving  the  agent's  subliminal  thoughts. —
Mr.  Riddell.

848.  Our  most  striking  case  is  a  long  series  of  telepathic  communications
between  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newnham.

849.  Mrs.  Newnham  writes  automatically  answers  to  unspoken  questions
by  Mr.  Newnham.     849  A.     Case  of  Mrs.  Newnham.

850.  A  similar  but  shorter  series  is  given  in  the  next  Appendix.     850  A.
Case  of  Mr.  Buttemer.

851.  The  next  case  shows  occasional  telepathy,  mingled  with  fragments  of
apparent  clairvoyance  and  premonition.     851  A.   Case  of  Lady  Mabel  Howard.

852.  A  case  of  communication  through  table-tilting  from  a  distant  agent. —
Mrs.   Kirby.     852  A.     Case  of  M.  Auguez  ;— prediction   of   death.     852  B.
Signer  Bonatti's  automatic  writing;  telepathy  from  a  distant  living  agent.

853.  Transitional  cases ; — information  purporting  to  come  from  deceased
persons,  but  more  probably  derived  telepathically  from  the  living ;  case  of  Mr.
Lewis.

854.  Message  purporting  to  come  from  a  deceased  person  who  was  found
to  be  living ;  case  of  Mr.  Long.

855.  Case  of  automatic  writing  reproducing  experimentally  the  thoughts  of
the  persons  present.

856.  Statement  through  table-tilting  of  incident  occurring  at  the  time  in  a
neighbouring  house. — Professor  Alexander's  case.

857.  Telepathy  may  produce  erroneous  statements  through  the  agent's
thoughts  being  reproduced  as  matters  of  fact.     857  A.    Case  of  Professor  H.

858.  Dr.  Ermacora's  experiments  with  a  sensitive, — Maria  Manzini.  858  A.
Her  automatic  writing  gives  the  contents  of  a  letter  which  reached  her  next
morning.

859.  The  information  may  be  derived  from  discarnate  spirits — though  not
necessarily  from  those  alleged  in  the  communications.     The  communicators
may  deliberately  veil  their   identity,  and  may  also  have  access  to  sources  of
knowledge  remote  even  to  themselves.     859  A.   These  problems  are  exemplified
in  the  automatic  writings  of  Miss  A.

860.  In   these    and   other    retrocognitive   cases,   it  is   difficult   to  decide
between  the  hypotheses  of  "  cryptomnesia  "  and  spirit-control.

861.  Mr.  Wedgwood's  experiments  with  Mrs.  R.  ; — case  of  communications
purporting  to  come  from  Colonel  Gurwood  (who  died  in  1845).

862.  Another  retrocognitive  case  of   the   same   kind  through    Mrs.  R.,
namely  :— 862  A.     The  "  David  Brainerd  "  case.

863.  But  retrocognitive  messages  referring  to  matters  easily  accessible  in
print  (e.g.  Mr.  Moses'  case  of  musical  composers,  giving  dates  of  their  lives),
even  if  genuine,  may  be  attributed  to  clairvoyance  on  the  part  of  the  automatist.

864.  A  resemblance  of  the  handwriting  to  that  of  the  deceased  person  is
sometimes  alleged,  but  must  be  received  with  caution.     864  A.    Professor  Rossi-
Pagnoni's  experiments  at  Pesaro.

865.  Another  case   of   alleged  resemblances  of  handwriting,  which  also
illustrates  the  spontaneous  recurrence  of  the  same  problems  with  automatists
of  many  different  types,  namely :— 865  A.    Case  of  Mrs.  Underwood.


xiv  SYLLABUSES

866.  Cases  where  the  Writing  announces  a  death  unknown  to  the  persons
present ; — instance  reported  by  Dr.  Lidbeault.

867.  In  another  case,  partially  correct  details  about  the  death  are  added.
867  A.    Case  of  Mdlle.  Stramm.

868.  Sometimes  telekinetic  phenomena  seem  to  be  associated  with  the
announcement  of  a  death.     868  A.    The  Pereliguine  case.     868  B.    Case  of
Mr.  F.  Hodgson.     868  C.   Ref.  to  "  Woodd  knockings."

869.  Cases  where  correct  details   unknown  to  the   automatist  are  given
regarding  a  death  which  is  known  to  him.     869  A.    Case  of  Mrs.  Fitzgerald.
869  B.    The  Skrytnikoff  case.

870.  A  communication  corresponding,  not  to  the  knowledge  of  the  sitters,
but  to  what  was  known  to  the  alleged  communicator  before  death.     870  A.
Case  of  Signer  Cavalli.

871.  Automatic  writing  by  a  child,  showing  faculties  superior  to  those  she
normally  possessed,  with  some  writing  in  languages  unknown  to  her.     871  A.
Mr.  Junor  Browne's  case.

872.  Writing  by  a  young  child  who  had  no  knowledge  of  her  letters.
872  A.     Mr.  Hempstead's  case.

873.  A  series  of  writings  by  Mr.  W.,  with  indications  of  subliminal  telaes-
thesia,  and  telepathy  both  from  the  living  and  from  the  dead.     873  A.  Another
experience  of  Mr.  W.'s.

874.  A  prediction  given  through  table-tilting  of  the  precise  date  of  a  death.
874  A.     Dr.  Suddick's  case.

875.  Example  pointing  to  continued  terrene  knowledge  on  the  part  of  a
deceased  person ;  case  of  Mrs.  von  Wieseler.

876.  A  test  message  planned  before  death  and  communicated  afterwards;
case  of  Mrs.  Finney.     876  A.  Case  of  Prince  Emile  Wittgenstein ;  message
about  missing  will.     876  B.  Dr.  Knorr's  case :  message  about  missing  note.

877.  Desirability  of  planning  beforehand  communications  to  be  made  after
death  as  a  test  of  personal  identity.     877  A.   Note  on  posthumous  letters.

878.  The  evidence  as  to  motor  phenomena  here  set  forth  confirms  and
extends  the  conceptions  to  which  the  cognate  sensory  phenomena  pointed ; —
the  expansion   of    normal    leading   on   to  the   development  of    supernormal
faculties.     The  motor  phenomena  suggest  more  strongly  than  the  sensory  the
hypothesis  of  "  psychical  invasion,"  which,  if  sufficiently  prolonged,  becomes
a  persistent  "  control"  or  "possession."

879.  When  the  subliminal  self  is  affected  by  a  telepathic  impact  which
works  itself  out  by  automatic  movements,  it  becomes  a  question  whether  the
movements  are  executed  by  the  subliminal  self  or  by  the  external  agent.

880.  This  leads  us  on  to  the  problem  to  be  discussed  in  the  next  chapter;
— in  what  ways  may  two  spirits  co-operate  in  the  possession  and  control  of  the
same  organism?

CHAPTER   IX

TRANCE,   POSSESSION,   AND   ECSTASY

900.  Possession  may  be  defined  as  a  development  of  Motor  Automatism,
resulting  at  last  in  a  substitution  of  personality ;  there  has  recently  been  a  great
advance  in  the  evidence  for  this  theory.


CHAPTER    IX  xv

901.  Further,  it  coheres  with  modern  notions  of  personality, — of  the  control
of  organism  by  spirit.     It  implies  that  the  spirit  of  the  entranced  automatist
partially  quits  his  organism,  and  allows  an  invading  spirit  to  occupy  and  use  it.

902.  The  conception — similar  as  it  is  to  primitive  beliefs — will  be  found  to
co-ordinate  and  explain  many  of  our  earlier  groups  of  phenomena.

903.  First,  the  alternating  use  of  brain-centres  by  alternate  personalities
seems  to  form  a  link  in  the  series  which  ends  in  possession.

904.  Genius  suggests  a  possession  of  the  brain-centres  by  the  subliminal
self.

905.  In  sleep  it  appears  that  the  spirit  may  sometimes  travel  away  from
the  body  and  perceive  distant  scenes  clairvoyantly.

906.  In  the  hypnotic  trance  or  in  spontaneous  somnambulism,  we  often  find
a  quasi-personality  occupying  the  organism,  while  the  sensitive's  own  spirit
often  claims  to  have  been  absent  elsewhere,  and  sometimes  exhibits  real  clair-
voyant power.     Telepathic  intercourse,  if  carried  far  enough,  corresponds  to
possession  or  to  ecstasy.

907.  In  telepathy  we  encounter  an  influence  which  suggests  an  intelligent
and  responsive  external  presence,  and  telepathy  between  the  living  leads  on  to
telepathy  from  the   dead ;   which  implies   that  the   communication  does   not
depend  on  vibrations  from  a  material  brain.

908.  When  motor  automatism  develops  into  possession,  there  is  apparently
no  communication  between  the  discarnate  mind   and   the  mind  of  the  auto-
matist, but  rather  with  the  latter's  brain.

909.  Even  in  ordinary  cases  of  telepathy,  the  percipient's  brain  may  some-
times be  influenced  by  his  own  mind,  and  sometimes  directly  by  the  agent's ;
in  the  latter  case,  the  influence  may  be  termed  telergic.     Veridical  apparitions
also  show  traces  of  the  spiritual  and  the  physical  elements  mingling  in  various
degrees  as  we  pass  from  clairvoyant  visions  to  collective  apparitions.

910.  The  same  stages  are  to  be  seen  in  the  case  of  apparitions  of  the
dead — leading   up   to   complete   possession   of  the   automatist's  brain   by  an
extraneous  spirit.

911.  Possession  by  spirits  is  difficult  to  distinguish  from  cases  of  secondary
personality,  where  the  organism  is  controlled  by  another  synthesis  of  its  own
spirit.     We  must  not  ascribe  to  spirit-control  cases  where  no  new  knowledge  is
shown  in  the  trance  state.

912.  In  reputed  savage  cases  of  possession,  the  hostility  of  the  control  to
the  automatist  is  no  proof  of  its  being  other  than  a  secondary  personality.
912  A.  Dr.  Nevius  on  demon  possession  in  China.

913.  It  is  sometimes  claimed  that  these  controls  show  supernormal  know-
ledge,  but  the   cases   recorded   may  generally  be   explained  by   heightened
memory,  with  possible   traces   of  telepathy.     In   cases  where   there  is  good
evidence  of  supernormal  knowledge,  the  controls  have  always  been  both  human
and  friendly.

914.  We  should  expect  spirit-control  to  be  subject  to  the  same  limits  that
we  find  in  controls  by  secondary  personalities ;  e.g.  the  external  spirit  is  not
likely  to    be    able  to    produce    utterance    in   a  language    unknown    to   the
automatist.

915.  In  both  cases,  and  also  in  dreams,  memory  seems  to  fail  and  change
in  a  capricious  way.

916.  Again,  it  is  hard  to  get  into  continuous  colloquy  with  a  somnambulist,


xvi  SYLLABUSES

who  generally  follows  his  own  train  of  ideas,  and  similar  difficulties  seem  to
occur  in  conversing  with  spirit-controls.

917.  Our  expectations  will  thus  be  very  different  from  the  commonplace  or
even  the  poetic  notion  of  what  communication  with  the  dead  is  likely  to  be.

918.  The  actual  phenomena  fail  to  comply  either  with  the  orthodox  or
traditional   line  of   expectation,  or  with  romantic   anticipations,  or  with   the
notion  that  they  should  subserve  some  practical  purpose.

919.  The  problems  of  possession,  on  the  other  baud,  form  the   natural
sequence  of  our  earlier   problems ;    the  actions   of   the   possessed   organism
show  the  furthest  stage  of  motor  automatism ;  the  incursion  of  the  possessing
spirit  is  the  completest  form  of  telepathic  invasion.

920.  We  must  now  briefly  consider  the  relation  of  spiritual  influences  to
the  world  of  matter.     In  some  telergic  cases,  it  appears  that  the  agent's  spirit
acts  directly  on  the  percipient's  brain.

921.  In  cases  of  possession,  it  is  possible  that  the  controlling  spirit  may
impel  the  organism  to  more  forcible  movements  than  its  usual  ones.

922.  It  may  also  be  able  to  use  the  organism  more  skilfully  and   emit
from  it  an  energy  which  can  move  objects  not  in  contact  with  it ;  this  pheno-
menon is  termed  by  Aksakoff  telekinesis.

923.  The  interest  excited  in  the  ordinary  public  by  the  "  physical  pheno-
mena of  spiritualism,"  or  telekinesis,  has,  as  is  well  known,  fostered  much  fraud,
to  expose  and  guard  against  which  has  been  one  of  the  main  tasks  of  the
S.P.R.     923  A.     References  to  exposures  of  Madame  Blavatsky.     923  B.
References  to  exposures  of  other  spiritualistic  frauds.

924.  In  this  work,  telekinesis  is  only  dealt  with  where  it  appears  as  an
element  in  spirit-possession,  especially  in  the  cases  of  D.  D.  Home  and  Stainton
Moses.

925.  Telekinesis  may  begin  as  a  form  of  automatism,  initiated  by  the  sub-
liminal self,  and  there  may  occasionally,  though  not  provably,  be  an  element  of
it  in  table-tilting  or  automatic  writing.     This  may  develop  into  raps  or  into
movements  of  distant  objects.     925  A.  Case  of  Mr.  Vaughan.

926.  The  right  comprehension  of  telekinetic  phenomena  must  depend  on
a  knowledge  greater  than  we  at  present  possess   of  the   relations  between
matter  and  ether.     A  tentative  sketch  of  what  may  be  done  by  future  inquiries
is  given  in  a  "  Scheme  of  Vital  Faculty  "  (926  A).     926  B.     References  to
accounts  of  telekinetic  cases.

927.  Sporadic  cases  of  ecstacy  or  possession  seem  not  infrequent  in  some
private   circles.     927  A.     Mr.   O.'s  case.     Cases  of:  927  B.   Miss  White;
927  C.   Miss  Lottie  Fowler.

928.  All  such  cases  are  difficult  to  classify  precisely,  but  the  more  de-
veloped forms  of  possession  throw  light  on  the  more  rudimentary  ones.

929.  The  most  rudimentary  form  seems  to  be  a  momentary  possession  by
the  subliminal  self  :  e.g.  case  of  Mrs.  Luther.

930.  Or  there  may  be  a  brief  psychical  excursion  in  which  some  know-
ledge is  gained  and  uttered  automatically  by  the  subliminal  self :  e.g.  case  of
Professor  Thoulet.

931.  The  next  case— that  of  Mr.  Goodall— suggests  a  kind  of  telepathic
conversation   between  the  subliminal   self,  controlling  the   utterance   of  the
sleeper,  and  some  perhaps  discarnate  spirit.

932.  The  next— Mr.  Wilkie's— is  a  miniature  case  of  possession.


CHAPTER    IX  xvii

933.  These  cases  illustrate  the  development  of  the  incipient  stages  of
trance  into  ecstacy  or  possession,  the  control  in  different  cases  being  by  the
incarnate  or  by  the  discarnate  spirit,  or  by  a  combination  of  the  two.

934.  In  one  form  of  trance  the  automatist  is  completely  controlled  by  his
own  subliminal  self  or  incarnate  spirit;  e.g.  934  A.  case  of  Mr.  Sanders.

935.  In  the  famous  case  of  Swedenborg,  on  the  other  hand,  direct  inter-
course during  ecstasy  with  discarnate  spirits  was  claimed.

936.  Swedenborg's  personal  experiences  are  in  accord  with  those  described
— apparently  independently — by  other  sensitives  since  his  time  ;  on  the  other
hand,   his   dogmatic   writings    have    been    discredited    by    later    knowledge.
936  A.  Kant  on  Swedenborg.    936  B.  The  Seeressof  Prevorst.    936  C.  Case
of  Mr.  Skilton.

937.  Cahagnet's  subject,  Adele  Maginot,  was  also  apparently,  when   in
trance,  controlled  by  her  own  subliminal  self.     937  A.  Mr.  Podmore's  account
of  this  case.

938.  In  the  case  of  D.  D.  Home  telekinetic  phenomena  are  alleged,  as
well  as  trance  manifestations.     938  A.  References  to  information  about  Home.
938  B.  Review  of  Mme.  Home's  Life  of  Home.

939.  Home's  trances  varied  a  good  deal  on  different  occasions.

940.  Comparison  of   the   trance-manifestations  of   Home  with   those  of
Moses  and  of  Mrs.  Piper.

941.  In  the  case  of  Moses,  as  in  that  of  Home,  the  telekinetic  phenomena
formed  an  integral  part  of  the  general  manifestations,  but  were  regarded  by
him  as  merely  subsidiary  to  the  religious  teachings  of  his  "  controls."

942.  This  ethical  preoccupation  was  natural  to  his  character  and  time.

943.  His  relation  to  the  S.P.R.     943  A.  References  to  printed  records
of  his  phenomena,  and  biography.

944.  The  two  series  of  phenomena — physical  and  trance — were  intimately
connected  in  his  case,  and  purported  to  be  produced  by  the  same  alleged
discarnate  spirits.

945.  These  belonged   to  three  classes :    (a)  persons  recently  dead ;    (b)
distinguished  persons  of  past  generations ;    (<:)   more  distinguished  and  more
remote  persons,  who  called  themselves  by  pseudonyms,  e.g.  "  Imperator."

946.  General  account  of  Moses'  automatic  writings.     946  A.  His  descrip-
tion of  the  process  of  writing.

947.  The  evidence  for  the  identity  of  the  remote  spirits  is  very  dubious.
947  A.  Case  of  Rector's  copying  from  a  closed  book.

948.  Possible  explanation  of  some  of  the  cases  by  subliminal  observation
and  memory.     948  A.    Cases  from  "  Spirit  Identity."     948  B.   Other  cases  of
veridical  communications.

949.  Case  of  "  Blanche  Abercromby,"  in  which  a  recent  death — unknown
normally  to  Moses — was  announced  by  his  automatic  writing,  some  of  which
was  alleged  to  have  a  close  resemblance  to  hers.

950.  Discussion  of  the  possible  or  alleged  functions  of  the  remote  controls.

951.  Classification  of  messages  according  to  their  evidential  quality.

952.  In  some  of  Moses'  cases,  the  messages  were  accompanied  by  appari-
tions or  by  telekinetic  phenomena.

953.  In  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper,  the  verbal  messages  from  persons  recently
dead  are  of  much  greater  evidential  value ;  she  is  also  alleged  to  be  controlled
by  the  "  Imperator  "  group.

VOL.  n.  b


xviii  SYLLABUSES

954.  Her  case  differs  from  those  of  Home  and  Moses  in  presenting  no
telekinetic  phenomena,  and  in  the  fact  that  she  shows  no  supernormal  powers
except  when  in  trance.

955.  Brief  history  of  the  case.

956.  The   hypothesis   of  fraud.     956  A.    Report   by  Professor   James.
956  B.    Report  by  the  present  writer.

957.  Discussion  of  the  personality  of  "  Phinuit."     957  A.  Description  by
Professor  Lodge.

958.  During  the  dominance  of  the  "  Phinuit "  control,  the  evidence  for  the
personal  identity  of  the  alleged  communicators  was  generally  slight.

959.  In  the  next  stage — that  of  the  "  G.  P."  control — the  evidence  greatly
improved.     959  A.    Mr.  Hart's    sitting.      959   B.  Mr.  and    Mrs.    Howard's
sitting.     959  C.   Communications  from  Mr.  Hart.

960.  Instance  of  correct  information,  unknown  to  the  sitter,  being  given-
960   A.  Communications  from  Elisa  Manners.

961.  Case  of  attempt  to  write  Hawaiian:  Mr.  Briggs'  sitting.

962.  Communications  from  young  children  :  Mrs.  Button's  sitting.  962  A.
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Thaw's  sittings.

963.  The  discarnate  spirits  seem  occasionally  to  manifest  powers  of  retro-
cognitive  telaesthesia  and  of  precognition.     963  A.  Predictions  given  through
Mrs.  Piper.

964.  In  the  last  stages  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  manifestations,  the  chief
controls  purport  to  be  those  of  Mr.  Moses — the  Imperator  group — but  there  is
no  proof  so  far  of  their  identity.

965.  Trance  communications  from  discarnate  spirits  must  be  influenced
both  by  the  subliminal  self  and  by  the  organism  of  the  medium,  and  perhaps
may  be  impaired  by  limitations  in  the  powers  of  the  spirits.

966.  Possession  appears  to  have  no  injurious  effect  on  the  medium,  but
rather  the  reverse.

967.  Coming  to  the  part  played  by  the  spirit,  it  seems  as  far  removed  from
modern  philosophical  as  from  ancient  savage  conceptions.

968.  The  personal  identity  of  a  spirit  must  connote  memory  and  character.

969.  The  communications  indicate  some  cognisance  of  space  and  time,
and  some  knowledge  both  of  the  thoughts  and  emotions  of  survivors  and  of
material  facts.

970.  Consideration  of  the  possible  difficulties  of  communicating  on  the
part  of  the  communicators.

971.  They  are  such  as  might  be  inferred  from  the  analogies  between
possession  and  alternating  personalities,  dreams,  and  somnambulism.

972.  The  relations  between  mind  and  brain   may  be  elucidated  by  the
difficulties  shown  by  the  spirit  in  using  the  medium's  brain.

973.  The  spirits  sometimes  appear  more  eager  to  communicate  than  the
sitters  are  to  receive  communications.

974.  Conclusions  which  may  be  drawn  from  the  phenomena  recorded.

975.  One  obstacle  to  our  inquiry  has  been  the  apparent  want  of  dignity
in  this  mode  of  acquiring  knowledge ;  but  the  apparently  trivial  experiments
and  observations  have  led  to  generalisations  of  immense  importance.

976.  Further  discussion  of  ecstasy.

977.  It  is  a  phenomenon  common  to  all  religions,  and  hence  of  special
importance  from  a  psychological  point  of  view.

978.  We  must  now  deal  briefly  with  the  subject   of  retrocognition   and


CHAPTER    X  xix

precognition ;    these  suggest   powers   even    more   remote  than   telepathy  or
telaesthesia  from  ordinary  methods  of  acquiring  knowledge.

979.  Retrocognition  begins  with  hypermnesia,  leading  on  to  cases  where
the  knowledge  seems  to  come  from  the  memories  of  other  minds,  embodied  or
disembodied,  or  from  a  direct  perception  of  the  cosmic  record.

980.  Precognition,  starting  from  promnesia,  leads  on  through  self-sugges-
tion   and    organic    prevision,  gradually   involving    more    and    more    of    the
percipient's  environment,  as  well  as  of  his  own  history;  but  may  even  then
be  regarded  as  the  result  of  the  wider  outlook  of  the  subliminal  self.     980  A.
Case  of  Signorina  Manzini.

981.  Some  precognitions,  however,  may  be  due  to  the  reasoned  foresight  of
disembodied  spirits;  and   some  may  possibly  be  derived  from  spirits  higher
than  human,  or  from  a  sphere  where  our  conception  of  time  no  longer  holds.

982.  Discussion  of  the  evolution  of  retrocognition  from  memory.

983.  The  various  stages  of  precognition :  hyperaesthesia,  peripheral   or
central.

984.  The  wider  knowledge  of  the  subliminal  self;  sometimes  transmitted
telepathically  to  others,  or  itself  derived  from  disembodied  spirits.

985.  Direct  foreknowledge  of  the  future;  the  relation  of  this  possibility
to  the  problem  of  Free  Will.

986.  The  conception  of  Time,  as  has  often  been  suggested,  may  be  purely
subjective.

987.  Our  evidence  seems  to  indicate  that  the  spiritual  world  is  now  just
beginning  to  act  systematically  upon  the  material  world.

988.  The  faintness  and  incoherence  of  the  messages  seem  an  evidence
of  effort  on  the  part  of  the  communicators ;  but  to  solve  the  mystery  fully  will
require  the  labours  of  many  generations.


CHAPTER    X

EPILOGUE

1000.  Some  attempt  to  place  these  new  discoveries  in  clearer  relation  to
existing  schemes  of  civilised  thought  and  belief  is  needful  for  the  practical
purpose  of  enlisting  help  in  our  inquiry,  which  has  hitherto   suffered  from
indifference  rather  than  from  opposition.

1001.  The  influence  of  the  evidence  set  forth  in  this  book  should  prompt
towards  the  ultimate  achievement  of  scientific  dominance  in  every  department
of  human  study,  including— as  never  before — the  realm  of  "  divine  things."

1002.  The  present  age  is  marked  by  a  deep  and  widespread  dissatisfaction,
by  a  decline  of  any  real  belief  in  the  worth  of  life.     A  similar  crisis  which
passed  over  Europe  once  before  was  dissipated  by  the  rise  of  Christianity.

1003.  In  our  age  the  scientific  instinct  must  be  satisfied  equally  with  the
religious;  any   scheme  of  knowledge  to  commend  itself  to  our  descendants
must  be  one  which,  while  it  transcends  our  present  knowledge,  steadily  continues
it.     It  is   only   now  that  this  principle  is  beginning  to  be   applied  to  the
spiritual  world.

1004.  The  conception  of  Telepathy  is  seen  gradually  to  enlarge  and  deepen,
proving  to  us  at  last  that  the  kinship  between  souls  is  more  fundamental  than
their  separation.


xx  SYLLABUSES

1005.  Let  us  suppose  that  whilst  incarnate  men  have  risen  from  savagery
into  intelligence,  discarnate  men  have  become  more  eager  and  more  able  to
communicate  with  earth.     Spo  adic  instances  of  such  communication  have
always  occurred ;  but  the  new^r  scientific  temper— demanding  not   miracles,
but  a  higher  law — is  not  perhaps  Confined  to  this  earth  alone.

1006.  Actual  increase  of  our  knowledge  of  the  spiritual  world,  both  by
discovery  and  by  revelation,  is  rendering  possible  a  religious  synthesis  less
incomplete  than  any  which  has  been  attained  until  now.

1007.  By  a  religious  synthesis  I  mean  a  co-ordination  and  development
of  all  such  response  of  the  human  spirit  to  Cosmic  Law  as  has  risen  above
mere  egoism  or  revolt  into  co-operation  and  worship.

1008.  I  hold  that  this  enthusiasm  of  response  is  morally  incumbent  on  us  ;
since,  even  though  the  Cosmos  appears  imperfect,  it  may  be  destined  to  attain
perfection  partly  through  our  own  work  and  faith.

1009.  The  response  actually  made  in  the  past  by  human  spirits  of  high  type
has  been,  on  the  whole,  concordant  in  recognising  that  a  spiritual  world  under-
lies the  material.     The  two  leading  World-Religions  have  developed  different
sides  of  this  obscure  philosophic  consensus.     Eastern  contemplation  has  dwelt
on  the  vastness  of  the  spirit's  ascent  up  infinite  degrees  of  Being,  to  be  merged
at  last  in  an  impersonal  All.     Western  worship  has  based  on  Jesus  Christ's
Resurrection  the  belief  that  the  soul  survives  bodily  death,  and  on  His  Revela-
tion the  belief  that  the  world  is  spiritual  and  is  ruled  by  Love.

1010.  This  dim  and  imperfect  agreement  is  now  supplemented  by  nascent
discovery  and  revelation.     From  the  discovery  of  telepathy  we   learn  that  a
direct  communication  passes  between  incarnate  spirits,  and  from   discarnate
spirits  to  incarnate.     From  the  revelation  contained  in  these  messages  from
discarnate  spirits,  we  learn  in  direct  fashion  what  philosophy  had  suspected,—
the  existence  and  influence  of  a  spiritual  world.

1011.  Our  new  knowledge,  confirming  ancient  streams  of  thought,  corrobo-
rates analogically  for  Christianity  the  record  of  Christ's  appearances   after
death,   and  hints   at  the  possibility  of  the  beneficent  incarnation  of  souls
previously  on  a  level  higher  than  man's.

1012.  Passing  on  to  the  further  future,  it  confirms  for  Buddhism  the  con-
ception of  an  endless  spiritual  evolution,  which  the  whole  Cosmos  subserves.

1013.  And  meantime,  by  its  actual  and  ever-growing  reality,  the  nascent
communion   with  enfranchised  spirits  offers  both  immediate  sustenance  and
endless  development.

1014.  That  development  must  be  an  increase  in  holiness ;  an  intensified
interpenetration  both  of  worlds  and  of  souls ;  an   evolution  of  Energy  into
Life,  and  of  Life  into  the  threefold  conception  of  Wisdom,  Love,  and  Joy.

1015.  This  process,  effected  for  each  several  soul  in  different  fashion,  is
in  itself  continuous  and  cosmic  ;  all  Life  is  developing  itself  from  the  primal
Energy,  and  divinising  itself  into  the  ultimate  Joy.

Appendix  A.     The  Function  of  a  Society  for  Psychical  Research.
Appendix  B.     The  Decline  of  Dogmatism.
Appendix  C.     Prayer  and  Supplication.


700]


CHAPTER  VII

PHANTASMS   OF   THE   DEAD

OVK€Tl    7TpO<TO>

aftdrav  a\a  /ctovcov  vTrep  'HpaKAcos  Trcpav  €v/xape?.
.    .    .   OvfJLe,   rtVa  Trpos  dAAoSaTray
axpav   ffJiov  irXoov  7rapa/i€i/Jeai ;

— PINDAR.

700.  The  course  of  our  argument  has  gradually  conducted  us  to
a  point  of  capital  importance.  A  profound  and  central  question,
approached  in  irregular  fashion  from  time  to  time  in  previous  chapters,
must  now  be  directly  faced.  From  the  actions  and  perceptions  of
spirits  still  in  the  flesh,  and  concerned  with  one  another,  we  must  pass
on  to  inquire  into  the  actions  of  spirits  no  longer  in  the  flesh,  and
into  the  forms  of  perception  with  which  men  still  in  the  flesh  respond
to  that  unfamiliar  and  mysterious  agency.

There  need,  I  hope,  be  no  real  break  here  in  my  previous  line  of
argument.  The  subliminal  self,  which  we  have  already  traced  through
various  phases  of  growing  sensitivity,  growing  independence  of  organic
bonds,  will  now  be  studied  as  sensitive  to  yet  remoter  influences ; — as
maintaining  an  independent  existence  even  when  the  organism  is  de-
stroyed. Our  subject  will  divide  itself  conveniently  under  three  main  heads.
First,  it  will  be  well  to  discuss  briefly  the  nature  of  the  evidence  to  man's
survival  of  death  which  may  theoretically  be  obtainable,  and  its  possible
connections  with  evidence  set  forth  in  previous  chapters.  Secondly, — and
this  must  form  the  bulk  of  the  present  chapter, — we  need  a  classified
exposition  of  the  main  evidence  to  survival  thus  far  obtained; — so  far,
that  is  to  say,  as  sensory  automatism — audition  or  apparition — is  con-
cerned ;  for  motor  automatism — automatic  writing  and  trance-utterance —
must  be  left  for  later  discussion.  Thirdly,  there  will  be  need  of  some
consideration  of  the  meaning  of  this  evidence  as  a  whole,  and  of  its
implications  alike  for  the  scientific  and  for  the  ethical  future  of  mankind.
Much  more,  indeed,  of  discussion  (as  well  as  of  evidence)  than  I  can
furnish  will  be  needed  before  this  great  conception  can  be  realised  or
argued  from  with  the  scientific  thoroughness  due  to  its  position  among
fundamental  cosmical  laws.  Considering  how  familiar  the  notion — the
vague  shadowy  notion — of  "  immortality  "  has  always  been,  it  is  strange
VOL.  n.  A


2  CHAPTER    VII  [701

indeed  that  so  little  should  have  been  done  in  these  modern  days  to
grasp  or  to  criticise  it : — so  little,  one  might  almost  say,  since  the  Phaedo
of  Plato.

701.  Beginning,  then,  with  the  inquiry  as  to  what  kind  of  evidence
ought  to  be  demanded  for  human  survival,  we  are  met  first  by  the  bluff
statement  which  is  still  often  uttered  even  by  intelligent  men,  that  no
evidence  would  convince  them  of  such  a  fact ;  "  neither  would  they  be
persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."

Extravagant  as  such  a  profession  sounds,  it  has  a  meaning  which
we  shall  do  well  to  note.  These  resolute  antagonists  mean  that  no  new
evidence  can  carry  conviction  to  them  unless  it  be  continuous  with  old
evidence  ;  and  that  they  cannot  conceive  that  evidence  to  a  world  of
spirit  can  possibly  be  continuous  with  evidence  based  upon  our  experi-
ence of  a  world  of  matter.  I  agree  with  this  demand  for  continuity;
and  I  agree  also  that  the  claims  usually  advanced  for  a  spiritual  world
have  not  only  made  no  attempt  at  continuity  with  known  fact,  but  have
even  ostentatiously  thrown  such  continuity  to  the  winds.  The  popular
mind  has  expressly  desired  something  startling,  something  outside  Law
and  above  Nature.  It  has  loved,  if  not  a  Credo  quia  absurdum,  at  least
a  Credo  quia  non  probatum.  But  the  inevitable  retribution  is  a  deep
insecurity  in  the  conviction  thus  attained.  Unsupported  by  the  general
fabric  of  knowledge,  the  act  of  faith  seems  to  shrink  into  the  background
as  that  great  fabric  stands  and  grows.

I  can  hardly  too  often  repeat  that  my  object  in  these  pages  is  of  a
quite  opposite  character.  Believing  that  all  cognisable  Mind  is  as  con-
tinuous as  all  cognisable  Matter,  my  ideal  would  be  to  attempt  for  the
realm  of  mind  what  the  spectroscope  and  the  law  of  gravitation  have
effected  for  the  realm  of  matter,  and  to  carry  that  known  cosmic  uni-
formity of  substance  and  interaction  upwards  among  the  essences  and
operations  of  an  unknown  spiritual  world.  And  in  order  to  explore
these  unreachable  altitudes  I  would  not  ask  to  stand  with  the  theologian
on  the  summit  of  a  "  cloud-capt  tower,"  but  rather  on  plain  earth  at  the
measured  base  of  a  trigonometrical  survey.

702.  If  we  would  measure  such  a  base,  the  jungle  must  be  cleared
to  begin  with.     Let  us  move  for  a  while  among  first  definitions ;  trying
to  make  clear  to  ourselves  what  kind  of  thing  it  is  that  we  are  endeavour-
ing to  trace  or  discover.     In  popular  parlance,  we  are  looking  out  for
ghosts.     What  connotation,  then,  are  we  to  give  to  the  word  "  ghost  " — a
word  which   has  embodied  so   many  unfounded    theories  and  causeless
fears?     It  would  be  more  satisfactory,  in  the  present  state  of  our  know-
ledge, simply  to  collect  facts  without  offering  speculative  comment.     But
it  seems  safer  to  begin  by  briefly  pointing  out  the  manifest  errors  of  the
traditional  view;  since  that   tradition,  if  left   unnoticed,  would   remain
lodged  in  the  background  even  of  many  minds  which  have  never  really
accepted  it.


702]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  3

Briefly,  then,  the  popular  view  regards  a  "  ghost "  as  a  deceased
person  permitted  by  Providence  to  hold  communication  with  survivors.
And  this  short  definition  contains,  I  think,  at  least  three  unwarrantable
assumptions.

In  the  first  place,  such  words  as  permission  and  Providence  are  simply
neither  more  nor  less  applicable  to  this  phenomenon  than  to  any  other.
We  conceive  that  all  phenomena  alike  take  place  in  accordance  with  the
laws  of  the  universe,  and  consequently  by  permission  of  the  Supreme
Power  in  the  universe.  Undoubtedly  the  phenomena  with  which  we  are
dealing  are  in  this  sense  permitted  to  occur.  But  there  is  no  a  priori
reason  whatever  for  assuming  that  they  are  permitted  in  any  especial  sense
of  their  own,  or  that  they  form  exceptions  to  law,  instead  of  being  ex-
emplifications of  law.  Nor  is  there  any  a  posteriori  reason  for  supposing
any  such  inference  to  be  deducible  from  a  study  of  the  phenomena
themselves.  If  we  attempt  to  find  in  these  phenomena  any  poetical
justice  or  manifest  adaptation  to  human  cravings,  we  shall  be  just  as
much  disappointed  as  if  we  endeavoured  to  find  a  similar  satisfaction  in
the  ordinary  course  of  terrene  history.

In  the  second  place,  we  have  no  warrant  for  the  assumption  that  the
phantom  seen,  even  though  it  be  somehow  caused  by  a  deceased  person,
is  that  deceased  person,  in  any  ordinary  sense  of  the  word.  Instead  of
appealing  to  the  crude  analogy  of  the  living  friend  who,  when  he  has
walked  into  the  room,  is  in  the  room,  we  shall  find  for  the  ghost  a  much
closer  parallel  in  those  hallucinatory  figures  or  phantasms  which  living
persons  can  sometimes  project  at  a  distance.  When  Mr.  Kirk,  for  in-
stance, caused  by  an  effort  of  will  an  apparition  of  himself  to  a  waking  per-
cipient out  of  sight  (see  668  B),  he  was  himself  awake  and  conscious  in
the  place  where,  not  his  phantom,  but  his  body,  stood.  Whatever,  then,
that  phantom  was — however  generated  or  conditioned — we  cannot  say
that  it  was  himself.  And  equally  unjustifiable  must  be  the  common
parlance  which  speaks  of  the  ghost  as  though  it  were  the  deceased  person
himself — a  revenant  coming  back  amongst  living  men.

All  this,  of  course,  will  be  already  familiar  to  most  of  my  readers,  and
only  needs  repetition  here  because  experience  shows  that  when — as  with
these  post-mortem  phantoms — the  deceased  person  has  gone  well  out  of
sight  or  reach  there  is  a  fresh  tendency,  so  to  say,  to  anthropomorphose
the  apparition ;  to  suppose  that,  as  the  deceased  person  is  not  provably
anywhere  else,  he  is  probably  here ;  and  that  the  apparition  is  bound  to
behave  accordingly.  All  such  assumptions  must  be  dismissed,  and  the
phantom  must  be  taken  on  its  merits,  as  indicating  merely  a  certain
connection  with  the  deceased,  the  precise  nature  of  that  connection
being  a  part  of  the  problem  to  be  solved.

And  in  the  third  place,  just  as  we  must  cease  to  say  that  the  phantom  is
the  deceased,  so  also  must  we  cease  to  ascribe  to  the  phantom  the  motives
by  which  we  imagine  that  the  deceased  might  be  swayed.  We  must


4  CHAPTER    VII  [703

therefore  exclude  from  our  definition  of  a  ghost  any  words  which  assume
its  intention  to  communicate  with  the  living.  It  may  bear  such  a  relation
to  the  deceased  that  it  can  reflect  or  represent  his  presumed  wish  to
communicate,  or  it  may  not.  If,  for  instance,  its  relation  to  his  post-
mortem life  be  like  the  relation  of  my  dreams  to  my  earthly  life,  it  may
represent  little  that  is  truly  his,  save  such  vague  memories  and  instincts
as  give  a  dim  individuality  to  each  man's  trivial  dreams.

703.  Let  us  attempt,  then,  a  truer  definition.  Instead  of  describing
a  "  ghost "  as  a  dead  person  permitted  to  communicate  with  the  living,
let  us  define  it  as  a  manifestation  of  persistent  personal  energy,  or  as  an
indication  that  some  kind  of  force  is  being  exercised  after  death  which  is
in  some  way  connected  with  a  person  previously  known  on  earth.  In  this
definition  we  have  eliminated,  as  will  be  seen,  a  great  mass  of  popular
assumptions.  Yet  we'  must  introduce  a  further  proviso,  lest  our  definition
still  seem  to  imply  an  assumption  which  we  have  no  right  to  make.  It
is  theoretically  possible  that  this  force  or  influence,  which  after  a  man's
death  creates  a  phantasmal  impression  of  him,  may  indicate  no  con-
tinuing action  on  his  part,  but  may  be  some  residue  of  the  force  or
energy  which  he  generated  while  yet  alive.  There  may  be  veridical  after-
images— such  as  Gurney  hints  at  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  417)
when  in  his  comments  on  the  recurring  figure  of  an  old  woman — seen  on
the  bed  where  she  was  murdered — he  remarks  that  this  figure  suggests
not  so  much  "  any  continuing  local  interest  on  the  part  of  the  deceased
person,  as  the  survival  of  a  mere  image,  impressed,  we  cannot  guess  how,
on  we  cannot  guess  what,  by  that  person's  physical  organism,  and  per-
ceptible at  times  to  those  endowed  with  some  cognate  form  of  sensitive-
ness." (I  quote  the  case  referred  to  in  733  B,  and  a  second  similar  one
in  745  B.)

Strange  as  this  notion  may  seem,  it  is  strongly  suggested  by  many
of  the  cases  of  haunting  which  are  referred  to  later  in  this  chapter.
We  shall  presently  find  (see  745-751)  that  there  is  strong  evidence
for  the  recurrence  of  the  same  hallucinatory  figures  in  the  same
localities,  but  weak  evidence  to  indicate  any  purpose  in  most  of  these
figures,  or  any  connection  with  bygone  individuals,  or  with  such  trage-
dies as  are  popularly  supposed  to  start  a  ghost  on  its  career.  In
some  of  these  cases  of  frequent,  meaningless  recurrence  of  a  figure  in  a
given  spot,  we  are  driven  to  wonder  whether  it  can  be  some  deceased
person's  past  frequentation  of  that  spot,  rather  than  any  fresh  action  of
his  after  death,  which  has  generated  what  I  have  termed  the  veridical
after-image — veridical  in  the  sense  that  it  communicates  information,
previously  unknown  to  the  percipient,  as  to  a  former  inhabitant  of  the
haunted  locality.

Such  are  some  of  the  questions  which  our  evidence  suggests.  And  I
may  point  out  that  the  very  fact  that  such  bizarre  problems  should  present
themselves  at  every  turn  does  in  a  certain  sense  tend  to  show  that  these


704]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  5

apparitions  are  not  purely  subjective  things, — do  not  originate  merely  in
the  percipient's  imagination.  For  they  are  not  like  what  any  man  would
have  imagined.  What  man's  mind  does  tend  to  fancy  on  such  topics
may  be  seen  in  the  endless  crop  of  fictitious  ghost  stories,  which  furnish,
indeed,  a  curious  proof  of  the  persistence  of  preconceived  notions.  For
they  go  on  being  framed  according  to  canons  of  their  own,  and  deal  with
a  set  of  imaginary  phenomena  quite  different  from  those  which  actually
occur.  The  actual  phenomena,  I  may  add,  could  scarcely  be  made
romantic.  One  true  "  ghost  story  "  is  apt  to  be  very  like  another,  and
most  of  them  to  be  fragmentary  and  apparently  meaningless.  Their
meaning,  that  is  to  say,  lies  in  their  conformity,  not  to  the  mythopceic
instinct  of  mankind,  which  fabricates  and  enjoys  the  fictitious  tales,  but
to  some  unknown  law,  not  based  on  human  sentiment  or  convenience
at  all.

And  thus,  absurdly  enough,  we  sometimes  hear  men  ridicule  the
phenomena  which  actually  do  happen,  simply  because  those  phenomena
do  not  suit  their  preconceived  notions  of  what  ghostly  phenomena  ought
to  be ; — not  perceiving  that  this  very  divergence,  this  very  unexpectedness,
is  in  itself  no  slight  indication  of  an  origin  outside  the  minds  which
obviously  were  so  far  from  anticipating  anything  of  the  kind.

704.  And  in  fact  the  very  qualities  which  are  most  apt  to  raise  deri-
sion are  such  as  the  evidence  set  forth  in  the  earlier  chapters  of  this  work
might  reasonably  lead  us  to  expect.  For  I  hold  that  now  for  the  first  time
can  we  form  a  conception  of  ghostly  communications  which  shall  in  any
way  consist  or  cohere  with  more  established  conceptions ;  which  can  be
presented  as  in  any  way  a  development  of  facts  which  are  already  experi-
mentally known.  Two  preliminary  conceptions  were  needed — conceptions
in  one  sense  ancient  enough ;  but  yet  the  first  of  which  has  only  in  this
generation  found  its  place  in  science,  while  the  second  is  as  yet  awaiting
its  brevet  of  orthodoxy.  The  first  conception  is  that  with  which  hypnotism
and  various  automatisms  have  familiarised  us, — the  conception  of  multiplex
personality,  of  the  potential  co-existence  of  many  states  and  many  memories
in  the  same  individual.  The  second  is  the  conception  of  telepathy ;  of
the  action  of  mind  on  mind  apart  from  the  ordinary  organs  of^liense ;  and
especially  of  its  action  by  means  of  hallucinations ; — by  the  generation  of
veridical  phantasms  which  form,  as  it  were,  messages  from  men  still  in  the
flesh.  And  I  believe  that  these  two  conceptions  are  in  this  way  connected,
that  the  telepathic  message  generally  starts  from,  and  generally  impinges
upon,  a  subconscious  or  submerged  stratum  in  both  agent  and  percipient.1
Wherever  there  is  hallucination,  whether  delusive  or  veridical,  I  hold
that  a  message  of  some  sort  is  forcing  its  way  upwards  from  one  stratum
of  personality  to  another, — a  message  which  may  be  merely  dreamlike  and
incoherent,  or  which  may  symbolise  a  fact  otherwise  unreachable  by  the
percipient  personality.  And  the  mechanism  seems  much  the  same  whether
1  See  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  231.


6  CHAPTER    VII  [704

the  message's  path  be  continued  within  one  individual  or  pass  between
two ;  whether  A's  own  submerged  self  be  signalling  to  his  emergent  self
or  B  be  telepathically  stimulating  the  hidden  fountains  of  perception  in  A.
If  anything  like  this  be  true,  it  seems  plainly  needful  that  all  that  we  know
of  abnormal  or  supernormal  communications  between  minds,  or  states  of
the  same  mind,  still  embodied  in  flesh,  should  be  searched  for  analogies
which  may  throw  light  on  this  strangest  mode  of  intercourse  between
embodied  and  disembodied  minds.  Our  steps  on  this  uncertain  ground
must  needs  be  short  and  wavering.  But  they  may  help  to  mark  the  right
direction  for  future  inquiry,  and  to  dispel  certain  vulgar  preconceptions
which  can  only  mislead.

A  communication  (if  such  a  thing  exists)  from  a  departed  person  to  a
person  still  on  earth  is,  at  any  rate,  a  communication  from  a  mind  in  one
state  of  existence  to  a  mind  in  a  very  different  state  of  existence.  And  it
is,  moreover,  a  communication  from  one  mind  to  another  which  passes
through  some  channel  other  than  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense,  since
on  one  side  of  the  gulf  no  material  sense-organs  exist.  It  will  apparently
be  an  extreme  instance  of  both  these  classes — of  communications  between
state  and  state,1  and  of  telepathic  communications ;  and  we  ought,  there-
fore, to  approach  it  by  considering  the  less  advanced  cases  of  both  these
types.

On  what  occasions  do  we  commonly  find  a  mind  conversing  with
another  mind  not  on  the  same  plane  with  itself? — with  a  mind  inhabiting
in  some  sense  a  different  world,  and  viewing  the  environment  with  a
difference  of  outlook  greater  than  the  mere  difference  of  character  of  the
two  personages  will  account  for?

The  first  instance  of  this  sort  which  will  occur  to  us  lies  in  spon-
taneous somnambulism,  or  colloquy  between  a  person  asleep  and  a
person  awake.  And  observe  here  how  slight  an  accident  allows  us  to
enter  into  converse  with  a  state  which  at  first  sight  seems  a  type  of  incom-
municable isolation.  "  Awake,  we  share  our  world,"  runs  the  old  saying,
"  but  each  dreamer  inhabits  a  world  of  his  own."  Yet  the  dreamer,
apparently  so  self-enclosed,  may  be  gently  led,  or  will  spontaneously  enter,
into  converse  with  waking  men.

The  somnambulist,  or  rather  the  somniloquist — for  it  is  the  talking
rather  than  the  walking  which  is  the  gist  of  the  matter — is  thus  our  first
natural  type  of  the  revenant.

And  observing  the  habits  of  somnambulists,  we  note  that  the  degree  in
which  they  can  communicate  with  other  minds  varies  greatly  in  different

1  Some  word  is  much  needed  to  express  communications  between  one  state  and
another,  e.g.  between  the  somnambulic  and  the  waking  state,  or,  in  hypnotism,  the
cataleptic  and  the  somnambulic,  &c.  The  word  "  methectic  "  (/j.€0fKTiic6s)  seems  to  me
the  most  suitable,  especially  since  neOel-is  happens  to  be  the  word  used  by  Plato  (Farm.
132  D.)  for  participation  between  ideas  and  concrete  objects.  Or  the  word  "  inter-state  "
might  be  pressed  into  this  new  duty.


705]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  7

cases.  One  sleep-waker  will  go  about  his  customary  avocations  without
recognising  the  presence  of  any  other  person  whatever;  another  will
recognise  certain  persons  only,  or  will  answer  when  addressed,  but  only
on  certain  subjects,  his  mind  coming  into  contact  with  other  minds
only  on  a  very  few  points.  Rarely  or  never  will  a  somnambulist  spon-
taneously notice  what  other  persons  are  doing,  and  adapt  his  own  actions
thereto.

Next  let  us  turn  from  natural  to  induced  sleep-waking,  from  idiopathic
somnambulism  to  the  hypnotic  trance.  Here,  too,  throughout  the  different
stages  of  the  trance,  we  find  a  varying  and  partial  (or  elective)  power  of
communication.  Sometimes  the  entranced  subject  makes  no  sign  what-
ever ;  sometimes  he  seems  able  to  hear  and  answer  one  person,  or  certain
persons,  and  not  others  ;  sometimes  he  will  talk  freely  to  all ;  but,  however
freely  he  may  talk,  he  is  not  exactly  his  waking  self,  and  as  a  rule  he  has
no  recollection,  or  a  very  imperfect  recollection,  in  waking  life  of  what  he
has  said  or  done  in  his  trance.

Judging,  then,  from  such  analogy  as  communications  from  one  living
state  to  another  can  suggest  to  us,  we  shall  expect  that  the  communication
of  a  disembodied  or  discarnate  person  with  an  incarnate,  if  such  exist,  will
be  subject  to  narrow  limitations,  and  very  possibly  will  not  form  a  part  of
the  main  current  of  the  supposed  discarnate  consciousness.

705.  These  preliminary  considerations  are  applicable  to  any  kind  of
alleged  communication  from  the  departed — whether  well  or  ill  evidenced ;
whether  conveyed  in  sensory  or  in  motor  form.

Let  us  next  consider  what  types  of  communication  from  the  dead  our
existing  evidence  of  communications  among  the  living  suggests  to  us
as  analogically  possible.  It  appears  to  me  that  there  is  an  important
parallelism  running  through  each  class  of  our  experiments  in  automatism
and  each  class  of  our  spontaneous  phenomena.  Roughly  speaking,  we
may  say  that  our  experiment  and  observation  up  to  this  point  have
comprised  five  different  stages  of  phenomena,  viz.,  (I.)  hypnotic  sugges-
tion; (II.)  telepathic  experiments;  (III.)  spontaneous  telepathy  during
life;  (IV.)  phantasms  at  death;  (V.)  phantasms  after  death.  And  we
find,  I  think,  that  the  same  types  of  communication  meet  us  at  each
stage ;  so  that  this  recurrent  similarity  of  types  raises  a  presumption  that
the  underlying  mechanism  of  manifestation  at  each  stage  may  be  in  some
way  similar.

Again  using  a  mere  rough  form  of  division,  we  shall  find  three  main
forms  of  manifestation  at  each  stage :  (i)  hallucinations  of  the  senses ;  (2)
emotional  and  motor  impulses;  (3)  definite  intellectual  messages.

(I.)  And  first  let  us  start  from  a  class  of  experiments  into  which  tele-
pathy does  not  enter,  but  which  exhibit  in  its  simplest  form  the  mechan-
ism of  the  automatic  transfer  of  messages  from  one  stratum  to  another  of
the  same  personality.  I  speak,  of  course,  of  post-hypnotic  suggestions.
Here  the  agent  is  a  living  man,  operating  in  an  ordinary  way,  by  direct


8  CHAPTER    VII  [705

speech.  The  unusual  feature  lies  in  the  condition  of  the  percipient,  who
is  hypnotised  at  the  time,  and  is  thus  undergoing  a  kind  of  dislocation  of
personality,  or  temporary  upheaval  of  a  habitually  subjacent  stratum  of
the  self.  This  hypnotic  personality,  being  for  the  time  at  the  surface,
receives  the  agent's  verbal  suggestion,  of  which  the  percipient's  waking
self  is  unaware.  Then  afterwards,  when  the  waking  self  has  resumed  its
usual  upper  position,  the  hypnotic  self  carries  out  at  the  stated  time  the
given  suggestion, — an  act  whose  origin  the  upper  stratum  of  consciousness
does  not  know,  but  which  is  in  effect  a  message  communicated  to  the
upper  stratum  from  the  now  submerged  or  subconscious  stratum  on
which  the  suggestion  was  originally  impressed.

And  this  message  may  take  any  one  of  the  three  leading  forms  men-
tioned above ; — say  a  hallucinatory  image  of  the  hypnotiser  or  of  some
other  person ;  or  an  impulse  to  perform  some  action ;  or  a  definite  word
or  sentence  to  be  written  automatically  by  the  waking  self,  which  thus
learns  what  order  has  been  laid  upon  the  hypnotic  self  while  the  waking
consciousness  was  in  abeyance.

(II.)  Now  turn  to  our  experiments  in  thought-transference.  Here
again  the  agent  is  a  living  man ;  but  he  is  no  longer  operating  by  ordinary
means, — by  spoken  words  or  visible  gestures.  He  is  operating  on  the
percipient's  subconscious  self  by  means  of  a  telepathic  impulse,  which  he
desires,  indeed,  to  project  from  himself,  and  which  the  percipient  may
desire  to  receive,  but  of  whose  modus  operandi  the  ordinary  waking  selves
of  agent  and  percipient  alike  are  entirely  unaware.

Here  again  we  may  divide  the  messages  sent  into  the  same  three  main
classes.  First  come  the  hallucinatory  figures — always  or  almost  always  of
himself — which  the  agent  causes  the  percipient  to  see.  Secondly  come
impulses  to  act,  telepathically  impressed,  as  when  the  hypnotiser  desires
his  subject  to  come  to  him  at  an  hour  not  previously  notified.  And  thirdly,
we  have  a  parallel  to  the  post-hypnotic  writing  of  definite  words  or
figures  in  our  own  experiments  on  the  direct  telepathic  transmission
of  words,  figures,  cards,  &c.,  from  the  agent,  using  no  normal  means  of
communication,  to  the  percipient,  either  in  the  hypnotised  or  in  the
waking  state.

(III.)  We  come  next  to  the  spontaneous  phantasms  occurring  during
life.  Here  we  find  the  same  three  broad  classes  of  messages,  with  this
difference,  that  the  actual  apparitions,  which  in  our  telepathic  experimen-
tation are  thus  far  unfortunately  rare,  become  now  the  most  important
class.  I  need  not  recall  the  instances  given  in  Chapters  IV.  and  VI.,
&c.,  where  an  agent  undergoing  some  sudden  crisis  seems  in  some  way  to
generate  an  apparition  of  himself  seen  by  a  distant  percipient.  Important
also  in  this  connection  are  those  apparitions  of  the  double,  where  some  one
agent  (Mrs.  Stone,  Mrs.  Beaumont,  &c.,  see  645  B  and  C),  is  seen  re-
peatedly in  phantasmal  form  by  different  percipients  at  times  when  that
agent  is  undergoing  no  special  crisis.


706]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  9

Again,  among  our  telepathic  impressions  generated  (spontaneously,
not  experimentally)  by  living  agents,  we  have  cases,  which  I  need  not
here  recapitulate,  of  pervading  sensations  of  distress ;  or  impulses  to  return
home  (see,  e.g.,  the  case  of  Mr.  Skirving  in  825  A),  which  are  parallel  to
the  hypnotised  subject's  impulse  to  approach  his  distant  hypnotiser,  at  a
moment  when  that  hypnotiser  is  willing  him  to  do  so.

And  thirdly,  among  these  telepathic  communications  from  the  living
to  the  living,  we  have  definite  sentences  automatically  written,  communi-
cating facts  which  the  distant  person  knows,  but  is  not  consciously
endeavouring  to  transmit.

(IV.)  Passing  on  to  phantasms  which  cluster  about  the  moment  of
death,  we  find  our  three  main  classes  of  cases  still  meeting  us.  Our
readers  are  familiar  with  the  visual  cases,  where  there  is  an  actual  appari-
tion of  the  dying  man,  seen  by  one  or  more  persons ;  and  also  with  the
emotional  and  motor  cases,  where  the  impression,  although  powerful,  is
not  definitely  sensory  in  character.  And  various  cases  also  have  been
published  where  the  message  has  consisted  of  definite  words,  not  always
externalised  as  an  auditory  hallucination,  but  sometimes  automatically
uttered  or  automatically  written  by  the  percipient  himself,  as  in  the  case
communicated  by  Dr.  Liebeault  (see  section  866),  where  a  girl  writes
the  message  announcing  her  friend's  death  at  the  time  when  that  friend  is,
in  fact,  dying  in  a  distant  city.

706.  (V.)  And  now  I  maintain  that  in  these  post-mortem  cases  also
we  find  the  same  general  classes  persisting,  and  in  somewhat  the  same
proportion.  Most  conspicuous  are  the  actual  apparitions,  with  which,
indeed,  the  following  pages  will  mainly  deal.  It  is  very  rare  to  find  an
apparition  which  seems  to  impart  any  verbal  message ;  but  a  case  of
this  kind  has  been  given  in  429  E.  As  a  rule,  however,  the  apparition
is  of  the  apparently  automatic,  purposeless  character,  already  so  fully
described.  We  have  also  the  emotional  and  motor  class  of  post-mortem
cases  (as  Mr.  Cameron  Grant's,  given  in  736  B)  ;  and  these  may,  perhaps,
be  more  numerous  in  proportion  than  our  collection  would  indicate ;
for  it  is  obvious  that  impressions  which  are  so  much  less  definite  than
a  visual  hallucination  (although  they  may  be  even  more  impressive  to
the  percipient  himself)  can  rarely  be  used  as  evidence  of  communication
with  the  departed.

But  now  I  wish  to  point  out  that,  besides  these  two  classes  of  post-
mortem manifestations,  we  have  our  third  class  also  still  persisting ;  we
have  definite  verbal  messages  which  at  least  purport,  and  sometimes,  I
think,  with  strong  probability,  to  come  from  the  departed.

I  have,  indeed,  for  the  reader's  convenience,  postponed  these  motor
cases  to  a  subsequent  chapter,  so  that  the  evidence  here  and  now  pre-
sented for  survival  will  be  very  incomplete.  Yet,  at  any  rate,  we  are
gradually  getting  before  us  a  fairly  definite  task.  We  have  in  this
chapter  to  record  and  analyse  such  sensory  experiences  of  living  men


io  CHAPTER    VII  [707

as  seem  referable  to  the  action  of  some  human  individuality  persisting
after  death.  We  have  also  obtained  some  preliminary  notion  as  to  the
kind  of  phenomena  for  which  we  can  hope,  especially  as  to  what  their
probable  limitations  must  be,  considering  how  great  a  gulf  between
psychical  states  any  communication  must  overpass.

707.  Let  us  now  press  the  actual  evidential  question  somewhat
closer.  Let  us  consider,  for  it  is  by  no  means  evident  at  first  sight,
what  conditions  a  visual  or  auditory  phantasm  is  bound  to  fulfil  before  it
can  be  regarded  as  indicating  prima  facie  the  influence  of  a  discarnate
mind.  The  discussion  may  be  best  introduced  by  quoting  the  words  in
which  Edmund  Gurney  opened  it  in  iSSS.1  The  main  evidential  lines  as
there  laid  down  retain  their  validity,  although  the  years  which  have  since
passed  have  greatly  augmented  the  testimony,  and  in  so  doing  have  illus-
trated yet  other  tests  of  true  post-mortem  communication, — to  which  we
shall  presently  come.

Those  who  have  followed  the  records  and  discussions  printed  in  the  Pro-
ceedings and  the  Journal  of  this  Society  will  not  need  to  be  informed  how  little
the  evidence  which  has  not  infrequently  led  even  educated  persons  to  believe
in  the  actual  reappearance  of  dead  friends  really  justifies  any  such  belief.  The
reason  can  be  given  in  a  single  sentence.  In  most  of  the  cases  where  persons
have  professed  to  have  seen  or  to  have  held  communication  with  deceased
friends  and  relatives,  there  is  nothing  to  distinguish  the  phenomenon  which
their  senses  have  encountered  from  purely  subjective  hallucination.  Simple  as
this  statement  seems,  the  truth  which  it  embodies  remained  for  centuries  un-
guessed.  It  is  only  in  comparatively  modern  days  that  the  facts  of  sensory
hallucination  have  been  at  all  understood,  and  that  the  extreme  definiteness
which  the  delusive  object  may  take  has  been  recognised ;  and  even  now  the
truth  of  the  matter  has  not  had  time  to  penetrate  to  the  popular  mind.  The
reply  of  average  common  sense  to  any  account  of  an  apparition  is  usually  either
that  the  witness  is  lying  or  grossly  exaggerating,  or  that  he  was  mad  or  drunk
or  emotionally  excited  at  the  time  ;  or  at  the  very  most  that  his  experience  was
an  illusion — a  misinterpretation  of  some  sight  or  sound  which  was  of  an  entirely
objective  kind.  A  very  little  careful  study  of  the  subject  will,  however,  show
that  all  these  hypotheses  must  of  ten  be  rejected ;  that  the  witness  may  be  in  good
health,  and  in  no  exceptional  state  of  nervousness  or  excitement,  and  that  what
he  sees  or  hears  may  still  be  of  purely  subjective  origin — the  projection  of  his
own  brain.  And  among  the  objects  thus  fictitiously  presented,  it  is  only  natural
to  expect  that  a  certain  percentage  will  take  the  form  of  a  human  figure  or
voice  which  the  percipient  recognises  as  that  of  a  deceased  person  ;  for  the
memory  of  such  figures  and  voices  is  part  of  his  mental  store,  and  the  latent
images  are  ready  to  supply  the  material  of  waking  hallucination,  just  as  they
are  ready  to  supply  the  material  of  dream.

^  It  is  further  evident  that  in  alleged  cases  of  apparitions  of  the  dead,  the
point  which  we  have  held  to  distinguish  certain  apparitions  of  living  persons
from  purely  subjective  hallucinations  is  necessarily  lacking.  That  point  is
coincidence  between  the  apparition  and  some  critical  or  exceptional  condition
of  the  person  who  seems  to  appear ;  but  with  regard  to  the  dead,  we  have  no

1  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  403-408.


707]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  11

independent  knowledge  of  their  condition,  and  therefore  never  have  the  oppor-
tunity of  observing  any  such  coincidences.

There  remain  three,  and  I  think  only  three,  conditions  which  might  estab-
lish a  presumption  that  an  apparition  or  other  immediate  manifestation1  of  a
dead  person  is  something  more  than  a  mere  subjective  hallucination  of  the  per-
cipient's senses.  Either  (i)  more  persons  than  one  might  be  independently
affected  by  the  phenomenon ;  or  (2)  the  phantasm  might  convey  information,
afterwards  discovered  to  be  true,  of  something  which  the  percipient  had  never
known ;  or  (3)  the  appearance  might  be  that  of  a  person  whom  the  percipient
himself  had  never  seen,  and  of  whose  aspect  he  was  ignorant,  and  yet  his  de-
scription of  it  might  be  sufficiently  definite  for  identification.  But  though  one
or  more  of  these  conditions  would  have  to  be  fully  satisfied  before  we  could  be
convinced  that  any  particular  apparition  of  the  dead  had  some  cause  external  to
the  percipient's  own  mind,  there  is  one  more  general  characteristic  of  the  class
which  is  sufficiently  suggestive  of  such  a  cause  to  be  worth  considering.  I  mean
the  disproportionate  number  of  cases  which  occur  shortly  after  the  death  of  the
person  represented.  Such  a  time-relation,  if  frequently  enough  encountered,
might  enable  us  to  argue  for  the  objective  origin  of  the  phenomenon  in  a  manner
analogous  to  that  which  leads  us  to  conclude  that  many  phantasms  of  the  living
have  an  objective  (a  telepathic)  origin.  For,  according  to  the  doctrines  of  pro-
babilities, a  hallucination  representing  a  known  person  would  not  by  chance
present  a  definite  time-relation  to  a  special  cognate  event — viz.,  the  death  of
that  person — in  more  than  a  certain  percentage  of  the  whole  number  of  similar
hallucinations  that  occur ;  and  if  that  percentage  is  decidedly  exceeded,  there
is  reason  to  surmise  that  some  other  cause  than  chance — in  other  words,  some
objective  origin  for  the  phantasm — is  present.

Supposing  the  peculiarity  which  I  have  mentioned  to  be  established,  the
significance  of  the  time-relation  would  of  course  be  quite  a  different  question.
The  popular  mind  naturally  leaps  to  explanations  of  an  exciting  fact,  before
the  fact  itself  is  at  all  established.  Thus  it  is  said  that  the  deceased  person
comes  to  say  farewell,  or  to  cheer  the  hearts  of  mourners  while  their  grief  is
fresh ;  or  that  his  "spirit"  is  "earth-bound,"  and  can  only  gradually  free  itself.
Or,  again,  there  is  the  elaborate  theory  of  "shells  "  propounded  by  M.  D'Assier,
who  holds  that,  though  consciousness  and  individuality  have  died,  some  basis
of  physical  manifestation  is  still  left,  which  fades  away  by  slow  degrees.  I  do
not  propose  now  to  discuss  any  of  these  hypotheses.  Our  business  at  present
is  wholly  with  \hzfacts  of  post-mortem  appearances.  The  question  for  science
is  simply  whether  those  facts  point  to  any  external  cause  at  all ;  and  it  is  as
bearing  on  this  great  primary  question  that  the  inquiry  as  to  the  relative  fre-
quency of  the  phenomena  near  the  time  of  death  assumes  importance.

It  was  in  the  formation  of  a  large  collection  of  first-hand  testimony  on  the
subject  of  sensory  hallucination,  that  I  was  first  struck  by  the  large  proportion
of  cases  where  the  phantasm  represented  a  friend  or  relative  recently  dead.
Out  of  two  hundred  and  thirty-one  hallucinations  representing  recognised  human
beings,  twenty-eight,  or  nearly  an  eighth  part,  occurred  within  a  few  weeks  of
the  death  of  the  person  represented.  There  are  two  reasons,  however,  why
little  weight  can  be  allowed  to  this  fact.  In  the  first  place  a  phantasm  repre-

1  I  am  not  here  considering  mediate  manifestations,  as  where  evidence  of  "spirit
identity  "  is  alleged  to  have  been  given  through,  e.g.,  the  writing  of  a  medium  under
"control."


12  CHAPTER    VII  [707

senting  a  person  whose  death  is  recent  is  specially  likely  to  excite  interest,  and
so  to  be  noted  and  remembered ;  and  this  might  easily  swell  the  percentage  of
this  class  of  cases  in  such  a  collection  as  mine.  And  in  the  second  place,  the
fact  of  the  death  was  in  every  instance  known  to  the  percipient.  It  is,  there-
fore, natural  to  conclude  that  the  emotional  state  of  the  percipient  was  the
sufficient  cause  of  the  hallucination;  and  that  is  the  explanation  which  the
large  majority  of  psychological  and  medical  experts  would  at  once  adopt.  I
should  myself  feel  more  completely  satisfied  with  it  if  we  had  any  record  of
the  phantasmal  appearance  of  a  person  whom  the  friend  who  saw  the  appear-
ance believed  to  be  dead,  but  who  was  really  safe  and  sound.  Still,  false  alarms
of  death  are  not  so  common  as  to  make  it  certain,  or  perhaps  even  likely,  that
we  should  have  encountered  such  a  case.  And  meanwhile  I  think  that  grief,
and  the  sense  of  awe  commonly  connected  with  death,  ought  to  be  held  as  the
sufficient  cause  of  abnormal  sensory  experiences  connected  with  persons  whose
recent  death  is  being  mourned,  until  the  objective  reality  of  phantasms  of  the
dead  in  certain  cases  is  established  by  some  independent  line  of  proof.

If,  then,  we  are  to  draw  any  probable  conclusion  as  to  the  objective  nature
of  post-mortem  appearances  and  communications  (or  of  some  of  them)  from
the  fact  of  their  special  frequency  soon  after  death,  we  must  confine  ourselves
to  cases  where  the  fact  of  death  has  been  unknown  to  the  percipient  at  the
time  of  his  experience.  Now,  in  these  days  of  letters  and  telegrams,  people
for  the  most  part  hear  of  the  deaths  of  friends  and  relatives  within  a  very
few  days,  sometimes  within  a  very  few  hours,  after  the  death  occurs ;  so  that  ap-
pearances of  the  sort  required  would,  as  a  rule,  have  to  follow  very  closely  indeed
on  the  death.  Have  we  evidence  of  any  considerable  number  of  such  cases  ?

Readers  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  will  know  that  we  have.  In  a  number
of  cases  which  were  treated  in  that  book  as  examples  of  telepathic  transference
from  a  dying  person,  the  person  was  actually  dead  at  the  time  that  the  perci-
pient's experience  occurred ;  and  the  inclusion  of  such  cases  under  the  title  of
Phantasms  of  the  Living  naturally  occasioned  a  certain  amount  of  adverse
criticism.  Their  inclusion,  it  will  be  remembered,  required  an  assumption
which  cannot  by  any  means  be  regarded  as  certain.  We  had  to  suppose  that  the
telepathic  transfer  took  place  just  before,  or  exactly  at,  the  moment  of  death  ;
but  that  the  impression  remained  latent  in  the  percipient's  mind,  and  only  after
an  interval  emerged  into  his  consciousness,  whether  as  waking  vision  or  as
dream  or  in  some  other  form.  Now,  as  a  provisional  hypothesis,  I  think  that
this  assumption  was  justified.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  moment  of  death  is,
in  time,  the  central  point  of  a  cluster  of  abnormal  experiences  occurring  to
percipients  at  a  distance,  of  which  some  precede,  while  others  follow,  the  death ;
it  is  natural,  therefore,  to  surmise  that  the  same  explanation  will  cover  the  whole
group,  and  that  the  motive  force  in  each  of  its  divisions  lies  in  a  state  of
the  "  agent "  prior  to  bodily  death.  In  the  second  place,  some  of  the  facts
of  experimental  thought-transference  countenance  the  view  that  "  transferred
impressions  "  may  be  latent  for  a  time  before  the  recipient  becomes  aware  of
them  ;  and  recent  discoveries  with  respect  to  the  whole  subject  of  automatism
and  "  secondary  intelligence  "  make  it  seem  far  less  improbable  than  it  would
otherwise  have  seemed  that  telepathy  may  take  effect  first  on  the  "  unconscious  "
part  of  the  mind.1  And  in  the  third  place,  the  period  of  supposed  latency  has

1  In  some  experimental  cases,  it  will  be  remembered,  the  impression  takes  effect
through  the  motor,  not  the  sensory,  system  of  the  recipient,  as  by  automatic  writing,  so
that  he  is  never  directly  aware  of  it  at  all.


707]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  13

in  a  good  many  instances  been  a  period  when  the  person  affected  was  in
activity,  and  when  his  mind  and  senses  were  being  solicited  by  other  things  ;
and  in  such  cases  it  is  specially  easy  to  suppose  that  the  telepathic  impression
did  not  get  the  right  conditions  for  rising  into  consciousness  until  a  season  of
silence  and  recueille?nent  arrived.1  But  though  the  theory  of  latency  has  thus
a  good  deal  to  be  said  for  it,  my  colleagues  and  I  are  most  anxious  not  to  be
supposed  to  be  putting  forward  as  a  dogma  what  must  be  regarded  at  present
merely  as  a  working  hypothesis.  Psychical  research  is  of  all  subjects  the  one
where  it  is  most  important  to  avoid  this  error,  and  to  keep  the  mind  open  for
new  interpretations  of  the  facts.  And  in  the  present  instance  there  are  certain
definite  objections  which  may  fairly  be  made  to  the  hypothesis  that  a  telepathic
impression  derived  from  a  dying  person  may  emerge  after  hours  of  latency.
The  experimental  cases  to  which  I  have  referred  as  analogous  are  few  and
uncertain,  and,  moreover,  in  them  the  period  of  latency  has  been  measured  by
seconds  or  minutes,  not  by  hours.  And  though,  as  I  have  said,  some  of  the
instances  of  apparent  delay  among  the  death-cases  might  be  accounted  for  by
the  fact  that  the  percipient's  mind  or  senses  needed  to  be  withdrawn  from
other  occupations  before  the  manifestation  could  take  place,  there  are  other
instances  where  this  is  not  so,  and  where  no  ground  at  all  appears  for  con-
necting the  delay  with  the  percipient's  condition.  On  the  whole,  then,  the
alternative  hypothesis — that  the  condition  of  the  phenomenon  on  the  "  agent's  "
side  (be  it  psychical  or  be  it  physical)  is  one  which  only  comes  into  existence
at  a  distinct  interval  after  death,  and  that  the  percipient  really  is  impressed
at  the  moment,  and  not  before  the  moment,  when  he  is  conscious  of  the
impression — is  one  which  must  be  steadily  kept  in  view.

So  far  I  have  been  speaking  of  cases  where  the  interval  between  the  death
and  the  manifestation  was  so  short  as  to  make  the  theory  of  latency  possible.
The  rule  adopted  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  was  that  this  interval  must  not
exceed  twelve  hours.  But  we  have  records  of  a  few  cases  where  this  interval
has  been  greatly  exceeded,  and  yet  where  the  fact  of  the  death  was  still  un-
known to  the  percipient  at  the  time  of  his  experience.  The  theory  of  latency
cannot  reasonably  be  applied  to  cases  where  weeks  or  months  divide  the  vision
(or  whatever  it  may  be)  from  the  moment  of  death,  which  is  the  latest  at  which
an  ordinary  2  telepathically  transferred  idea  could  have  obtained  access  to  the
percipient.  And  the  existence  of  such  cases— so  far  as  it  tends  to  establish
the  reality  of  objectively-caused  apparitions  of  the  dead — diminishes  the  ob-
jection to  conceiving  that  the  appearances,  &c.,  which  have  very  shortly
followed  death  have  had  a  different  causation  from  those  which  have  coincided
with  or  very  shortly  preceded  it.  For  we  shall  not  be  inventing  a  wholly  new
class  for  the  former  cases,  but  only  provisionally  shifting  them  from  one  class
to  another — to  a  much  smaller  and  much  less  well-evidenced  class,  it  is  true,
but  one  nevertheless  for  which  we  have  evidence  enough  to  justify  us  in  ex-
pecting more.

1  See,  for  instance,  case  500,  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  462.

2  I  mean  by  "  ordinary "  the  classes  which   are  recognised  and  treated  of  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living.     But  if  the  departed  survive,  the  possibility  of  thought-
transference  between   them  and  those  who  remain  is  of  course  a  perfectly  tenable
hypothesis.     "  As  our  telepathic  theory  is  a  psychical  one,  and  makes  no  physical
assumptions,  it  would  be  perfectly  applicable  (though  the  name  perhaps  would  be  in-
appropriate) to  the  conditions  of  disembodied  existence." — Phantasms ;  vol.  i.  p.  512.


I4  CHAPTER    VII  [708

708.  This,  as  I  conceive,  is  a  sound  method  of  proceeding  from
ground  made  secure  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living — and  retraversed  in  my
own  just  previous  chapter — to  cases  closely  analogous,  save  for  that  little
difference  in  time-relations,  that  occurrence  in  the  hours  which  follow,
instead  of  the  hours  which  precede,  bodily  dissolution,  which  counts  for
so  much  in  our  insight  into  cosmic  law.1

The  hypothesis  of  latency  which  thus  meets  us  in  limine  in  this  inquiry,
will  soon  be  found  inadequate  to  cover  the  facts.  Yet  it  will  be  well  to
dwell  somewhat  more  fully  upon  its  possible  range.

It  might  conduce  to  a  clearer  view  of  the  facts  if  we  could  draw  a
curve,  showing  the  proportionate  number  of  apparitions  observed  at  various
periods  before  and  after  death.  It  would  then  be  seen  that  they  increase
very  rapidly  for  the  few  hours  which  precede  death,  and  decrease  gradu-
ally during  the  hours  and  days  which  follow.  In  the  present  state  of  our
evidence,  however,  and  considering  all  the  problems  involved,  there
would  perhaps  be  an  affectation  of  more  exactness  than  we  can  actually
attain,  were  we  to  set  forth  such  a  curve,  embodying  the  dates,  in  reference
to  death,  of  all  the  cases  as  yet  received  by  us.  It  may  be  enough  to
say,  generally,  that  if  the  length  of  the  base-line  represents  a  year,  and
the  point  with  the  highest  ordinate  the  moment  of  death,  the  comparative
frequency  of  veridical  apparitions  might  be  somewhat  as  follows  : —


ONE     YEAR

That  is  to  say,  the  recognised  apparitions  decrease  rapidly  in  the  few
days  after  death,  then  more  slowly ;  and  after  about  a  year's  time  they
become  so  sporadic  that  we  can  no  longer  include  them  in  a  steadily
descending  line.

1  Certain  statistics  as  to  these  time-relations  are  given  by  Edmund  Gurney  as
follows  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  408) :  "The  statistics  drawn  from  the  first-hand
records  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  as  to  the  time-relation  of  appearances,  &c.,  occurring
in  close  proximity  to  deaths,  are  as  follows  : — In  134  cases  the  coincidence  is  represented
as  having  been  exact,  or,  when  times  are  specifically  stated,  close  to  within  an  hour.
In  104  cases  it  is  not  known  whether  the  percipient's  experience  preceded  or  followed
the  death;  such  cases  cannot  be  taken  account  of  for  our  present  purpose.  There


708]  PHANTASMS     OF    THE    DEAD  15

Yet  one  more  point  must  be  touched  on,  to  avoid  misconception  of
the  phrase  cited  above,  that  "  the  moment  of  death  is  the  centre  of  a
cluster  of  abnormal  experiences,  of  which  some  precede,  while  others
follow  the  death."  Gurney,  of  course,  did  not  mean  to  assume  that  the
act  of  death  itself  was  the  cause  of  all  these  experiences.  Those  which
occur  before  death  may  be  caused  or  conditioned,  not  by  the  death  itself,
but  by  the  abnormal  state,  as  of  coma,  delirium,  &c.,  which  preceded  the
death.  This  we  say  because  Ve  have  many  instances  where  veridical
phantasms  have  coincided  with  moments  of  crisis — carriage-accidents  and
the  like — occurring  to  distant  agents,  but  not  followed  by  death.  Accord-
ingly we  find  that  in  almost  all  cases  where  a  phantasm,  apparently  veridical,
has  preceded  the  agent's  death,  that  death  was  the  result  of  disease  and
not  of  accident.  To  this  rule  there  are  very  few  exceptions.  There  is
a  case  given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (vol.  ii.  p.  52),  where  the  phan-
tasm seems  on  the  evidence  to  have  preceded  by  about  half-an-hour
(longitude  allowed  for)  a  sudden  death  by  drowning.  In  this  case  the
percipient  was  in  a  Norfolk  farmhouse,  the  drowning  man — or  agent —
was  in  a  storm  off  the  island  of  Tristan  d'Acunha ;  and  we  have  sug-
gested that  an  error  of  clocks  or  of  observation  may  account  for  the
discrepancy.  In  another  case  the  death  was  in  a  sense  a  violent  one,
for  it  was  a  suicide ;  but  the  morbidly  excited  state  of  the  girl  a  few  hours
before  death — when  her  phantasm  was  seen — was  in  itself  a  state  of
crisis.  But  there  are  also  a  few  recorded  cases  (none  of  which  were  cited
in  Phantasms  of  the  Living)  where  a  phantasm  or  double  of  some  person
has  been  observed  some  days  previous  to  that  person's  accidental  death.
The  evidence  obtained  in  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,  however,  tended
to  show  that  cases  of  this  sort  are  too  few  to  suggest  even  primd  facie  a
causal  connection  between  the  death  and  the  apparition  (see  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  331).

Thus  much  it  has  seemed  needful  to  say  in  order  to  explain  the  diffi-
culty of  representing  by  any  one  curved  line  the  true  time-relations  in-
volved in  this  complex  matter.  I  now  proceed  briefly  to  review  some
of  the  cases  where  the  interval  between  death  and  phantasm  has  been
measurable  by  minutes  or  hours.

It  is  not  easy  to  get  definite  cases  where  the  interval  has  been  measur-
able by  minutes ;  for  if  the  percipient  is  at  a  distance  from  the  agent
we  can  seldom  be  sure  that  the  clocks  at  both  places  have  been  correct,
and  correctly  observed ;  while  if  he  is  present  with  the  agent  we  can

remain  78  cases  where  it  appears  that  there  was  an  interval  of  more  than  an  hour  ;  and
of  these  38  preceded  and  40  followed  the  death.  Of  the  38  cases  where  the  percipient's
experience  preceded  the  death  (all  of  which,  of  course,  took  place  during  a  time  when
the  'agent'  was  seriously  ill),  19  fell  within  twenty-four  hours  of  the  death.  Of  the
40  cases  where  the  percipient's  experience  followed  the  death,  all  followed  within  an
interval  of  twenty-four  hours,  and  in  only  one  ( included  by  mistake )  was  the  twelve  hours'
interval  certainly  exceeded,  though  there  are  one  or  two  others  where  it  is  possible  that
it  was  slightly  exceeded."


16  CHAPTER    VII  [709

rarely  be  sure  that  the  phantasm  observed  is  more  than  a  mere  subjective
hallucination.  Thus  we  have  several  accounts  of  a  rushing  sound  heard
by  the  watcher  of  a  dying  man  just  after  his  apparent  death,  or  of  some
kind  of  luminosity  observed  near  his  person ;  but  this  is  just  the  moment
when  we  may  suppose  some  subjective  hallucination  likely  to  occur,  and
if  one  person's  senses  alone  are  affected  we  cannot  allow  much  evidential
weight  to  the  occurrence.  I  may  add  that  one  of  our  cases  (which  I
quote  below,  in  747)  is  remarkable  in  that  the  auditory  hallucina-
tion— a  sound  as  of  female  voices  gently  singing — was  heard  by  five  per-
sons— by  four  of  them,  as  it  seems,  independently — and  in  two  places,  on
different  sides  of  the  house.  At  the  same  time,  one  person — the  Eton
master  whose  mother  had  just  died,  and  who  was  therefore  presumably
in  a  frame  of  mind  more  prone  to  hallucination  than  the  physician,
matron,  friend,  or  servants  who  actually  did  hear  the  singing — himself
heard  nothing  at  all.  In  this  case  the  physician  felt  no  doubt  that
Mrs.  L.  was  actually  dead ;  and  in  fact  it  was  during  the  laying  out  of
the  body  that  the  sounds  occurred.  In  including  this  case  and  similar
collective  ones  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Gurney  expressly  stated
(vol.  ii.  pp.  190-92)  that  he  did  so  because  in  his  view  they  involved  at
least  an  element  of  thought-transference  between  the  living  minds  of  the
percipients,  whatever  other  influence  may  or  may  not  have  proceeded  from
the  deceased  person.  But  if  we  are  finding  reason  to  suppose  that  the
deceased  person's  power  of  influencing  other  minds  may  persist  after  death,
it  seems  reasonable  to  dwell  on  that  aspect  of  such  an  incident  as  this.1

709.  There  are  some  other  circumstances  also  in  which,  in  spite  of
the  fact  that  the  death  is  already  known,  a  hallucination  occurring  shortly
afterwards  may  have  some  slight  evidential  value.  Thus  we  have  a  case
where  a  lady  who  knew  that  her  sister  had  died  a  few  hours  previously,
but  who  was  not  herself  in  any  morbidly  excited  condition,  seemed  to  see
some  one  enter  her  own  dining-room,  opening  and  shutting  the  door.
The  percipient  (who  had  never  had  any  other  hallucination)  was  much
astonished  when  she  found  no  one  in  the  dining-room  ;  but  it  did  not  till
some  time  afterwards  occur  to  her  that  the  incident  could  be  in  any  way
connected  with  her  recent  loss.  This  reminds  us  of  a  case  (ii.  p.  6942)
where  the  Rev.  R.  M.  Hill  sees  a  tall  figure  rush  into  the  room,  which
alarms  and  surprises  him,  then  vanishes  before  he  has  time  to  recognise  it.

1  The  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  (vol.  i.  p.  405)
contain  a  case  where  a  physician  and  his  wife,  sleeping  in  separate  but  adjoining  rooms,
are  both  of  them  awakened  by  a  bright  light.  The  physician  sees  a  figure  standing  in
the  light ;  his  wife,  who  gets  up  to  see  what  the  light  in  her  husband's  room  may  be,
does  not  reach  that  room  till  the  figure  has  disappeared.  The  figure  is  not  clearly
identified,  but  has  some  resemblance  to  a  patient  of  the  physician's,  who  has  died  sud-
denly (from  hemorrhage)  about  three  hours  before,  calling  for  her  doctor,  who  did  not
anticipate  this  sudden  end.  Even  this  resemblance  did  not  strike  the  percipient  until
after  he  knew  of  the  death,  and  the  defect  in  recognition  has  prevented  me  from  quoting
this  case  at  length.

a  The  references  in  this  and  the  two  folio  wing  sections  are  to  Phantasms oj  the  Living.


710]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  17

An  uncle,  a  tall  man,  dies  about  that  moment,  and  it  is  remarked  that
although  Mr.  Hill  knew  his  uncle  to  be  ill,  the  anxiety  which  he  may
have  felt  would  hardly  have  given  rise  to  an  unrecognised  and  formidable
apparition.

There  are  cases  also  where  a  percipient  who  has  had  an  apparition  of
a  friend  shortly  after  that  friend's  known  death  has  had  veridical  hallucina-
tions at  other  times,  and  has  never  had  any  hallucination  of  purely  subjective
origin.  Such  a  percipient  may  naturally  suppose  that  his  apparition  of  the
departed  friend  possessed  the  same  veridical  character  which  was  common
to  the  rest,  although  it  was  not  per  se  evidential,  since  the  fact  of  the  death
was  already  known.

For  the  present,  however,  it  will  be  better  to  return  to  the  cases  which
are  free  from  this  important  primd  facie  drawback — cases  where  the  perci-
pient was,  at  any  rate,  unaware  that  the  death,  which  the  phantasm  seemed
to  indicate,  had  in  fact  taken  place.

710.  In  the  first  place,  there  are  a  few  cases  where  a  percipient  is
informed  of  a  death  by  a  veridical  phantasm,  and  then  some  hours  after-
wards a  similar  phantasm,  differing  perhaps  in  detail,  recurs.

Such  was  the  case  of  Archdeacon  Farler  (i.  p.  414),  who  twice  during
one  night  saw  the  dripping  figure  of  a  friend  who,  as  it  turned  out,  had
been  drowned  during  the  previous  day.  Even  the  first  appearance  was
several  hours  after  the  death,  but  this  we  might  explain  by  the  latency  of
the  impression  till  a  season  of  quiet.  The  second  appearance  may  have
been  a  kind  of  recrudescence  of  the  first ;  but  if  the  theory  of  latency  be
discarded,  so  that  the  first  appearance  (if  more  than  a  mere  chance-
coincidence)  is  held  to  depend  upon  some  energy  excited  by  the  deceased
person  after  death,  it  would  afford  some  ground  for  regarding  the  second
appearance  as  also  veridical.  The  figure  in  this  case  was  once  more  seen
a  fortnight  later,  and  on  this  occasion,  as  Archdeacon  Farler  informs  me,
in  ordinary  garb,  with  no  special  trace  of  accident.

A  similar  repetition  occurs  (as  noted  by  Gurney,  vol.  ii.  p.  237,  note)
in  the  cases  of  Major  Moncrieff  (i.  p.  415)  ;  of  Mr.  Keulemans  (i.  p.  444),
where  the  second  phantasm  was  held  by  the  percipient  to  convey  a  fresh
veridical  picture;  of  Mr.  Hernaman  (i.  p.  561),  where,  however,  the
agent  was  alive,  though  dying,  at  the  time  of  each  appearance  ;  in  the  case
of  Mrs.  Ellis  (ii.  p.  59)  ;  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  D.  (ii.  p.  467)  ;  of  Mrs.
I<airman  (ii.  p.  482),  and  of  Mr.  F.  J.  Jones  (ii.  p.  500),  where  the  death
was  again  due  to  drowning,  and  the  act  of  dying  cannot,  therefore,  have
been  very  prolonged.  We  may  note  also  Mrs.  Reed's  case  (ii.  p.  237),
where  a  phantom  is  seen  three  times,  the  first  two  visions  being  apparently
about  the  time  of  death,  the  third  (occurring  to  a  different  percipient,
whether  independently  or  not  is  not  clear)  a  few  hours  later.  And  in
Captain  Ayre's  case  (ii.  p.  256),  a  phantom  seen  by  one  percipient  at
about  the  time  of  the  agent's  death  is  followed  by  hallucinatory  sounds
heard  by  the  same  and  by  another  percipient  for  some  three  hours  longer,
VOL.  ii.  B


i8  CHAPTER    VII  [711

till  the  news  of  the  death  arrives.  In  the  case  of  Mrs.  Cox,  again  (ii.  p.
235),  a  child  sees  a  phantom  at  about  9  P.M.,  and  Mrs.  Cox  sees  the  same
figure,  but  in  a  different  attitude,  at  about  midnight,  the  exact  hour  of  the
corresponding  death  being  unknown.  In  the  case  of  Miss  Harriss  (ii.  p.
117),  a  hallucinatory  voice t  about  the  time  of  the  death,  but  not  suggesting
the  decedent,  is  followed  by  a  dream  the  next  night,  which  presents  the
dead  person  as  in  the  act  of  dying.  One  or  two  other  cases  might  be
added  to  this  list,  and  it  is  plain  that  the  matter  is  one  towards  which
observation  should  be  specially  directed.

711.  Turning  now  to  the  cases  where  the  phantasm  is  not  repeated,
but  occurs  some  hours  after  death,  let  us  take  a  few  narratives  where  the
interval  of  time  is  pretty  certain,  and  consider  how  far  the  hypothesis  of
latency  looks  probable  in  each  instance.

Where  there  is  no  actual  hallucination,  but  only  a  feeling  of  unique
malaise  or  distress  following  at  a  few  hours'  interval  on  a  friend's  death  at
a  distance,  as  in  Archdeacon  Wilson's  case  (i.  p.  280),  it  is  very  hard
to  picture  to  ourselves  what  has  taken  place.  Some  injurious  shock  com-
municated to  the  percipient's  brain  at  the  moment  of  the  agent's  death
may  conceivably  have  slowly  worked  itself  into  consciousness.  The  delay
may  have  been  due,  so  to  say,  to  physiological  rather  than  to  psychical
causes.

Next  take  a  case  like  that  of  Mrs.  Wheatcroft  (i.  p.  420),  or  of  Mrs.
Evens  (ii.  p,  690),  or  Mr.  Wingfield  (quoted  in  429  C),  or  Sister  Bertha
(quoted  below  in  743  A) ,  where  a  definite  hallucination  of  sight  or  sound
occurs  some  hours  after  the  death,  but  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  It  is
in  a  case  of  this  sort  that  we  can  most  readily  suppose  that  a  "  telepathic
impact"  received  during  the  day  has  lain  dormant  until  other  excitations  were
hushed,  and  has  externalised  itself  as  a  hallucination  after  the  first  sleep,
just  as  when  we  wake  from  a  first  sleep  some  subject  of  interest  or  anxiety,
which  has  been  thrust  out  of  our  thoughts  during  the  day,  will  often  well
upwards  into  consciousness  with  quite  a  new  distinctness  and  force.  But
on  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  (for  instance)  of  Mrs.  Teale  (ii.  p.  693),
there  is  a  deferment  of  some  eight  hours,  and  then  the  hallucination
occurs  while  the  percipient  is  sitting  wide  awake  in  the  middle  of  her
family.  And  in  one  of  the  most  remarkable  dream-cases  in  our  collection
(given  in  section  427),  Mrs.  Storie's  experience  does  not  resemble  the
mere  emergence  of  a  latent  impression.  It  is  long  and  complex,  and
suggests  some  sort  of  clairvoyance ;  but  if  it  be  "telepathic  clairvoyance,"
that  is,  a  picture  transferred  from  the  decedent's  mind,  then  it  almost
requires  us  to  suppose  that  a  post-mortem  picture  was  thus  transferred,  a
view  of  the  accident  and  its  consequences  fuller  than  any  which  could
have  flashed  through  the  dying  man's  mind  during  his  moment  of  sudden
and  violent  death  from  "  the  striking  off  of  the  top  of  the  skull "  by  a
railway  train.

If  once  we  assume  that  the  deceased  person's  mind  could  continue  to


712]  PHANTASMS    OF   THE    DEAD  19

act  on  living  persons  after  his  bodily  death,  then  the  confused  horror  of  the
series  of  pictures  which  were  presented  to  Mrs.  Storie's  view — mixed,  it
should  be  said,  with  an  element  of  fresh  departure  which  there  was  nothing
in  the  accident  itself  to  suggest — would  correspond  well  enough  to  what  one
can  imagine  a  man's  feelings  a  few  hours  after  such  a  death  to  be.  This  is
trespassing,  no  doubt,  on  hazardous  ground ;  but  if  once  we  admit  com-
munication from  the  other  side  of  death  as  a  working  hypothesis,  we  must
allow  ourselves  to  imagine  something  as  to  the  attitude  of  the  communi-
cating mind,  and  the  least  violent  supposition  will  be  that  that  mind  is
still  in  part  at  least  occupied  with  the  same  thoughts  which  last  occupied
it  on  earth.  The  case  cited  below  (in  744)  of  the  gardener  Bard  and  Mrs.
de  FreVille  well  illustrates  this  view.  And  it  is  possible  that  there  may  be
some  interpretation  of  this  kind  for  some  of  the  cases  where  a  funeral
scene,  or  a  dead  body,  is  what  the  phantasm  presents.  In  the  remarkable
case  in  664  where  a  lady  sees  the  body  of  a  well-known  London  physician
— about  ten  hours  after  death — lying  in  a  bare  unfurnished  room  (a
cottage  hospital  abroad),  the  description,  as  we  have  it,  would  certainly
fit  best  with  some  kind  of  telepathic  clairvoyance  prolonged  after  death —
some  power  on  the  deceased  person's  part  to  cause  the  percipient  to
share  the  picture  which  might  at  that  moment  be  occupying  his  own  mind.

712.  It  will  be  seen  that  these  phenomena  are  not  of  so  simple  a
type  as  to  admit  of  our  considering  them  from  the  point  of  view  of
time-relations  alone.  Whatever  else,  indeed,  a  "  ghost  "  may  be,  it  is
probably  one  of  the  most  complex  phenomena  in  nature.  It  is  a  function
of  two  unknown  variables — the  incarnate  spirit's  sensitivity  and  the  dis-
carnate  spirit's  capacity  of  self- manifestation.  Our  attempt,  therefore,  to
study  such  intercourse  may  begin  at  either  end  of  the  communication —
with  the  percipient  or  with  the  agent.  We  shall  have  to  ask,  How  does
the  incarnate  mind  receive  the  message?  and  we  shall  have  to  ask  also,
How  does  the  discarnate  mind  originate  and  convey  it?

Now  it  is  by  pressing  the  former  of  these  two  questions  that  we  have,
I  think,  the  best  chance  at  present  of  gaining  fresh  light.  So  long  as  we
are  considering  the  incarnate  mind  we  are,  to  some  extent  at  least,  on
known  ground ;  and  we  may  hope  to  discern  analogies  in  some  other
among  that  mind's  operations  to  that  possibly  most  perplexing  of  all  its
operations  which  consists  in  taking  cognisance  of  messages  from  unem-
bodied  minds,  and  from  an  unseen  world.  I  think,  therefore,  that  "  the
surest  way,  though  most  about,"  as  Bacon  would  say,  to  the  comprehension
of  this  sudden  and  startling  phenomenon  lies  in  the  study  of  other  rare
mental  phenomena  which  can  be  observed  more  at  leisure,  just  as  "  the
surest  way,  though  most  about,"  to  the  comprehension  of  some  blazing
inaccessible  star  has  lain  in  the  patient  study  of  the  spectra  of  the  incan-
descence of  terrestrial  substances  which  lie  about  our  feet.  I  am  in
hopes  that  by  the  study  of  various  forms  of  subliminal  consciousness,
subliminal  faculty,  subliminal  perception,  we  may  ultimately  obtain  a


20  CHAPTER  VII  [713

conception  of  our  own  total  being  and  operation  which  may  show  us  the
incarnate  mind's  perception  of  the  discarnate  mind's  message  as  no
isolated  anomaly,  but  an  orderly  exercise  of  natural  and  innate  powers,
frequently  observed  in  action  in  somewhat  similar  ways.

It  is,  I  say,  from  this  human  or  terrene  side  that  I  should  prefer,  were
it  possible,  to  study  in  the  first  instance  all  our  cases.  Could  we  not
only  share  but  interpret  the  percipient's  subjective  feelings,  could  we
compare  those  feelings  with  the  feelings  evoked  by  ordinary  vision  or
telepathy  among  living  men,  we  might  get  at  a  more  intimate  knowledge
of  what  is  happening  than  any  observation  from  outside  of  the  details  of
an  apparition  can  supply.  But  this,  of  course,  is  not  possible  in  any
systematic  way ;  occasional  glimpses,  inferences,  comparisons,  are  all  that
we  can  attain  to  as  yet.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  comparatively  easy  to
arrange  the  whole  group  of  our  cases  in  some  series  depending  on  their
observed  external  character  and  details.  They  can,  indeed,  be  arranged
in  more  than  one  series  of  this  kind — the  difficulty  is  in  selecting  the  most
instructive.  That  which  I  shall  here  select  is  in  some  points  arbitrary,
but  it  has  the  advantage  of  bringing  out  the  wide  range  of  variation  in  the
clearness  and  content  of  these  apparitional  communications,  here  arranged
mainly  in  a  descending  series,  beginning  with  those  cases  where  fullest
knowledge  or  purpose  is  shown,  and  ending  with  those  where  the  indica-
tion of  intelligence  becomes  feeblest,  dying  away  at  last  into  vague  sounds
and  sights  without  recognisable  significance.

713.  But  I  shall  begin  (see  713  A)  with  a  small  group  of
cases,  which  I  admit  to  be  anomalous  and  non-evidential — for  we
cannot  prove  that  they  were  more  than  subjective  experiences — yet  which
certainly  should  not  be  lost,  filling  as  they  do,  in  all  their  grotesqueness,
a  niche  in  our  series  otherwise  as  yet  vacant.  If  man's  spirit  is  separated
at  death  from  his  organism,  there  must  needs  be  cases  where  that  separa-
tion, although  apparently,  is  not  really  complete.  There  must  be  subjec-
tive sensations  corresponding  to  the  objective  external  facts  of  apparent
death  and  subsequent  resuscitation.  Nor  need  it  surprise  those  who  may
have  followed  my  general  argument,  if  those  subjective  sensations  should
prove  to  be  dreamlike  and  fantastic.  Here,  as  so  often  in  our  inquiries,
the  very  oddity  and  unexpectedness  of  the  details — the  absence  of  that
solemnity  which  one  would  think  the  dying  man's  own  mind  would  have
infused  into  the  occasion — may  point  to  the  existence  of  some  reality
beneath  the  grotesque  symbolism  of  the  transitional  dream.

The  transitional  dream,  I  call  it,  for  it  seems  to  me  not  improbable —
remote  though  such  a  view  may  be  from  current  notions — that  the  passage
from  one  state  to  another  may  sometimes  be  accompanied  with  some
temporary  lack  of  adjustment  between  experiences  taking  place  in  such
different  environments — between  the  systems  of  symbolism  belonging  to
the  one  and  to  the  other  state.  But  the  reason  why  I  refer  to  the
cases  in  this  place  is  that  here  we  have  perhaps  our  nearest  possible


714]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  21

approach — in  M.  Bertrand's  case  the  account,  but  for  remoteness,  might
have  been  evidential  enough — to  the  sensations  of  the  spirit  which  is
endeavouring  to  manifest  itself ; — an  inside  view  of  a  would-be  apparition.
The  narratives  suggest,  moreover,  that  spirits  recently  freed  from  the
body  may  enjoy  a  fuller  perception  of  earthly  scenes  than  it  is  afterwards
possible  to  retain,  and  that  thus  the  predominance  of  apparitions  of  the
recently  dead  may  be  to  some  extent  explained.

714.  We  have,  indeed,  very  few  cases  where  actual  apparitions  give
evidence  of  any  continuity  in  the  knowledge  possessed  by  a  spirit  of
friends  on  earth.  Such  evidence  is,  naturally  enough,  more  often  fur-
nished by  automatic  script  or  utterance.  But  there  is  one  case  where  a
spirit  is  recorded  as  appearing  repeatedly — in  guardian  angel  fashion —
and  especially  as  foreseeing  and  sympathising  with  the  survivor's  future
marriage.

The  account  of  this  case,  given  by  Mr.  E.  Mamtchitch,  is  taken  from
the  "  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  "  in  the  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,
vol.  x.  pp.  387-91.

ST.  PETERSBURG,  April  29^,  1891.

Comme  il  s'agira  des  apparitions  de  Palladia,  je  dois  dire  auparavant  quel-
ques  mots  sur  sa  personne.  Elle  e'tait  la  fille  d'un  riche  proprie'taire  russe,  mort
un  mois  avant  sa  naissance.  Sa  mere,  dans  son  de'sespoir,  voua  son  enfant
futur  au  couvent.  De  la  son  nom,  usite'  parmi  les  religieuses.  Deux  ans  apres,
sa  mere  mourut,  et  1'orpheline,  jusqu'a  1'age  de  14  ans,  fut  e'leve'e  dans  un
couvent  de  Moscou  par  sa  tante,  qui  en  e'tait  la  supe'rieure.

En  1870,  dtant  encore  dtudiant  a  Puniversite'  de  Moscou,  je  fis  la  connais-
sance  du  frere  de  Palladia,  e'tudiant  comme  moi,  et  il  fut  souvent  question  entre
nous  de  rendre  a  la  socie'te'  la  nonne  malgre  soi ;  mais  ce  plan  ne  fut  re'alise'  qu'en
1872.  J'e'tais  venu  en  e'te'  a  Moscou,  pour  voir  1'exposition,  et  j'y  rencontrai  par
hasard  le  frere  de  Palladia.  J'appris  qu'il  e'tait  en  train  de  1'envoyer  en  Crime'e
pour  cause  de  sante*,  et  je  le  secondai  de  mon  mieux.  C'est  alors  que  je  vis
Palladia  pour  la  premiere  fois;  elle  avait  14  ans;  quoique  haute  de  taille,  elle
e'tait  fort  che'tive  et  de'ja  poitrinaire.  A  la  priere  de  son  frere,  j'accompagnai
Palladia  et  sa  sceur,  Mme.  P.  S.,  en  Crime'e,  ou  elles  resterent  pour  passer  1'hiver,
et  moi,  deux  semaines  apres,  je  revins  a  Kieff.

En  e'te'  1873  je  rencontrai  par  hasard  Palladia  et  sa  sceur  a  Odessa,  ou  elles
e'taient  venues  pour  consulter  les  me'decins,  quoique  Palladia  avait  1'air  de  se
porter  assez  bien.  Le  27  Aout,  pendant  que  je  faisais  la  lecture  aux  deux
dames.  Palladia  mourut  subitement  d'un  aneVrisme,  a  1'age  de  15  ans.

Deux  ans  apres  la  mort  de  Palladia,  en  1875,  me  trouvanta  Kieff,  il  m'arriva,
par  une  soire'e  du  mois  de  De'cembre,  d'assister  pour  la  premiere  fois  a  une
stance  spiritique ;  j'entendis  des  coups  dans  la  table ;  cela  ne  m'e'tonna  nulle-
ment,  car  j'e'tait  sur  que  c'e"tait  une  plaisanterie.  De  retour  chez  moi,  je  voulus
voir  si  les  memes  coups  se  produiraient  chez  moi ;  je  me  mis  dans  la  meme
pose,  les  mains  sur  la  table.  Bient6t  des  coups  se  firent  entendre.  Imitant
le  proce'de'  dont  j'avais  dte*  le  temoin,  je  commencai  a  re'citer  1'alphabet ;  le  nom
de  Panadia  me  fut  indiqud.  Je  fus  e'tonne',  presque  effraye' ;  ne  pouvant  me
tranquilliser,  je  me  mis  de  nouveau  k  la  table,  et  je  demandai  a  Palladia,
qu'avait-elle  a  me  dire?  La  re'ponse  fut  :  " Replacer  Fange,  il  tombe"  Je  ne


22  CHAPTER    VII  [714

compris  pas  de  suite  de  quoi  il  s'agissait.  Le  fait  est  qu'elle  est  enterree  a
Kieff,  et  j'avais  entendu  dire  qu'on  voulait  mettre  un  monument  sur  sa  tombe,
mais  je  n'y  avais  jamais  £t6,  et  je  ne  savais  pas  de  quel  genre  e'tait  le  monument.
Apres  cette  re'ponse,  je  ne  me  couchai  plus,  et  des  que  le  jour  parut  je  me
rendis  au  cimetiere.  Non  sans  peine,  avec  1'aide  du  gardien,  je  ddcouvris  enfin
la  tombe  enfouie  sous  la  neige.  Je  m'arretai  stupe'fie' :  la  statue  en  marbre  de
1'ange  avec  une  croix  e'tait  tout  a  fait  de  cotd.

Depuis  ce  moment,  il  me  fut  prouve  a  1'eVidence  qu'il  y  a  un  autre  monde
avec  lequel,  je  ne  sais  comment,  nous  pouvons  entrer  en  rapport,  et  dont  les
habitants  peuvent  nous  donner  de  telles  preuves  de  leur  existence  qu'elles
ddsarment  le  scepticisme  le  plus  tenace.

En  Octobre,  1876,  je  me  trouvais  a  Kieff,  et  j'dtais  en  train  de  m'installer
dans  un  nouveau  logement  (rue  Prore'snaya)  avec  mon  camarade  de  service  au
Ministere  de  la  Justice,  M.  Potolof.  On  venait  de  m'apporter  un  pianino.  II
fut  place*  dans  la  salle,  et  je  me  mis  a  jouer;  il  e'tait  a  peu  pres  8  h.  du  soir;  la
salle  ou  je  jouais  e'tait  e'claire'e  par  une  lampe  pendue  au  mur.  A  c6td  se  trou-
vait  mon  cabinet  de  travail,  eclaire*  aussi  par  une  lampe.  Je  me  rappelle  tres
bien  que  j'dtais  de  fort  bonne  humeur.  Mon  camarade,  M.  Potolof,  etait  occupe
a  sa  table,  a  1'autre  bout  du  logis.  Toutes  les  portes  e^taient  ouvertes,  et  de  sa
place  il  pouvait  voir  tres  bien  le  cabinet  et  la  salle  ou  je  jouais.1  Jetant  un
regard  vers  la  porte  de  mon  cabinet  de  travail,  je  vis  tout  a  coup  Palladia.  Elle
se  tenait  au  milieu  de  la  porte.  un  peu  de  c6t6,  avec  le  visage  tourne'  vers  moi.
Elle  me  regardait  tranquillement.  Elle  avait  la  meme  robe  fonce'e  qu'elle  por-
tait  lorsqu'elle  mourut  en  ma  presence.  Sa  main  droite  pendait  librement.
Je  voyais  distinctement  ses  dpaules  et  sa  taille,  mais  ne  me  rappelle  pas  du  bas
de  son  habit,  et  avais-je  vu  les  pieds  ? — peut-etre,  parce  que  tout  le  temps  je  lui
regardais  dans  les  yeux.  En  la  voyant,  j'avais  tout  a  fait  oublie'  que  je  voyais
devant  moi  non  une  personne  vivante,  mais  morte,  tellement  je  la  voyais  dis-
tinctement ;  elle  e'tait  e'claire'e  de  deux  cote's ;  et  d'autant  plus  j'ai  la  vue  tres
bonne.  Ma  premiere  sensation  fut  un  frisson  dans  le  dos.  Je  fus  comme
pe'trifie'  et  ma  respiration  fut  suspendue ;  mais  ce  n 'e'tait  pas  un  eff et  causd  par
la  frayeur  ou  1'excitation, — c'^tait  quelque  chose  d'autre.  Je  puis  comparer  cela
a  la  sensation  que  j'dprouve  quand  je  regarde  en  bas  d'une  grande  hauteur;  je
sens  alors  une  terrible  anxie'ti  et  en  meme  temps  je  ne  puis  me  retenir  de  re-
garder,  quelque  chose  m'attire  invinciblement.  Combien  de  temps  Palladia
resta  devant  moi,  je  ne  saurais  le  dire,  mais  je  me  rappelle  qu'elle  fit  un  mouve-
ment  a  droite  et  disparut  derriere  la  porte  du  cabinet  du  travail.  Je  me  prd-
cipitai  vers  elle,  mais  dans  la  porte  je  m'arretai,  car  alors  seulement  je  me  rap-
pelai  qu'elle  e'tait  ddja  morte,  et  je  craignai  d'entrer,  e'tant  sur  de  la  revoir.
Dans  ce  moment  mon  camarade  vint  a  moi  et  me  demanda  qu'est-ce  que
j'avais?  Je  lui  dis  ce  qui  venait  de  se  passer;  alors  nous  entrames  au  cabinet,
ou  nous  ne  trouvames  personne.  Mon  camarade,  ayant  entendu  la  brusque  in-
terruption de  mon  jeu,  avait  leve*  la  tete  et,  tant  que  je  me  rappelle,  disait  avoir
vu  aussi  quelqu'un  passer  devant  la  porte  de  mon  cabinet ;  mais,  voyant  mon
excitation,  il  me  dit,  pour  me  tranquilliser,  que  probablement  c'e'tait  Nikita,
mon  domestique,  qui  e'tait  venu  arranger  la  lampe.  Nous  allames  imme'diate-
ment  dans  sa  chambre,  il  n'y  e'tait  pas ;  il  e'tait  en  bas,  dans  la  cuisine,  ou  il

1  A  plan  enclosed  shows  a  suite  of  four  rooms,  M.  Potolof 's  study,  the  ante-room,  the
drawing-room,  and  M.  Mamtchitch's  study,  all  opening  into  one  another,  the  three  doors
between  them  being  in  one  straight  line.


714]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  23

prdparait  le   samovar.     Voilk  comment  je  vis  Palladia  pour  la  premiere  fois,
trois  ans  apres  sa  mort.

Apres  la  premiere  apparition  de  Palladia,  en  Octobre,  1876,  et  jusqu'a
present,  je  la  vois  souvent.  II  arrive  que  je  la  vois  trois  fois  par  semaine,  ou
deux  fois  le  meme  jour,  ou  bien  un  mois  se  passe  sans  la  voir.  En  resume,
voila  les  traits  principaux  de  ces  apparitions.

(1)  Palladia  apparait  toujours  d'une  facon  inattendue,  me  prenant  comme
par  surprise,  juste  au  moment  quand  j'y  pense  le  moins.

(2)  Quand  je  veux  la  voir  moi-meme,  j'ai  beau  y  penser  ou  le  vouloir — elle
n'apparait  pas.

(3)-,  A  de  rares  exceptions,  son  apparition  n'a  aucun  rapport  avec  le  courant
de  ma  vie,  comme  presage  ou  avertissement  de  quelqu'  e've'nement  insolite.

(4)  Jamais  je  ne  la  vois  en  songe.

(5)  Je  la  vois  dgalement  quand  je  suis  seul,  ou  en  grande  compagnie.

(6)  Elle  m'apparait  toujours  avec  la  meme  expression  sereine  des  yeux ;
quelques  fois  avec  un  faible  sourire.     Elle  ne  m'a  jamais  parle*,  <L  1'exception  de
deux  fois,  que  je  vais  raconter  plus  loin.

(7)  Je  la  vois  toujours  dans  la  robe  fonce'e  qu'elle  portait  lorsqu'elle  mourut
sous  mes  yeux.     Je  vois  distinctement  son  visage,  sa  tete,  les  dpaules  et  les
bras,  mais  je  ne  vois  pas  ses  pieds,  ou   plutot  je  n'ai   pas  le   temps  de  le
examiner.

(8)  Chaque  fois,  en  voyant  Palladia  inopine'ment,  je  perds  la  parole,  je  sens
du  froid  dans  le  dos,  je  palis,  je  m'dcrie  faiblement,  et  ma  respiration  s'arrete
(c'est  ce  que  me  disent  ceux  qui  par  hasard  m'ont  observe  pendant  ce  moment),

(9)  L'apparition   de  Palladia  se  prolonge  une,  deux,  trois  minutes,  puis
graduellement  elle  s'efface  et  se  dissout  dans  1'espace.

A  present  je  vais  de'crire  trois  cas  d'apparitions  de  Palladia  dont  je  me
souviens  bien.

(1)  En  1879,  ^  ^a  fin  de  Novembre,  a  Kieff,  jMtais  assis  a  mon  bureau  a
e'crire  un  acte  d'accusation ;  il  £tait  8J  du  soir,  la  montre  dtait  devant  moi  sur
la  table.     Je  me  hatais  de  finir  mon  travail,  car  a  9  h.  je  devais  me  rendre  a  une
soire'e.     Tout  a  coup,  en  face  de  moi,  assise  sur  un  fauteuil,  je  vis  Palladia ;  elle
avait    le  coude  du   bras  droit    sur    la    table  et  la  tete  appuyde  sur  la  main.
M'dtant  remis  de  mon  saisissement,  je  regardai  la  montre  et  je  suivis  le  mouve-
ment  de  1'aiguille  a  seconde,  puis  je  relevai  les  yeux  sur  Palladia ;  je  vis  qu'elle
n'avait  pas  changd  de  pose  et  son  coude  se  dessinait  clairement  sur  la  table.
Ses  yeux  me  regardaient  avec  joie  et  se're'nite ;  alors  pour  la  premiere  fois  je  me
d£cidai  de  lui  parler:  "Que  sentez-vous  a  present?"   lui  demandai-je.     Son
visage  resta  impassible,  ses  levres,  tant  que  je  me  rappelle,  resterent  immobiles,
mais  j'entendis  distinctement  sa  voix  prononcer  le  mot  "  Quie'tude."     "  Je  com-
prends,"  lui  rdpondis-je,  et  effectivement,  en  ce  moment,  je  comprenais  toute  la
signification  qu'elle  avait  mise  dans  ce  mot.     Encore  une  fois,  pour  etre  sur  que
je  ne  revai  pas,  je  regardai  de  nouveau  la  montre  et  je  suivis  les  mouvements  de
1'aiguille  a  seconde;  je  voyais  clairement  comme  elle  se  mouvait.     Ayant  rap-
porte'  mon  regard  sur  Palladia,  je  remarquai  qu'elle  commen9ait  deja  a  s'effacer
et  disparaitre.     Si  je  m'e'tais  avisd  de  noter  imme'diatement  la  signification  du
mot  "  Quietude,"  ma  me'moire  aurait  retenu  tout  ce  qu'il  y  avait  de  nouveau  et
d'dtrange.     Mais  a  peine  avais-je  quitte'  la  table  pour  monter  en  haut,  chez  mon
camarade  Apouktine,  avec  lequel  nous  devions  aller  ensemble,  que  je  ne  pus
lui  dire  autre  chose  que  ce  que  je  viens  d'e'crire.

(2)  En  1885,  Je  demeurais  chez  mes  parents,  a  une  campagne  du  gouverne-


24  CHAPTER    VII  [714

ment  de  Poltava.  Une  dame  de  notre  connaissance  e'tait  venue  passer  chez
nous  quelques  jours  avec  ses  deux  demoiselles.  Quelque  temps  apres  leur
arrive'e,  m'e'tant  re'veille'  a  1'aube  du  jour,  je  vis  Palladia  (je  dormais  dans  une
aile  sdparde  ou  j'£tais  tout  seul).  Elle  se  tenait  devant  moi,  a  cinq  pas  a  peu
pres,  et  me  regardait  avec  un  sourire  joyeux.  S'&ant  approche'e  de  moi,  elle
me  dit  deux  mots  :  "  J'ai  &6,  j'ai  vu,"  et  tout  en  souriant  disparut.  Que  vou-
laient  dire  ces  mots,  je  ne  pus  le  comprendre.  Dans  ma  chambre  dormait  avec
moi  mon  setter.  Des  que  j'ape^us  Palladia,  le  chien  he'rissa  le  poil  et  avec
glapissement  sauta  sur  mon  lit ;  se  pressant  vers  moi,  il  regardait  dans  la  direc-
tion ou  je  voyais  Palladia.  Le  chien  n'aboyait  pas,  tandis  que,  ordinairement,
il  ne  laissait  personne  entrer  dans  la  chambre  sans  aboyer  et  grogner.  Et
toutes  les  fois,  quand  mon  chien  voyait  Palladia,  il  se  pressait  aupres  de  moi,
comme  cherchant  un  refuge.  Quand  Palladia  disparut  et  je  vins  dans  la
maison,  je  ne  dis  rien  a  personne  de  cette  incident.  Le  soir  du  meme  jour,  la
fille  ainde  de  la  dame  qui  se  trouvait  chez  nous  me  raconta  qu'une  chose  Strange
lui  e'tait  arrive'e  ce  matin  :  "  M'e'tant  re'veille'e  de  grand  matin,"  me  dit-elle,  "j'ai
send  comme  si  quelqu'un  se  tenait  au  chevet  de  mon  lit,  et  j'entendis  distincte-
ment  une  voix  me  disant:  *  Ne  me  crains  pas,  je  suis  bonne  et  aimante.'  Je
tournai  la  tete,  mais  je  ne  vis  rien  ;  ma  mere  et  ma  soeur  dormaient  tranquille-
ment;  cela  m'a  fort  e'tonne'e,  car  jamais  rien  de  pareil  ne  m'est  arriveV'  Sur
quoi  je  r^pondis  que  bien  des  choses  inexplicables  nous  arrivent;  mais  je  ne  lui
dit  rien  de  ce  que  j'avais  vu  le  matin.  Seulement  un  an  plus  tard,  quand  j'e*tais
dejil  son  fiance,  je  lui  fis  part  de  1'apparition  et  des  paroles  de  Palladia  le  meme
jour.  N'&ait-ce  pas  elle  qui  e'tait  venue  la  voir  aussi?  Je  dois  ajouter  que
j'avais  vu  alors  cette  demoiselle  pour  la  premiere  fois  et  que  je  ne  pensais  pas
du  tout  que  j'allais  I'dpouser.

(3)  En  Octobre,  1890,  je  me  trouvais  avec  ma  femme  et  mon  fils,  age*  de
deux  ans,  chez  mes  anciens  amis,  les  Strijewsky,  a  leur  campagne  du  gouverne-
ment  de  Woroneje.  Un  jour,  vers  les  7  h.  du  soir,  rentrant  de  la  chasse,  je
passai  dans  1'aile  que  nous  habitions  pour  changer  de  toilette;  j'dtais  assis  dans
une  chambre  e'claire'e  par  une  grande  lampe.  La  porte  s'ouvrit  et  mon  fils  Oteg
accourut;  il  se  tenait  aupres  de  mon  fauteuil,  quand  Palladia  apparut  tout  a
coup  devant  moi.  Jetant  sur  lui  un  coup  d'ceil,  je  remarquai  qu'il  ne  de'tachait
pas  les  yeux  de  Palladia;  se  tournant  vers  moi  et  montrant  Palladia  du  doigt,
il  pronon9a:  "La  tante."  Je  le  pris  sur  les  genoux  et  jetai  un  regard  sur
Palladia,  mais  elle  n'e'tait  plus.  Le  visage  d'Oldg  e'tait  tout  a  fait  tranquil  et
joyeux ;  il  commencait  seulement  a  parler,  ce  qui  explique  la  denomination
qu'il  donna  a  Palladia.  EUGENE  MAMTCHITCH.

Mrs.  Mamtchitch  writes  : —

5  Mai,  1891.

Je  me  rappelle  tres  bien  que  le  10  Juillet  1885,  lorsque  nous  e*tions  en  visite
chez  les  parents  de  M.  E.  Mamtchitch,  je  m'e'tais  re'veille'e  a  1'aube  du  jour,  car
il  avait  e'te'  convenu  entre  moi  et  ma  soeur  que  nous  irions  faire  une  promenade
matinale.  M'e'tant  souleve'e  sur  le  lit,  je  vis  que  maman  et  ma  soeur  dormaient,
et  en  ce  moment  je  sentis  comme  si  quelqu'un  se  tenait  a  mon  chevet.  M'e'tant
tourne"e  a  demi — car  je  craignais  de  bien  regarder — je  ne  vis  personne ;  m'e'tant
recouch^e,  j'entendis  imme'diatement,  derriere  et  au  dessus  de  ma  tete,  une
voix  de  femme  me  disant  doucement,  mais  distinctement :  "  Ne  me  crains  pas,
je  suis  bonne  et  aimante,"  et  encore  toute  une  phrase  que  j'oubliai  a  1'instant
meme.  Immediatement  apres  je  m'habillai  et  j'allai  me  promener.  C'est


714]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE   DEAD  25

dtrange  que  ces  paroles  ne  m'effrayerent  pas  du  tout.  De  retour,  je  n'en  dis
rien  ni  a  ma  mere,  ni  a  ma  soeur,  car  elles  n'aimaient  pas  de  telles  choses  et
n'y  croyaient  pas  ;  mais  le  soir  du  meme  jour,  comme  la  conversation  tourna  sur
le  spiritisme,  je  racontai  a  M.  M.  ce  qui  venait  de  m'arriver  le  matin  ;  il  ne  me
rdpondit  rien  de  particulier.

Je  n'ai  jamais  eu  aucune  hallucination,  ni  avant,  ni  apres  cet  incident,  a
1'exception  d'un  cas  tout  re'cent,  quand  je  me  suis  vue  moi-meme,  de  quoi  je
parlerai  une  autre  fois.  SOPHIE  MAMTCHITCH.

Mr.  Potolof  writes  to  the  collector,  Mr.  Aksakoff:—

RUE  SCHPALERNAYA,  26.       S.  PETERSBOURG,  If  IO  Mai,  iSgi.

MONSIEUR, — En  rdponse  a  votre  lettre  du  8  Mai  et  les  questions  que  vous
me  posez  relativement  a  1'incident  avec  M.  E.  Mamtchitch,  lorsque  dans  les
anne'es  1876-77  nous  habitions  ensemble  Kieff,  rue  Proresnaya,  maison
Barsky,  je  puis  vous  communiquer  ce  qui  suit.  Effectivement,  je  fus  alors
te'moin  comme  M.  M.,  pendant  qu'il  jouait  un  soir  du  piano  quelque  air  me'lan-
colique,  s'interrompit  brusquement  (comme  si  apres  avoir  fortement  attaque*  le
clavier,  ses  mains  s'etaient  subitement  affaisse'es),  et  lorsque  je  vins  lui  demander
ce  qui  lui  dtait  arrive*,  il  me  re'pondit  qu'il  venait  de  voir  apparaitre  le  fantome
de  Palladia,  se  tenant  derriere  la  draperie  de  la  porte  de  la  chambre  contigue
a  celle  ou  se  trouvait  le  piano.  Je  dois  ajouter  que  notre  appartement  commun
formait  une  enfilade  de  trois  chambres,  sans  compter  celle  de  I'entre'e,  qui
occupait  le  milieu ;  je  travaillais  dans  ma  chambre,  qui  e*tait  a  droite  de  celle  de
I'entre'e,  et  je  pouvais  voir  toute  1'enfilade  bien  e'claire'e.  Ce  qui  me  regarde
personnellement,  je  ne  vis  en  ce  moment  aucune  figure  humaine  passer  par  les
chambres  de  M.  M.,  mais  je  ne  nie  pas  que  pour  le  tranquilliser  j'essayai
d'expliquer  cet  incident  par  I'entre'e  de  notre  domestique  Nikita;  il  se  peut
aussi  que,  ne  1'ayantpas  trouve*  dans  nos  appartements,  nous  allames  le  chercher
en  bas,  dans  la  cuisine.  Voila  tout  ce  que  je  puis  vous  dire  relativement  a  cet
incident.  W.  POTOLOF.

Note  by  the  collector  : —

S.  PETERSBOURG,  Le  16/28  Mai,  1891.

Traduit  des  manuscrits  russes  de  M.  et  Madame  Mamtchitch,  et  de  M.
Potolof.  La  premiere  partie  du  manuscrit  de  M.  Mamtchitch,  jusqu'a  la
premiere  apparition  de  Palladia,  est  abre'ge'e.

J'avais  rencontre*  M.  Mamtchitch  plusieurs  fois,  mais  je  n'avais  aucune  ide'e
de  ces  apparitions  constantes  de  Palladia.  M.  Mamtchitch  a  vu  aussi  d'autres
figures  que  celle  de  Palladia,  mais  je  n'ai  pas  eu  le  temps  d'en  faire  un
memorandum  circonstantiel.  A.  AKSAKOFF.

Among  repeated  apparitions  this  case  at  present  stands  almost  alone  ;
its  parallels  will  be  found  when  we  come  to  deal  with  the  persistent
"  controls,"  or  alleged  communicating  spirits,  which  influence  trance-
utterance  or  automatic  script.

A  case  bearing  some  resemblance  to  Palladia's  is  given  in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  233,  the  main  difference  being  that  the  repeated  com-
munications are  there  made  in  dream.  I  add  in  714  A  another  case,
where  the  deceased  person  seems  to  make  repeated  efforts  to  impress
on  survivors  a  wish  prompted  by  continued  affection.


26  CHAPTER    VII  [715

715.  Less  uncommon  are  the  cases  where  an  apparition,  occurring
singly  and  not  repeated,  indicates  a  continued  knowledge  of  the  affairs
of  earth.     That  knowledge,  indeed,  runs  mainly,  as  we  shall  presently  see,
in  two  directions.     There  is  often  knowledge  of  some  circumstance   con-
nected with  the  deceased  person's  own  death,  as  the  appearance  of  his
body  after  dissolution,  or  the  place  of  its  temporary  deposit  or  final  burial.
And  there  is  often  knowledge  of  the  impending  or  actual  death  of  some
friend  of  the  deceased  person's.     On  the  view  here  taken  of  the  gradual
passage  from  the  one  environment  into  the  other,  both  these  kinds  of
knowledge  seem  probable  enough.     I  think  it  likely  that  some  part  of  the
consciousness  after  death  may  for  some  time  be  dreamily  occupied  with
the  physical  scene.     And  similarly,  when  some  surviving  friend  is  gradu-
ally verging  towards  the  same  dissolution,  the  fact  may  be  readily  per-
ceptible in  the  spiritual  world.     When  the  friend  has  actually  died,  the
knowledge  which  his  predecessor  may  have  of  his  transition  is  knowledge
appertaining  to  events  of  the  next  world  as  much  as  of  this.

716.  But  apart  from  this  information,  acquired  perhaps  on  the  border-
land between  two  states,  apparitions  do  sometimes  imply  a  perception  of
more    definitely   terrene    events,  such  as  the  moral  crises   (as  marriage,
grave  quarrels,  or  impending  crimes)  of  friends  left  behind  on  earth.     I
quote  in  716  A  a  specimen  of  this  class, — a  case  of  impressive  warning,
in  which  the  phantom  was  seen  by  two  persons,  one  of  whom  had  already
had  a  less  evidential  experience.

A  word  as  to  the  light  thrown  on  each  other  by  these  two  successive
experiences  of  the  same  percipient.  The  latter  experience,  as  will  have
been  seen,  is  strongly  evidential.  The  nature  of  the  warning  given  is
such  that  the  case  would  hardly  have  been  communicated  to  us,  even  for
anonymous  publication,  except  under  a  grave  sense  of  its  importance.
The  former  experience  lacks,  by  its  nature,  coincidental  proof.  The
daughter  knew  of  her  father's  death ;  she  hoped,  although  uncertainly,
that  all  was  well  with  him;  and  the  vision  announcing  his  bliss  might
thus  have  been  the  creation  of  her  own  mind.  It  was  a  "  vision  of  con-
solation" of  a  frequent  type — a  type  excluded  from  our  evidential  reckon-
ings. Yet  I  can  hardly  suppose  that  of  the  two  visions  thus  similar  the
one  was  really  due  to  spiritual  agency  and  the  other  was  not.  I  regard
each  as  corroborating  and  lending  weight  to  the  other.

I  add  in  716  B  another  case  of  similar  type,  the  message  in  which,
while  felt  by  the  percipient  to  be  convincing  and  satisfactory,  was
held  too  private  to  be  communicated  in  detail.  It  is  plain  that  just  in
the  cases  where  the  message  is  most  intimately  veracious,  the  greatest
difficulty  is  likely  to  be  felt  as  to  making  it  known  to  strangers.

I  have  already  given  a  case  (in  714)  where  a  departed  spirit  seems  to
show  a  sympathetic  anticipation  of  a  marriage  some  time  before  it  is
contemplated.  In  another  case,  given  in  716  C,  the  percipient,  Mrs.  V.,
describes  a  vision  of  a  mother's  form  suspended,  as  it  were,  in  a  church


717]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  27

where  her  son  is  undergoing  the  rite  of  confirmation.  That  vision,
indeed,  might  have  been  purely  subjective,  as  Mrs.  V.  was  familiar  with
the  departed  mother's  aspect;  though  value  is  given  to  it  by  the  fact
that  Mrs.  V.  has  had  other  experiences  which  included  evidential
coincidences.

717.  From  these  instances  of  knowledge  shown  by  the  departed  of
events  which  seem  wholly  terrene,  I  pass  to  knowledge  of  events  which
seem  in  some  sense  more  nearly  concerned  with  the  spirit-world.  We
have,  as  already  hinted,  a  considerable  group  of  cases  where  a  spirit  seems
to  be  aware  of  the  impending  death  of  a  survivor.  In  some  few  of  those
cases  the  foreknowledge  is  entirely  inexplicable  by  any  such  foresight  as
we  mortals  can  imagine.  But  those  cases  I  shall  not  cite  here;  de-
ferring them  until  the  whole  question  of  the  limits  of  spiritual  precogni-
tion  comes  to  be  discussed  in  a  later  chapter.  In  the  cases  to  which  I
shall  now  allude  the  degree  of  foresight  seems  not  greater  than  that  of
ordinary  spectators,  except  in  the  case  to  be  first  given,  where,  though
the  family  did  not  foresee  the  death,  a  physician  might,  for  aught  we
know,  have  been  able  to  anticipate  it.  However  explained,  the  case  is
one  of  the  best-attested,  and  in  itself  one  of  the  most  remarkable,  that
we  possess.

The  account,  which  I  quote  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  17,
was  sent  in  1887  to  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  by
Mr.  F.  G.,  of  Boston.  Professor  Royce  and  Dr.  Hodgson  vouch  for  the
high  character  and  good  position  of  the  informants ;  and  it  will  be  seen
that,  besides  the  percipient  himself,  his  father  and  brother  are  first-hand
witnesses  as  regards  the  most  important  point, — the  effect  produced  by
a  certain  symbolic  item  in  the  phantom's  aspect.  Mr.  G.  writes  :—

January  nth,  1888.

SIR, — Replying  to  the  recently  published  request  of  your  Society  for  actual
occurrences  of  psychical  phenomena,  I  respectfully  submit  the  following  remark-
able occurrence  to  the  consideration  of  your  distinguished  Society,  with  the
assurance  that  the  event  made  a  more  powerful  impression  on  my  mind  than
the  combined  incidents  of  my  whole  life.  I  have  never  mentioned  it  outside  of
my  family  and  a  few  intimate  friends,  knowing  well  that  few  would  believe  it,  or
else  ascribe  it  to  some  disordered  state  of  my  mind  at  the  time ;  but  I  well  know
I  never  was  in  better  health  or  possessed  a  clearer  head  and  mind  than  at
the  time  it  occurred.

In  1867  my  only  sister,  a  young  lady  of  eighteen  years,  died  suddenly  of
cholera  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.  My  attachment  for  her  was  very  strong,  and  the
blow  a  severe  one  to  me.  A  year  or  so  after  her  death  the  writer  became  a
commercial  traveller,  and  it  was  in  1876,  while  on  one  of  my  Western  trips,  that
the  event  occurred.

I  had  "  drummed  "  the  city  of  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  and  had  gone  to  my  room  at
the  Pacific  House  to  send  in  my  orders,  which  were  unusually  large  ones,  so
that  I  was  in  a  very  happy  frame  of  mind  indeed.  My  thoughts,  of  course,
were  about  these  orders,  knowing  how  pleased  my  house  would  be  at  my
success.  I  had  not  been  thinking  of  my  late  sister,  or  in  any  manner  reflecting


28  CHAPTER    VII  [717

on  the  past.  The  hour  was  high  noon,  and  the  sun  was  shining  cheerfully  into
my  room.  While  busily  smoking  a  cigar  and  writing  out  my  orders,  I  sud-
denly became  conscious  that  some  one  was  sitting  on  my  left,  with  one  arm
resting  on  the  table.  Quick  as  a  flash  I  turned  and  distinctly  saw  the  form  of
my  dead  sister,  and  for  a  brief  second  or  so  looked  her  squarely  in  the  face ;
and  so  sure  was  I  that  it  was  she,  that  I  sprang  forward  in  delight,  calling  her
by  name,  and,  as  I  did  so,  the  apparition  instantly  vanished.  Naturally  I  was
startled  and  dumbfounded,  almost  doubting  my  senses ;  but  the  cigar  in  my
mouth,  and  pen  in  hand,  with  the  ink  still  moist  on  my  letter,  I  satisfied  myself
I  had  not  been  dreaming  and  was  wide  awake.  I  was  near  enough  to  touch
her,  had  it  been  a  physical  possibility,  and  noted  her  features,  expression,  and
details  of  dress,  &c.  She  appeared  as  if  alive.  Her  eyes  looked  kindly  and
perfectly  natural  into  mine.  Her  skin  was  so  life-like  that  I  could  see  the  glow
or  moisture  on  its  surface,  and,  on  the  whole,  there  was  no  change  in  her
appearance,  otherwise  than  when  alive.

Now  comes  the  most  remarkable  confirmation  of  my  statement,  which  cannot
be  doubted  by  those  who  know  what  I  state  actually  occurred.  This  visitation,
or  whatever  you  may  call  it,  so  impressed  me  that  I  took  the  next  train  home,
and  in  the  presence  of  my  parents  and  others  I  related  what  had  occurred.
My  father,  a  man  of  rare  good  sense  and  very  practical,  was  inclined  to  ridicule
me,  as  he  saw  how  earnestly  I  believed  what  I  stated ;  but  he,  too,  was  amazed
when  later  on  I  told  them  of  a  bright  red  line  or  scratch  on  the  right-hand  side
of  my  sister's  face,  which  I  distinctly  had  seen.  When  I  mentioned  this  my
mother  rose  trembling  to  her  feet  and  nearly  fainted  away,  and  as  soon  as  she
sufficiently  recovered  her  self-possession,  with  tears  streaming  down  her  face,
she  exclaimed  that  I  had  indeed  seen  my  sister,  as  no  living  mortal  but  herself
was  aware  of  that  scratch,  which  she  had  accidentally  made  while  doing  some
little  act  of  kindness  after  my  sister's  death.  She  said  she  well  remembered  how
pained  she  was  to  think  she  should  have,  unintentionally,  marred  the  features  of
her  dead  daughter,  and  that  unknown  to  all,  how  she  had  carefully  obliterated
all  traces  of  the  slight  scratch  with  the  aid  of  powder,  &c.,  and  that  she  had
never  mentioned  it  to  a  human  being  from  that  day  to  this.  In  proof,  neither
my  father  nor  any  of  our  family  had  detected  it,  and  positively  were  unaware  of
the  incident,  yet  /  saw  the  scratch  as  bright  as  if  just  made.  So  strangely
impressed  was  my  mother,  that  even  after  she  had  retired  to  rest  she  got  up  and
dressed,  came  to  me  and  told  me  she  knew  at  least  that  I  had  seen  my  sister.
A  few  weeks  later  my  mother  died,  happy  in  her  belief  she  would  rejoin  her
favourite  daughter  in  a  better  world.

In  a  further  letter  Mr.  F.  G.  adds  :—

There  was  nothing  of  a  spiritual  or  ghostly  nature  in  either  the  form  or
dress  of  my  sister,  she  appearing  perfectly  natural,  and  dressed  in  clothing  that
she  usually  wore  in  life,  and  which  was  familiar  to  me.  From  her  position  at
the  table,  I  could  only  see  her  from  the  waist  up,  and  her  appearance  and
everything  she  wore  is  indelibly  photographed  in  my  mind.  I  even  had  time  to
notice  the  collar  and  little  breastpin  she  wore,  as  well  as  the  comb  in  her  hair,
after  the  style  then  worn  by  young  ladies.  The  dress  had  no  particular  associa-
tion for  me  or  my  mother,  no  more  so  than  others  she  was  in  the  habit  of
wearing;  but  to-day,  while  I  have  forgotten  all  her  other  dresses,  pins,  and
combs,  I  could  go  to  her  trunk  (which  we  have  just  as  she  left  it)  and  pick  out


717]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  29

the  very  dress  and  ornaments  she  wore  when  she  appeared  to  me,  so  well  do  I
remember  it.

You  are  correct  in  understanding  that  I  returned  home  earlier  than  I  had
intended,  as  it  had  such  an  effect  on  me  that  I  could  hardly  think  of  any
other  matter ;  in  fact,  I  abandoned  a  trip  that  I  had  barely  commenced,  and,
ordinarily,  would  have  remained  on  the  road  a  month  longer.

Mr.  F.  G.  again  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  January  23rd,  1888  : —

As  per  your  request,  I  enclose  a  letter  from  my  father  which  is  indorsed  by
my  brother,  confirming  the  statement  I  made  to  them  of  the  apparition  I  had
seen.  I  will  add  that  my  father  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  respected  citizens

of  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  a  retired  merchant,  whose  winter  residence  is  at ,  Ills.,

a  few  miles  out  by  rail.  He  is  now  seventy  years  of  age,  but  a  remarkably
well-preserved  gentleman  in  body  and  mind,  and  a  very  learned  man  as  well.
As  I  informed  you,  he  is  slow  to  believe  things  that  reason  cannot  explain.
My  brother,  who  indorses  the  statement,  has  resided  in  Boston  for  twelve  years,

doing  business  on Street,  as  per  letter-head  above,  and  the  last  man  in

the  world  to  take  stock  in  statements  without  good  proof.  The  others  who
were  present  (including  my  mother)  are  now  dead,  or  were  then  so  young  as  to
now  have  but  a  dim  remembrance  of  the  matter.

You  will  note  that  my  father  refers  to  the  "  scratch,"  and  it  was  this  that
puzzled  all,  even  himself,  and  which  we  have  never  been  able  to  account  for,
further  than  that  in  some  mysterious  way  I  had  actually  seen  my  sister  nine
years  after  death,  and  had  particularly  noticed  and  described  to  my  parents
and  family  this  bright  red  scratch,  and  which,  beyond  all  doubt  in  our  minds,
was  unknown  to  a  soul  save  my  mother,  who  had  accidentally  caused  it.

When  I  made  my  statement,  all,  of  course,  listened  and  were  interested;
but  the  matter  would  probably  have  passed  with  comments  that  it  was  a  freak
of  memory  had  not  I  asked  about  the  scratch,  and  the  instant  I  mentioned  it
my  mother  was  aroused  as  if  she  had  received  an  electric  shock,  as  she  had
kept  it  secret  from  all,  and  she  alone  was  able  to  explain  it.  My  mother  was  a
sincere  Christian  lady,  who  was  for  twenty-five  years  superintendent  of  a  large
infant  class  in  her  church,  the  Southern  Methodist,  and  a  directress  in  many
charitable  institutions,  and  was  highly  educated.  No  lady  at  the  time  stood
higher  in  the  city  of  St.  Louis,  and  she  was,  besides,  a  woman  of  rare  good
sense.

I  mention  these  points  to  give  you  an  insight  into  the  character  and  standing
of  those  whose  testimony,  in  such  a  case,  is  necessary.

(Signed)  F.  G.

From  Mr.  H.  G. :—

,  ILLS.,  January  2Oth,  1888.

DEAR  F.,— -Yours  of  i6th  inst.  is  received.  In  reply  to  your  questions
relating  to  your  having  seen  our  Annie,  while  at  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  I  will  state
that  I  well  remember  the  statement  you  made  to  family  on  your  return  home.
I  remember  your  stating  how  she  looked  in  ordinary  home  dress,  and  parti-
cularly about  the  scratch  (or  red  spot)  on  her  face,  which  you  could  not  account
for,  but  which  was  fully  explained  by  your  mother.  The  spot  was  made  while
adjusting  something  about  her  head  while  in  the  casket,  and  covered  with
powder.  All  who  heard  you  relate  the  phenomenal  sight  thought  it  was


30  CHAPTER    VII  [717

true.     You  well  know  how  sceptical  I  am  about  things  which  reason  cannot
explain.

(Signed)  H.  G.  (father).

I  was  present  at  the  time  and  indorse  the  above.

(Signed)  K.  G.  (brother).

The  apparent  redness  of  the  scratch  on  the  face  of  the  apparition  goes
naturally  enough  with  the  look  of  life  in  the  face.  The  phantom  did  not
appear  as  a  corpse,  but  as  a  blooming  girl,  and  the  scratch  showed  as  it
would  have  shown  if  made  during  life.

Dr.  Hodgson  visited  Mr.  F.  G.  later,  and  sent  us  the  following  notes
of  his  interview  :—

ST.  Louis,  Mo.,  April  ibtk,  1890.

In  conversation  with  Mr.  F.  G.,  now  forty-three  years  of  age,  he  says  that
there  was  a  very  special  sympathy  between  his  mother,  sister,  and  himself.

When  he  saw  the  apparition  he  was  seated  at  a  small  table,  about  two  feet
in  diameter,  and  had  his  left  elbow  on  the  table.  The  scratch  which  he  saw
was  on  the  right  side  of  his  sister's  nose,  about  three-fourths  of  an  inch  long,
and  was  a  somewhat  ragged  mark.  His  home  at  the  time  of  the  incident  was
in  St.  Louis.  His  mother  died  within  two  weeks  after  the  incident.  His  sister's
face  was  hardly  a  foot  away  from  his  own.  The  sun  was  shining  upon  it  through
the  open  window.  The  figure  disappeared  like  an  instantaneous  evaporation.

Mr.  G.  has  had  another  experience,  but  of  a  somewhat  different  character.
Last  fall  the  impression  persisted  for  some  time  of  a  lady  friend  of  his,  and  he
could  not  rid  himself  for  some  time  of  thoughts  of  her.  He  found  afterwards
that  she  died  at  the  time  of  the  curious  persistence  of  his  impression.

Mr.  G.  appears  to  be  a  first-class  witness.

R.  HODGSON.

I  have  ranked  this  case  primd  facie  as  a  perception  by  the  spirit  of  her
mother's  approaching  death.  That  coincidence  is  too  marked  to  be  ex-
plained away :  the  son  is  brought  home  in  time  to  see  his  mother  once
more  by  perhaps  the  only  means  which  would  have  succeeded ;  and  the
mother  herself  is  sustained  by  the  knowledge  that  her  daughter  loves  and
awaits  her.  Mr.  Podmore  l  has  suggested,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the
daughter's  figure  was  a  mere  projection  from  the  mother's  mind :  a  con-
ception which  has  scarcely  any  analogy  to  support  it ;  for  the  one  ancient
case  of  Wesermann's  projection  of  a  female  figure  to  a  distance  (already
recounted  in  668  G)  remains,  I  think,  the  sole  instance  where  an  agent
has  generated  a  hallucinatory  figure  or  group  of  figures  which  did  not,  at
any  rate,  include  his  own.  I  mean  that  he  may  spontaneously  project  a
picture  of  himself  as  he  is  or  dreams  himself  to  be  situated,  perhaps  with
other  figures  round  him,  but  not,  so  far  as  our  evidence  goes,  the  single
figure  of  some  one  other  than  himself.  Whilst  not  assuming  that  this  rule
can  have  no  exceptions,  I  see  no  reason  for  supposing  that  it  has  been
transgressed  in  the  present  case.  Nay,  I  think  that  the  very  fact  that  the

1  See  "  Phantasms  of  the  Dead  from  another  point  of  view,"  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  vi.  p.  291.


719]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  31

figure  was  not  that  of  the  corpse  with  the  dull  mark  on  which  the  mother's
regretful  thoughts  might  dwell,  but  was  that  of  the  girl  in  health  and
happiness,  with  the  symbolic  red  mark  worn  simply  as  a  test  of  identity,
goes  far  to  show  that  it  was  not  the  mother's  mind  from  whence  that  image
came.  As  to  the  spirit's  own  knowledge  of  the  fate  of  the  body  after
death,  a  subsequent  group  of  cases  will,  I  think,  show  that  this  specific
form  of  post-mortem  perception  is  not  unusual  (see  730  and  731  A).

I  add  in  Appendices  three  other  cases  where  the  impending  death  of
a  survivor  seems  to  be  indicated.1  In  one  of  them — the  apparition  of  a
floating  female  figure  to  two  officers  (717  C) — the  identification  of  that
figure  as  the  wife  of  the  dying  man  is  very  imperfect.  But  the  appear-
ance of  the  figure  to  two  persons  collectively  is  well  attested,  and  this  is,
at  any  rate,  the  explanation  most  in  accordance  with  analogy.

718.  I  place  next  by  themselves  a  small  group  of  cases  which  have
the  interest  of  uniting  the  group  just  recounted,  where  the  spirit  anticipates
the  friend's  departure,  with  the  group  next  to  be  considered,  where  the
spirit  welcomes  the  friend  already  departed  from  earth.     This  class  forms
at  the  same  time  a  natural  extension  of  the  clairvoyance  of  the  dying
exemplified  in  some  "  reciprocal "  cases  (e.g.  in  the  case  of  Miss  W.,  where
a  dying  aunt  has  a  vision  of  her  little  niece  who  sees  an  apparition  of
her  at  the  same   time  ;    see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.   253).
Just  as  the  approaching  severance  of  spirit  from  body  there  aided  the
spirit  to  project  its  observation  among  incarnate  spirits  at  a  distance
upon  this  earth,  so  here  does  that  same  approaching  severance  enable
the   dying   person   to   see   spirits   who  are  already  in  the  next   world.
It  is  not  very  uncommon  for  dying  persons  to  say,  or  to  indicate  when
beyond  speech,  that  they  see  spirit  friends  apparently  near  them.     But,
of  course,  such  vision  becomes  evidential  only  when  the  dying  person  is
unaware  that  the  friend  whose  spirit  he  sees  has  actually  departed,  or  is
just  about  to  depart,  from  earth.     Such  a  conjuncture  must  plainly  be
rare ;  it  is  even  rather  surprising  that  these  "  Peak  in  Darien  "  cases,  as
Miss  Cobbe  has   termed  them  in  a  small  collection   which   she  made
some  years  ago,  should  be  found  at  all.     We  can  add  to  Miss  Cobbe's
cases  two  of  fair  attestation,  which  I  give  in  718  A  and  B.

719.  From  this  last  group,  then,  there  is  scarcely  a  noticeable  transi-
tion to  the  group  where  departed  spirits  manifest  their  knowledge  that
some  friend  who  survived  them  has  now  passed  on  into  their  world.    That
such  recognition  and  welcome  does  in  fact  take  place,  later  evidence,
drawn  especially  from  trance-utterances,  will  give  good  ground  to  believe.
Only  rarely,  however,  will  such  welcome — taking  place  as  it  does  in  the
spiritual  world — be  reflected  by  apparitions  in  this.     When  so  reflected,  it
may  take  different  forms,  from  an  actual  utterance  of  sympathy,  as  from
a  known  departed  friend,  down  to  a  mere  silent  presence,  perhaps  inex-

1  For  some  curious  parallels  to  these  modern  cases  from  savage  beliefs,  see
Mr.  Andrew  Lang's  Myth,  Ritual,  and  Religion,  vol.  i.  pp.  105-6.


32  CHAPTER    VII  [719

plicable  except  to  those  who  happen  to  have  known  some  long  prede-
ceased friend  of  the  decedent's.

I  quote  in  full  one  of  the  most  complete  cases  of  this  type,  which  was
brought  to  us  by  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.
pp.  380-82).

From  Miss  L.  Dodson  : —

September  \\th,  1891.

On  June  5th,  1887,  a  Sunday  evening,1  between  eleven  and  twelve  at  night,
being  awake,  my  name  was  called  three  times.  I  answered  twice,  thinking  it
was  my  uncle,  "  Come  in,  Uncle  George,  I  am  awake,"  but  the  third  time  I
recognised  the  voice  as  that  of  my  mother,  who  had  been  dead  sixteen  years.
I  said,  "  Mamma ! "  She  then  came  round  a  screen  near  my  bedside  with  two
children  in  her  arms,  and  placed  them  in  my  arms  and  put  the  bedclothes  over
them  and  said,  "  Lucy,  promise  me  to  take  care  of  them,  for  their  mother  is
just  dead."  I  said,  "Yes,  mamma."  She  repeated,  "Promise  me  to  take  care
of  them."  I  replied,  "Yes,  I  promise  you  ;  "  and  I  added,  "  Oh,  mamma,  stay
and  speak  to  me,  I  am  so  wretched."  She  replied,  "  Not  yet,  my  child,"  then
she  seemed  to  go  round  the  screen  again,  and  I  remained,  feeling  the  children
to  be  still  in  my  arms,  and  fell  asleep.  When  I  awoke  there  was  nothing.
Tuesday  morning,  June  7th,  I  received  the  news  of  my  sister-in-law's  death.
She  had  given  birth  to  a  child  three  weeks  before,  which  I  did  not  know  till
after  her  death.

I  was  in  bed,  but  not  asleep,  and  the  room  was  lighted  by  a  gaslight  in  the
street  outside.  I  was  out  of  health,  and  in  anxiety  about  family  troubles.  My
age  was  forty-two.  I  was  quite  alone.  I  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  my
uncle  the  next  morning.  He  thought  I  was  sickening  for  brain  fever.  [I  have
had  other  experiences,  but]  only  to  the  extent  of  having  felt  a  hand  laid  on  my
head,  and  sometimes  oh  my  hands,  at  times  of  great  trouble.

LUCY  DODSON.

The  collector,  Mr.  C.  H.  Cope,  writes  in  answer  to  our  questions  : —

BRUSSELS,  October  ifth,  1891.

I  have  received  replies  from  Miss  Dodson  to  your  inquiries.

(1)  "Yes  [I  was]  perfectly  awake  [at  the  time]."

(2)  "Was  she  in  anxiety  about  her  sister-in-law?"     "None  whatever;  I
did  not  know  a  second  baby  had  been  born ;  in  fact,  had  not  the  remotest  idea
of  my  sister-in-law's  illness.'*

(3)  "Did  she  think  at  the  time  that  the  words  about  the  children's  mother
having  just  died  referred  to  her  sister-in-law?     Had  she  two  children?"     "  No,
I  was  at  a  total  loss  to  imagine  whose  children  they  were."

(4)  "  I  was  living  in  Albany  Street,  Regent's  Park,  at  the  time.    My  sister-
in-law,  as  I  heard  afterwards,  was  confined  at  St.  Andre*  (near  Bruges),  and
removed  to   Bruges  three  days  prior  to  her  death.     (N.B. — She  had  two
children  including  the  new-born  baby.)  "

(5)  "  My  late  uncle  only  saw  business  connections,  and  having  no  relations
or  personal  friends  in  London,  save  myself,  would  not  have  been  likely  to
mention  the  occurrence  to  any  one."

1  We  have  ascertained  that  this  date  was  a  Sunday.


719]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  33

Mr.  Cope  also  sent  us  a  copy  of  the  printed  announcement  of  the
death,  which  Miss  Dodson  had  received.  It  was  dated,  "  Bruges,  June  7th,
1887,"  and  gave  the  date  of  death  as  June  5th.  He  quotes  from  Miss
Dodson's  letter  to  him,  enclosing  it,  as  follows  : — "  [My  friend],  Mrs.
Grange,  tells  me  she  saw  [my  sister-in-law]  a  couple  of  hours  prior  to  her
death,  which  took  place  about  nine  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  June  5th,
and  it  was  between  eleven  and  twelve  o'clock  the  same  night  my  mother
brought  me  the  two  little  children."

Professor  Sidgwick  writes  : —

November  23rd,  1892.

I  have  just  had  an  interesting  conversation  with  Miss  Dodson  and  her
friend,  Mrs.  Grange.

Miss  Dodson  told  me  that  she  was  not  thinking  of  her  brother  or  his  wife
at  this  time,  as  her  mind  was  absorbed  by  certain  other  matters.  But  the
brother  was  an  object  of  special  concern  to  her,  as  her  mother  on  her  death-
bed, in  1871,  had  specially  charged  her — and  she  had  promised — to  take  care
of  the  other  children,  especially  this  brother,  who  was  then  five  years  old.  He
had  married  in  April  1885,  and  she  had  not  seen  him  since,  though  she  had
heard  of  the  birth  of  his  first  child,  a  little  girl,  in  January  1886;  and  she  had
never  seen  his  wife  nor  heard  of  the  birth  of  the  second  child.

She  is  as  sure  as  she  can  be  that  she  was  awake  at  the  time  of  the  expe-
rience. She  knew  the  time  by  a  clock  in  the  room  and  also  a  clock  outside.
She  heard  this  latter  strike  twelve  afterwards,  and  the  apparition  must  have
occurred  after  eleven,  because  lights  were  out  in  front  of  the  public-house.
The  children  seemed  to  be  with  her  a  long  time ;  indeed,  they  seemed  to  be
still  with  her  when  the  clock  struck  twelve.  The  room  was  usually  light  enough
to  see  things  in — e.g.  to  get  a  glass  of  water,  &c. — owing  to  the  lamp  in  the
street,  but  the  distinctness  with  which  the  vision  was  seen  is  not  explicable  by
the  real  light.  The  children  were  of  ages  corresponding  to  those  of  her  sister-
in-law's  children,  i.e.  they  seemed  to  be  a  little  girl  and  a  baby  newly  born ;
the  sex  was  not  distinguished.  She  was  not  at  all  alarmed.

She  heard  from  Mrs.  Grange  by  letter,  and  afterwards  orally  from  her
brother,  that  her  sister-in-law  died  between  eight  and  nine  the  same  night.

She  never  had  any  experience  of  the  kind,  or  any  hallucination  at  all  before  :
but  since  she  has  occasionally  felt  a  hand  on  her  head  in  trouble.

Mrs.  Grange  told  me  that  she  was  with  the  sister-in-law  about  an  hour  and  a
half  before  her  death.  She  left  her  about  seven  o'clock,  without  any  particular
alarm  about  her;  though  she  was  suffering  from  inflammation  after  childbirth,
and  Mrs.  Grange  did  not  quite  like  her  look ;  still  her  state  was  not  considered
alarming  by  those  who  were  attending  on  her.  Then  about  8.30  news  came
to  Mrs.  Grange  in  her  own  house  that  something  had  happened  at  the  sister-
in-law's.  As  it  was  only  in  the  next  street,  Mrs.  Grange  put  on  her  bonnet  and
went  round  to  the  house,  and  found  she  was  dead.  She  then  wrote  and  told
Miss  Dodson.

I  quote  further  cases  more  or  less  analogous  to  this  in  the  Appendices
to  this  section.  In  the  first  (719  A)  the  apparition  of  a  dying  mother
brings  the  news  of  her  own  death  and  that  her  baby  is  living.  In  the
second  (719  B)  a  mother  sees  a  vision  of  her  son  being  drowned  and
also  an  apparition  of  her  own  dead  mother,  who  tells  her  of  the  drowning.

VOL.  II.  C


34  CHAPTER    VII  [720

In  this  case,  the  question  may  be  raised  as  to  whether  the  second  figure
seen  may  not  have  been,  so  to  say,  substitutive — a  symbol  in  which  the
percipient's  own  mind  clothed  a  telepathic  impression  of  the  actual
decedent's  passage  from  earth.  Such  a  view  might  perhaps  be  supported
by  some  anomalous  cases  where  news  of  the  death  is  brought  by  the
apparition  of  a  person  still  living,  who,  nevertheless,  is  not  by  any  normal
means  aware  of  the  death.  (See  the  case  of  Mrs.  T.,  already  given  in
Chapter  IV.,  428;  and  that  of  Miss  Hawkins-Dempster  in  719  C.)

720.  I  will  quote  here  one  case,  at  any  rate,  where  such  an  explanation
would  be  impossible,  since  both  the  deceased  person  and  the  phantasmal
figure  were  previously  unknown  to  the  percipient.  This  case — the  last
which  Edmund  Gurney  published — comes  from  an  excellent  witness.
The  psychical  incident  which  it  seems  to  imply,  while  very  remote  from
popular  notions,  would  be  quite  in  accordance  with  the  rest  of  our  present
series.  A  lady  dies;  her  husband  in  the  spirit-world  is  moved  by  her
arrival ;  and  the  direction  thus  given  to  his  thought  projects  a  picture  of
him,  clothed  as  in  the  days  when  he  lived  with*her,  into  visibility  in  the
house  where  her  body  is  lying.  We  have  thus  a  dream-like  recurrence  to
earthly  memories,  prompted  by  a  revival  of  those  memories  which  had
taken  place  in  the  spiritual  world.  The  case  is  midway  between  a  case  of
welcome  and  a  case  of  haunting.

From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  422-26.  The  account  is  given  by
Mrs.  Bacchus,  of  Sherbourne  Villa,  Leamington.

August  1886.

On  Saturday,  October  i8th  [really  24th],  1868,  we  left  some  friends  (the
Marquis  and  Madame  de  Lys)  with  whom  we  had  been  staying  at  Malvern
Wells,  and  went  to  Cheltenham.  The  reason  for  going  to  Cheltenham  was
that  a  brother-in-law  of  my  husband,  Mr.  George  Copeland,  was  living  there.
He  was  a  great  invalid,  suffering  from  paralysis  and  quite  unable  to  move,  but
in  full  mental  vigour,  so  his  friends  were  anxious  to  see  him  as  often  as  possible
to  relieve  the  dreariness  of  his  long  illness,  and  we  did  not  like  to  be  so  near
without  paying  him  a  visit.  We  knew  that  he  had  friends  staying  in  the  house
at  the  time,  so  determined  to  go  to  Cheltenham  without  letting  him  know,  to
take  lodgings  near,  and  then  tell  him  we  had  done  so,  that  he  might  not  feel  he
ought  to  invite  us  to  his  house.  We  soon  found  some  rooms  in  York  Terrace,
close  to  Bay's  Hill,  Mr.  Copeland's  house.  After  we  had  taken  the  rooms —
the  usual  lodging-house  kind — drawing-room  and  bedroom  at  the  back,  and
were  going  out,  we  noticed  some  medicine  bottles  on  the  hall  table,  asked  if
any  one  were  ill  in  the  house,  and  were  told  that  an  old  lady,  a  Mrs.  R.,  and
her  daughter  were  in  the  dining-room,  that  Mrs.  R.  had  been  ill  for  some  time,
that  her  illness  was  not  serious  and  that  there  was  no  immediate  danger  of  her
dying ;  in  fact,  it  was  made  quite  light  of,  and  we  thought  no  more  about  it.
We  just  mentioned  in  the  course  of  the  evening  the  name  of  the  people  lodging
in  the  same  house,  and  Mr.  Copeland  said  he  knew  who  Mrs.  R.  was ;  she  was
the  widow  of  a  physician  who  formerly  practised  in  Cheltenham,  that  one  of
her  daughters  was  married  to  a  master  of  the  College,  a  Mr.  N.  Then  I
remembered  having  seen  Mrs.  N.  at  a  garden-party  at  Dr.  Barry's  the  year
before,  and  had  noticed  her  talking  to  Mrs.  Barry,  and  thought  her  very  pretty.
This  was  all  I  knew  or  ever  heard  of  the  people.  On  Sunday  morning,  when


720]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  '35

I  came  into  the  drawing-room  for  breakfast,  I  thought  my  husband  looked  a
little  uncomfortable ;  however,  he  said  nothing  till  I  had  finished  breakfast,
then  asked,  "Did  you  hear  a  noise  of  a  chair  in  the  hall  a  little  while  ago?
The  old  lady  downstairs  died  in  her  chair  last  night,  and  they  were  wheeling
her  into  the  bedroom  at  the  back."  I  was  very  uncomfortable  and  frightened  ;
I  had  never  been  in  a  house  with  any  one  dead  before,  and  wanted  to  go,  and
several  friends  who  heard  of  it  asked  me  to  stay  with  them,  but  my  husband
did  not  wish  to  move.  He  said  it  was  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  was  really  foolish
of  me  to  wish  it,  that  he  did  not  like  moving  on  Sunday,  also  that  he  did  not
think  it  right  or  kind  to  go  away  because  some  one  had  died,  that  we  should
think  it  unkind  if  the  case  had  been  our  own,  and  other  people  had  rushed
off  in  a  hurry  ;  so  we  decided  to  stay.  I  spent  the  day  with  my  brother-in-law
and  nieces,  and  only  returned  to  the  lodgings  in  time  to  go  to  bed.  I  went  to
sleep  quickly  as  usual,  but  woke,  I  suppose,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  not
frightened  by  any  noise,  and  for  no  reason,  and  saw  distinctly  at  the  foot  of  the
bed  an  old  gentleman  with  a  round  rosy  face,  smiling,  his  hat  in  his  hand,
dressed  in  an  old-fashioned  coat  (blue)  with  brass  buttons,  light  waistcoat,  and
trousers.  The  longer  I  looked  at  him  the  more  distinctly  I  saw  every  feature
and  particular  of  his  dress,  &c.  I  did  not  feel  much  frightened,  and  after  a
time  shut  my  eyes  for  a  minute  or  two,  and  when  I  looked  again  the  old  gentle-
man was  gone.  After  a  time  I  went  to  sleep,  and  in  the  morning,  while
dressing,  made  up  my  mind  that  I  would  say  nothing  of  what  I  had  seen  till  I
saw  one  of  my  nieces,  and  would  then  describe  the  old  gentleman,  and  ask  if
Dr.  R.  could  be  like  him,  although  the  idea  seemed  absurd.  I  met  my  niece,
Mary  Copeland  (now  Mrs.  Brandling),  coming  out  of  church,  and  said,  "Was
Dr.  R.  like  an  old  gentleman  with  a  round  rosy  face,"  &c.,  &c.,  describing  what
I  had  seen.  She  stopped  at  once  on  the  pavement,  looking  astonished.  "  Who
could  have  told  you,  aunt?  We  always  said  he  looked  more  like  a  country
farmer  than  a  doctor,  and  how  odd  it  was  that  such  a  common-looking  man
should  have  had  such  pretty  daughters."

This  is  an  exact  account  of  what  I  saw.  I  am  quite  sure  I  should  know
the  old  gentleman  again,  his  face  is  clearly  before  me  when  I  think  of  it  now,
as  at  the  time  Miss  de  Lys  had  a  letter  from  me  with  the  story,  and  sent  it  to
a  relation  in  France;  she  heard  me  tell  it  again  some  years  after,  and  said
there  was  no  variation  whatever  in  it.  My  two  nieces  are  still  living,  and  can
remember  exactly  everything  that  happened  as  I  told  it  to  them.  Of  course
I  cannot  explain  it  in  any  way ;  the  old  lady  who  was  dead  was  in  the  room
directly  under  the  one  I  was  sleeping  in.  The  part  of  the  whole  thing  that
surprised  me  the  most  was,  that  I  was  so  very  little  frightened  as  to  be  able
to  sleep  afterwards,  and  did  not  wish  to  disturb  any  one  else.

Mr.  Bacchus  writes  : —

LEAMINGTON,  September  2"jth,  1886.

I  have  read  my  wife's  account  of  what  happened  at  Cheltenham  when  we
were  staying  there  in  October  1868;  it  is  exactly  what  she  told  me  at  the
time,  and  I  remember  it  all  perfectly,  also  her  telling  my  niece  about  it  in  the
morning.  HENRY  BACCHUS.

In  answer  to  further  questions,  Mrs.  Bacchus  replied  as  follows  : —

September  qth,  1886.

(1)  I  have  never  seen  anything  of  the  kind  before  or  since.

(2)  I  gave  the  date  from  memory.    The  day  was  Saturday,  and  it  was  Sun-
day night,  or  early  on  Monday  morning,  that  I  saw  Dr.  R.


36  CHAPTER    VII  [721

(3)  I  do  not  remember  the  number  in  York  Terrace;  probably  the  Times
of  October  1868  would  give  Mrs.  R.'s  death  and  where  it  took  place.     [The
Times  gives  the  death  at  7  York  Terrace,  Sunday,  October  25th,  1868.]

(4)  The  letter  to  Miss  de  Lys  cannot  be  found ;  all  my  letters  to  her  were
burnt  after  she  died  in  1883.

(5)  Mr.  Bacchus  and  Mrs.  Henry  Berkeley  have  given  their  account.    Mrs.
Brandling  has  not  yet  written.

(6)  I  am  quite  sure  I  never  saw  any  picture  of  any  kind  of  Dr.  R.

(7)  I  do  not  know  when  he  died  ;  probably  three  or  four  years  before  I  saw
him.     His  death  was  spoken  of  in  that  way.     I  can  find  out  if  necessary  from
an  old  servant  of  Mr.  Copeland's  who  lives  at  Cheltenham,  and  who  would
remember  him,  and  be  able  to  inquire.

(8)  I  do  not  remember  anything  about  the  light,  if  there  was  a  night-light
in  the  room  or  not;  I  think  not.     When  I  say,  "do  not  remember,"  I  mean
that  being  asked  puzzles  me;  my  impression  of  the  whole  thing  is  that  it  was
like  a  magic  lantern,  all  dark  round,  and  the  figure,  colour,  and  clothes  quite
light  and  bright.     I  always  see  the  whole  thing  when  I  speak  of  it.

ISABELLE  BACCHUS.

Statements  were  also  obtained  from  Mrs.  Berkeley  and  Mrs.  Brand-
ling, nieces  of  Mrs.  Bacchus,  confirming  her  recollection  that  she  had
described  the  details  of  the  apparition  to  them  the  next  morning,  and
that  it  closely  resembled  Dr.  R.,  as  they  remembered  him.  These
statements  are  printed  in  full  in  the  Proceedings.

Mr.  R.  died  (as  Mrs.  Bacchus  ascertained  for  us),  August  3Oth,  1865.

721.  I  now  come  to  a  considerable  group  of  cases  where  the  departed
spirit  shows  a  definite  knowledge  of  some  fact  connected  with  his  own
earth-life,  his  death,  or  subsequent  events  connected  with  that  death.
The  knowledge  of  subsequent  events,  as  of  the  spread  of  the  news  of  his
death,  or  as  to  the  place  of  his  burial,  is,  of  course,  a  greater  achievement
(so  to  term  it)  than  a  mere  recollection  of  facts  known  to  him  in  life,  and
ought  strictly,  on  the  plan  of  this  series,  to  be  first  illustrated.  But  it
will  be  seen  that  all  these  stages  of  knowledge  cohere  together ;  and  their
connection  can  better  be  shown  if  I  begin  at  the  lower  stage, — of  mere
earth- memory.  Now  here  again,  as  so  often  already,  we  shall  have  to
wait  for  automatic  script  and  the  like  to  illustrate  the  full  extent  of  the
deceased  person's  possible  memory.  Readers  of  the  utterances,  for
instance,  of  "  George  Pelham"  (see  Chapter  IX.),  will  know  how  full  and
accurate  may  be  these  recollections  from  beyond  the  grave.  Mere  appari-
tions, such  as  those  with  which  we  are  now  dealing,  can  rarely  give  more
than  one  brief  message,  probably  felt  by  the  deceased  to  be  of  urgent
importance.

I  will  quote  at  length  a  well-attested  case  where  the  information  com-
municated in  a  vision  proved  to  be  definite,  accurate,  and  important  to
the  survivors.  (From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  200-205.)  l

1  Some  of  the  correspondence  about  the  case  given  in  the  Proceedings  is  omitted  here
for  want  of  space.


721]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  37

The  first  report  of  the  case  appeared  in  The  Herald  (Dubuque,  Iowa),
Febiuary  nth,  1891,  as  follows: —

It  will  be  remembered  that  on  February  2nd,  Michael  Conley,  a  farmer
living  near  Ionia,  Chickasaw  County,  was  found  dead  in  an  outhouse  at  the
Jefferson  house.  He  was  carried  to  Coroner  Hoffmann's  morgue,  where,  after
the  inquest,  his  body  was  prepared  for  shipment  to  his  late  home.  The  old
clothes  which  he  wore  were  covered  with  filth  from  the  place  where  he  was
found,  and  they  were  thrown  outside  the  morgue  on  the  ground.

His  son  came  from  Ionia,  and  took  the  corpse  home.  When  he  reached
there,  and  one  of  the  daughters  was  told  that  her  father  was  dead,  she  fell  into
a  swoon,  in  which  she  remained  for  several  hours.  When  at  last  she  was
brought  from  the  swoon,  she  said,  "  Where  are  father's  old  clothes  ?  He  has
just  appeared  to  me  dressed  in  a  white  shirt,  black  clothes,  and  felt  [mis-reported
for  satin]  slippers,  and  told  me  that  after  leaving  home  he  sewed  a  large  roll  of
bills  inside  his  grey  shirt  with  a  piece  of  my  red  dress,  and  the  money  is  still
there."  In  a  short  time  she  fell  into  another  swoon,  and  when  out  of  it
demanded  that  somebody  go  to  Dubuque  and  get  the  clothes.  She  was  deathly
sick,  and  is  so  yet.

The  entire  family  considered  it  only  a  hallucination,  but  the  physician
advised  them  to  get  the  clothes,  as  it  might  set  her  mind  at  rest.  The  son
telephoned  Coroner  Hoffmann,  asking  if  the  clothes  were  still  in  his  posses-
sion. He  looked  and  found  them  in  the  backyard,  although  he  had  supposed
they  were  thrown  in  the  vault,  as  he  had  intended.  He  answered  that  he  still
had  them,  and  on  being  told  that  the  son  would  come  to  get  them,  they
were  wrapped  in  a  bundle.

The  young  man  arrived  last  Monday  afternoon,  and  told  Coroner  Hoffmann
what  his  sister  had  said.  Mr.  Hoffmann  admitted  that  the  lady  had  described
the  identical  burial  garb  in  which  her  father  was  clad,  even  to  the  slippers,
although  she  never  saw  him  after  death,  and  none  of  the  family  had  seen  more
than  his  face  through  the  coffin  lid.  Curiosity  being  fully  aroused,  they  took
the  grey  shirt  from  the  bundle,  and  within  the  bosom  found  a  large  roll  of  bills
sewed  with  a  piece  of  red  cloth.  The  young  man  said  his  sister  had  a  red  dress
exactly  like  it.  The  stitches  were  large  and  irregular,  and  looked  to  be  those
of  a  man.  The  son  wrapped  up  the  garments  and  took  them  home  with  him
yesterday  morning,  filled  with  wonder  at  the  supernatural  revelation  made  to
his  sister,  who  is  at  present  lingering  between  life  and  death.

Dr.  Hodgson  communicated  with  the  proprietors  of  The  Herald,  and
both  they  and  their  reporter  who  had  written  the  account  stated  that  it
was  strictly  accurate.  The  coroner,  Mr.  Hoffmann,  wrote  to  Dr.  Hodgson
on  March  iSth,  1891,  as  follows: —

In  regard  to  the  statement  in  the  Dubuque  Herald,  about  February  iQth,
about  the  Conley  matter  is  more  than  true  by  my  investigation.  I  laughed
and  did  not  believe  in  the  matter  when  I  first  heard  of  it,  until  I  satisfied
myself  by  investigating  and  seeing  what  I  did.

M.  M.  HOFFMANN,  County  Coroner.

Further  evidence  was  obtained  through  Mr.  Amos  Cnim,  pastor  of  a
church  at  Dubuque.  The  following  statement  was  made  by  Mr.  Brown,


38  CHAPTER    VII  [721

whom  Mr.  Crum  described  as  "  an  intelligent  and  reliable  farmer,  residing
about  one  mile  from  the  Conleys."

IONIA,  July  20th,  1891.

Elizabeth  Conley,  the  subject  of  so  much  comment  in  the  various  papers,
was  born  in  Chickasaw  township,  Chickasaw  County,  Iowa,  in  March  1863.
Her  mother  died  the  same  year.  Is  of  Irish  parentage  ;  brought  up,  and  is,  a
Roman  Catholic;  has  been  keeping  house  for  her  father  for  ten  years.

On  the  1st  day  of  February  1891  her  father  went  to  Dubuque,  Iowa,  for
medical  treatment,  and  died  on  the  3rd  of  the  same  month  very  suddenly.
His  son  was  notified  by  telegraph  the  same  day,  and  he  and  I  started
the  next  morning  after  the  remains,  which  we  found  in  charge  of  Coroner
Hoffmann.

He  had  9  dollars  75  cents,  which  he  had  taken  from  his  pocket-book.  I
think  it  was  about  two  days  after  our  return  she  had  the  dream  or  vision.  She
claimed  her  father  had  appeared  to  her,  and  told  her  there  was  a  sum  of  money
in  an  inside  pocket  of  his  undershirt.  Her  brother  started  for  Dubuque  a  few
days  afterwards,  and  found  the  clothes  as  we  had  left  them,  and  in  the  pocket
referred  to  found  30  dollars  in  currency.  These  are  the  facts  of  the  matter  as
near  as  I  can  give  them.  GEORGE  BROWN.

Mr.  Crum  wrote  later : —

DUBUQUE,  IOWA,  August  i$th,  1891.

DEAR  MR.  HODGSON, — I  send  you  in  another  cover  a  detailed  account  of
interview  with  the  Conleys.  I  could  not  get  the  doctor.

I  have  had  a  long  talk  with  Mr.  Hoffmann  about  the  Conley  incident,  and
think  you  have  all  the  facts — and  they  are  facts.

The  girl  Lizzie  Conley  swooned.  She  saw  her  dead  father ;  she  heard  from
him  of  the  money  left  in  his  old  shirt ;  she  returned  to  bodily  consciousness ;
she  described  her  father's  burial  dress,  robe,  shirt,  and  slippers  exactly,  though
she  had  never  seen  them.  She  described  the  pocket  in  the  shirt  that  had  been
left  for  days  in  the  shed  at  the  undertaker's.  It  was  a  ragged-edged  piece  of
red  cloth  clumsily  sewn,  and  in  this  pocket  was  found  a  roll  of  bills — 35  dollars
in  amount — as  taken  out  by  Mr.  Hoffmann  in  presence  of  Pat  Conley,  son  of
the  deceased,  and  brother  of  the  Lizzie  Conley  whose  remarkable  dream  or
vision  is  the  subject  of  inquiry.  AMOS  CRUM,  Past.  Univ.  Ch.

...  I  herewith  transcribe  my  questions  addressed  to  Miss  Elizabeth
Conley  and  her  replies  to  the  same  concerning  her  alleged  dream  or  vision  ....

On  July  1 7th,  about  noon,  I  called  at  the  Conley  home  near  Ionia,  Chicka-
saw County,  Iowa,  and  inquired  for  Elizabeth  Conley.  She  was  present  and
engaged  in  her  domestic  labours.  When  I-  stated  the  object  of  my  call,  she
seemed  quite  reluctant  for  a  moment  to  engage  in  conversation.  Then  she
directed  a  lad  who  was  present  to  leave  the  room.  She  said  she  would  converse
with  me  upon  the  matter  pertaining  to  her  father.

Q.  What  is  your  age  ?    A.  Twenty-eight.

Q.  What  is  the  state  of  your  health  ?    A.  Not  good  since  my  father's  death.

Q.  What  was  the  state  of  your  health  previous  to  his  death  ?  A.  It  was
good.  I  was  a  healthy  girl.

Q.  Did  you  have  dreams,  visions,  or  swoons  previous  to  your  father's  death  ?
A.  Why,  I  had  dreams.  Everybody  has  dreams.


721]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  39

Q.  Have  you  ever  made  discoveries  or  received  other  information  during
your  dreams  or  visions  previous  to  your  father's  death  ?  A.  No.

Q.  Had  there  been  anything  unusual  in  your  dreams  or  visions  previous  to
your  father's  death  ?  A.  No,  not  that  I  know  of.

Q.  Was  your  father  in  the  habit  of  carrying  considerable  sums  of  money
about  his  person?  A.  Not  that  I  knew  of.

Q.  Did  you  know  before  his  death  of  the  pocket  in  the  breast  of  the  shirt
worn  by  him  to  Dubuque  ?  A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  wash  or  prepare  that  shirt  for  him  to  wear  on  his  trip  to
Dubuque  ?  A.  No.  It  was  a  heavy  woollen  undershirt,  and  the  pocket  was
stitched  inside  of  the  breast  of  it.

Q.  Will  you  recite  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  recovery  of
money  from  clothing  worn  by  your  father  at  the  time  of  his  death?  A.
(after  some  hesitation)  When  they  told  me  that  father  was  dead  I  felt  very
sick  and  bad;  I  did  not  know  anything.  Then  father  came  to  me.  He
had  on  a  white  shirt  and  black  clothes  and  slippers.  When  I  came  to,  I
told  Pat  [her  brother]  I  had  seen  father.  I  asked  him  (Pat)  if  he  had
brought  back  father's  old  clothes.  He  said,  "  No,"  and  asked  me  why  I
wanted  them.  I  told  him  father  said  to  me  he  had  sewed  a  roll  of  bills  inside
of  his  grey  shirt,  in  a  pocket  made  of  a  piece  of  my  old  red  dress.  I  went
to  sleep,  and  father  came  to  me  again.  When  I  awoke  I  told  Pat  he  must  go
and  get  the  clothes.

Q.  While  in  these  swoons  did  you  hear  the  ordinary  conversations  or  noises
in  the  house  about  you  ?  A.  No.

Q.  Did  you  see  your  father's  body  after  it  was  placed  in  its  coffin  ?  A.  No  ;
I  did  not  see  him  after  he  left  the  house  to  go  to  Dubuque.

Q.   Have  you  an  education  ?     A.  No.

Q.  Can  you  read  and  write?  A.  Oh  yes,  I  can  read  and  write;  but  I've
not  been  to  school  much.

Q.  Are  you  willing  to  write  out  what  you  have  told  me  of  this  strange
affair?  A.  Why,  I've  told  you  all  I  know  about  it.

She  was  averse  to  writing  or  to  signing  a  written  statement.  During  the
conversation  she  was  quite  emotional,  and  manifested  much  effort  to
suppress  her  feelings.  She  is  a  little  more  than  medium  size,  of  Irish  parent-
age, of  Catholic  faith,  and  shows  by  her  conversation  that  her  education  is
limited.

Her  brother,  Pat  Conley,  corroborates  all  that  she  has  recited.  He  is  a
sincere  and  substantial  man,  and  has  no  theory  upon  which  to  account  for  the
strange  facts  that  have  come  to  his  knowledge.  In  his  presence  Coroner
Hoffmann,  in  Dubuque,  found  the  shirt  with  its  pocket  of  red  cloth  stitched  on
the  inside  with  long,  straggling,  and  awkward  stitches,  just  as  a  dim-sighted  old
mr.n  or  an  awkward  boy  might  sew  it  there.  The  pocket  was  about  7  [seven]
inches  deep,  and  in  the  pocket  of  that  dirty  old  shirt  that  had  lain  in  Hoff-
mann's back  room  was  a  roll  of  bills  amounting  to  35  dollars.  When  the  shirt
was  found  with  the  pocket,  as  described  by  his  sister  after  her  swoon,  and  the
money  as  told  her  by  the  old  man  after  his  death,  Pat  Conley  seemed  dazed
and  overcome  by  the  mystery.  Hoffmann  says  the  girl,  after  her  swoon,  de-
scribed exactly  the  burial  suit,  shirt,  coat  or  robe,  and  satin  slippers  in  which
the  body  was  prepared  for  burial.  She  even  described  minutely  the  slippers,
which  were  of  a  new  pattern  that  had  not  been  in  the  market  here,  and  which
the  girl  could  never  have  seen  a  sample  of ;  and  she  had  not  seen,  and  never


40  CHAPTER    VII  [722

saw,  the  body  of  her  father  after  it  was  placed  in  the  coffin,  and  if  she  had  seen
it  she  could  not  have  seen  his  feet  "  in  the  nice  black  satin  slippers  "  which  she
described.  .  .  .  AMOS  CRUM,  Pastor  Univ.  Church.

If  we  may  accept  the  details  of  this  narrative,  which  seems  to  have
been  carefully  and  promptly  investigated,  we  find  that  the  phantasm  com-
municates two  sets  of  facts :  one  of  them  known  only  to  strangers  (the
dress  in  which  he  was  buried),  and  one  of  them  known  only  to  himself
(the  existence  of  the  inside  pocket  and  the  money  therein).  In  discussing
from  what  mind  these  images  orignate  it  is,  of  course,  important  to  note
whether  any  living  minds,  known  or  unknown  to  the  percipient,  were
aware  of  the  facts  thus  conveyed.

There  are  few  cases  where  the  communication  between  the  percipient
and  the  deceased  seems  to  have  been  more  direct  than  here.  The  hard,
prosaic  reality  of  the  details  of  the  message  need  not,  of  course,  surprise
us.  On  the  contrary,  the  father's  sudden  death  in  the  midst  of  earthly
business  would  at  once  retain  his  attention  on  money  matters  and  facilitate
his  impressing  them  on  the  daughter's  mind.  One  wishes  that  more
could  be  learned  of  the  daughter's  condition  when  receiving  the  message.
It  seems  to  have  resembled  trance  rather  than  dream.

722.  A  dream  in  which  a  message  of  somewhat  the  same  kind  is  given
is  here  added  in  722  A,  after  which  will  also  be  found  (in  722  B)  one  of
the  few  old  cases  whose  lineage  is  sufficiently  respectable  to  allow  its
entrance  here.  The  preoccupation  in  each  case  turns  on  the  fulfilment  of
a  small  duty.  One  other  case  in  this  group  I  must  quote  at  length.  It
illustrates  the  fact  that  the  cases  of  deepest  interest  are  often  the  hardest
for  the  inquirer  to  get  hold  of.

From  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  pp.  385-86.

The  account  of  the  percipient,  Baron  B.  von  Driesen,  was  written  in
November  1890,  and  has  been  translated  from  the  Russian  by  Mr.  M.
Petrovo-Solovovo,  who  sent  us  the  case.

[Baron  von  Driesen  begins  by  saying  that  he  has  never  believed  and  does
not  believe  in  the  supernatural,  and  that  he  is  more  inclined  to  attribute  the
apparition  he  saw  to  his  "  excited  fancy  "  than  to  anything  else.  After  these
preliminary  remarks  he  proceeds  as  follows  :— ]

I  must  tell  you  that  my  father-in-law,  M.  N.  J.  Ponomareff,  died  in  the
country.  This  did  not  happen  at  once,  but  after  a  long  and  painful  illness,
whose  sharp  phases  had  obliged  my  wife  and  myself  to  join  him  long  before
his  death.  I  had  not  been  on  good  terms  with  M.  Ponomareff.  Different  cir-
cumstances, which  are  out  of  place  in  this  narrative,  had  estranged  us  from
each  other,  and  these  relations  did  not  change  until  his  death.  He  died  very
quietly,  after  having  given  his  blessing  to  all  his  family,  including  myself.  A
liturgy  for  the  rest  of  his  soul  was  to  be  celebrated  on  the  ninth  day.  I  re-
member very  well  how  I  went  to  bed  between  one  and  two  o'clock  on  the  eve
of  that  day,  and  how  I  read  the  Gospel  before  falling  asleep.  My  wife  was
sleeping  in  the  same  room.  It  was  perfectly  quiet.  I  had  just  put  out  the
candle  when  footsteps  were  heard  in  the  adjacent  room— a  sound  of  slippers


722]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  41

shuffling,  I  might  say — which  ceased  before  the  door  of  our  bedroom.  I  called
out,  "  Who  is  there  ?  "  No  answer.  I  struck  one  match,  then  another,  and  when
after  the  stifling  smell  of  the  sulphur  the  fire  had  lighted  up  the  room,  I  saw  M.
Ponomareff  standing  before  the  closed  door.  Yes,  it  was  he,  in  his  blue
dressing-gown,  lined  with  squirrel  furs  and  only  half-buttoned,  so  that  I  could
see  his  white  waistcoat  and  his  black  trousers.  It  was  he  undoubtedly.  I  was
not  frightened.  They  say  that,  as  a  rule,  one  is  not  frightened  when  seeing  a
ghost,  as  ghosts  possess  the  quality  of  paralysing  fear.

"What  do  you  want?"  I  asked  my  father-in-law.  M.  Ponomareff  made
two  steps  forward,  stopped  before  my  bed,  and  said,  "  Basil  Feodorovitch,  I
have  acted  wrongly  towards  you.  Forgive  me !  Without  this  I  do  not  feel
at  rest  there."  He  was  pointing  to  the  ceiling  with  his  left  hand  whilst  hold-
ing out  his  right  to  me.  I  seized  this  hand,  which  was  long  and  cold,  shook  it,
and  answered,  "  Nicholas  Ivanovitch,  God  is  my  witness  that  I  have  never  had
anything  against  you."

[The  ghost  of]  my  father-in-law  bowed  [or  bent  down],  moved  away,  and
went  through  the  opposite  door  into  the  billiard-room,  where  he  disappeared.
I  looked  after  him  for  a  moment,  crossed  myself,  put  out  the  candle,  and  fell
asleep  with  the  sense  of  joy  which  a  man  who  has  done  his  duty  must  feel.
The  morning  came.  My  wife's  brothers,  as  well  as  our  neighbours  and  the
peasants,  assembled,  and  the  liturgy  was  celebrated  by  our  confessor,  the  Rev.
Father  Basil.  But  when  all  was  over,  the  same  Father  Basil  led  me  aside,  and
said  to  me  mysteriously,  "  Basil  Feodorovitch,  I  have  got  something  to  say  to
you  in  private."  My  wife  having  come  near  us  at  this  moment,  the  clergyman
repeated  his  wish.  I  answered,  "  Father  Basil,  I  have  no  secrets  from  my
wife  ;  please  tell  us  what  you  wished  to  tell  me  alone."

Then  Father  Basil,  who  is  living  till  now  in  the  Koi  parish  of  the  district  of
Kashin  [Gov.  of  Tver],  said  to  me  in  a  rather  solemn  voice,  "  This  night  at
three  o'clock  Nicholas  Ivanovitch  [Ponomareff]  appeared  to  me  and  begged  of
me  to  reconcile  him  to  you."  (Signed)  BARON  BASIL  DRIESEN.

Mr.  Solovovo  adds  : —

The  Baroness  von  Driesen  is  now  dead,  so  that  her  evidence  cannot  be
obtained  .  .  .

I  also  saw  Baron  Basil  von  Driesen  himself,  and  spoke  with  him  about
M.  Ponomareff's  ghost.  He  stated  to  me  that  if  he  were  going  to  die  to-morrow,
he  should  still  be  ready  to  swear  to  the  fact  of  his  having  seen  the  apparition,
or  something  to  this  effect.  I  asked  him  to  obtain  for  me  the  clergyman's
account,  to  whom  I  had  already  written  before  seeing  Baron  von  Driesen
(though  not  knowing  him),  but  without  receiving  an  answer — which  is  but
natural,  after  all.  Baron  von  Driesen  kindly  promised  to  procure  for  me  the
account  in  question,  as  it  was  then  his  intention  to  visit  different  estates  in
Central  Russia,  including  the  one  that  had  belonged  to  M.  Ponomareff.

Baron  Nicholas  von  Driesen — Baron  Basil's  son — called  on  me  a  few  days
ago.  He  stated,  with  regard  to  the  case  in  question,  that  it  was  necessary  to
see  the  clergyman  in  order  to  induce  him  to  write  an  account  of  what  had
happened  to  him.

Baron  N.  von  Driesen  afterwards  sent  a  note  to  Mr.  Solovovo,  stating
that  his  grandfather  (M.  Ponomareff)  died  on  November  2ist,  1860;  and


42  CHAPTER    VII  [723

the  testimony  of  the  priest  was  obtained  later.  Mr.  Solovovo,  who  had
already  ascertained  independently  that  the  Rev.  Basil  Bajenoff  had  been
a  priest  at  Koi  in  the  year  1861,  and  was  there  still,  writes  : —

The  following  is  the  translation  of  the  Rev.  Basil  Bajenoff' s  statement : —

"Koi,  July  zyd  [Attgust  qth],  1891.

"  To  the  account  I  heard  from  Baron  B.  F.  Driesen  in  the  presence  of  his
wife's  brothers,  MM.  N.  N.,  A.  N.,  and  I.  N.  Ponomareff,  as  to  how  M.  Nicholas
I.  Ponomareff  appeared  to  him  in  the  night  of  November  29-30^1,  1860,  having
died  nine  days  before,  and  begged  of  the  Baron  to  be  reconciled  to  him,  I  may
add  that  to  me  also  did  he  appear  at  the  same  time  and  with  the  same  request,
which  fact,  before  hearing  the  Baron's  narrative,  I  communicated  to  all  those
present  at  the  liturgy  for  the  rest  of  the  soul  of  the  late  M.  N.  I.  Ponomareff.

"(Signed)  BASIL  BAJENOFF,

"  Priest  of  Trinity  Church,  at  Koi,  District  of  Kashin,
Government  of  Tver."

723.  In  this  connection  I  may  refer  again  to  Mrs.  Storie's  dream  of  the
death  of  her  brother  in  a  railway  accident,  given  in  Chapter  IV.   (427).
While  I  think  that  Gurney  was  right — in  the  state  of  the  evidence  at  the
time  Phantasms  of  the  Living  was  written — in  doing  his  best  to  bring  this
incident   under  the  head  of  telepathic  clairvoyance,  I  yet  feel  that  the
knowledge  since  gained  makes  it  impossible  for  me  to  adhere  to  that  view.
I  cannot  regard  the  visionary  scene  as  wholly  reflected  from  the  mind  of
the  dying  man.     I  cannot  think,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  vision  of  Mr.
Johnstone, — interpolated  with  seeming  irrelevance  among  the  details  of
the  disaster, — did  only  by  accident  coincide  with  the  fact  that  that  gentle-
man really  was  in  the  train,  and  with  the  further  fact  that  it  was  he  who
communicated  the  fact  of  Mr.  Hunter's  death  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Storie.     I
must  suppose  that  the  communicating  intelligence  was  aware  of  Mr.  John-
stone's  presence,  and  at  least  guessed  that  upon  him  (as  a  clergyman)  that
task  would  naturally  fall.     Nor  can  I  pass  over  as  purely  symbolic  so  im-
portant a  part  of  the  vision  as  the  second  figure,  and  the  scrap  of  conversa-
tion, which  seemed  to  be  half  heard.     I  therefore  consider  that  the  case
falls  among  those  where  a  friend  recently  departed  appears  in  company  of
some  other  friend,  dead  some  time  before.

724.  We  have  thus  seen  the  spirit  occupied  shortly  after  death  with
various  duties  or  engagements,  small  or  great,  which  it  has  incurred  during
life  on  earth.     Such  ties  seem  to  prompt  or  aid  its  action  upon  its  old  sur-
roundings.    And  here  an  important  reflection  occurs.     Can  we  prepare
such  a  tie  for  the  departing  spirit  ?     Can  we  create  for  it  some  welcome
and  helpful  train  of  association  which  may  facilitate  the  self-manifestation
which  many  souls  appear  to  desire  ?     I  believe  that  we  can  to  some  extent
do  this.     At  an  early  stage  of  our  collection,  Edmund  Gurney  was  struck
by  the  unexpectedly  large  proportion  of  cases  where  the  percipient  in-
formed us  that  there  had  been  a  compact  between  himself  and  the  deceased
person  that  whichever  passed  away  first  should  try  to  appear  to  the  other.


725]  PHANTASMS     OF    THE     DEAD  43

"Considering,"  he  adds,  "what  an  extremely  small  number  of  persons
make  such  a  compact,  compared  with  those  who  do  not,  it  is  difficult  to
resist  the  conclusion  that  its  existence  has  a  certain  efficacy."

The  cases  recorded  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  are  such  as  fell,  or  may
have  fallen,  within  twelve  hours  of  the  death ;  otherwise  they  would  not
have  been  introduced  into  that  work.  It  will,  of  course,  occur  to  the  reader
that  since  the  especial  object  of  that  compact  is  to  assure  the  surviving
friend  that  the  deceased  person  has  safely  traversed  the  gate  of  death,  its
fulfilment  affords  some  presumption  that  he  is  not  merely  approaching  that
gate,  but  feels  that  he  has  passed  it.  On  the  other  hand,  Gurney  remarks,
that  "  considering  how  often  spontaneous  telepathy  acts  without  any  con-
scious set  of  the  distant  mind  towards  the  person  impressed,  it  is  safer  to
refer  the  phenomenon  to  the  same  sort  of  blind  movements  as  seem  some-
times at  supreme  crises  to  evoke  a  response  out  of  memories  and  affinities
that  have  long  lapsed  from  consciousness ;  on  which  view  the  efficacy  of
the  compact  may  quite  as  readily  be  conceived  to  depend  on  its  latent
place  in  the  percipient's  mind  as  in  the  agent's."

Since  these  words  were  written  the  general  trend  of  the  evidence  has
somewhat  changed ;  and  it  may  be  well  briefly  to  refer  to  the  compact-
cases  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  considering  how  far  they  seem  to  indicate
ante-mortem  or  post-mortem  communication.

725.  Taking  the  cases  as  they  follow  each  other  in  that  work,  the  first
(vol.  i.  p.  395)  is  the  well-known  incident  recorded  by  Lord  Brougham —
his  vision,  while  taking  a  warm  bath  in  Sweden,  of  a  school  friend  from
whom  he  had  parted  many  years  before,  but  with  whom  he  had  long  ago
"  committed  the  folly  of  drawing  up  an  agreement  written  with  our  blood,
to  the  effect  that  whichever  of  us  died  first  should  appear  to  the  other,
and  thus  solve  any  doubts  we  had  entertained  of  the  life  after  death."
This  incident  happened  about  2  A.M.  apparently  on  December  ipth
(possibly  on  December  2Oth),  1799.  G.  died  in  India  on  December
1 9th,  1799 — place  and  hour  not  stated.  The  time  in  any  part  of  India  is,
of  course,  several  hours  ahead  of  the  time  in  Sweden.  In  this  case  the
time-coincidence  cannot  be  clearly  determined.

The  second  compact-case  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (vol.  i.  p.  419)
tells  definitely  against  the  assumption  that  the  apparent  fulfilment  of  a
compact  must  needs  indicate  actual  death.  Captain  P.  was  washed  over-
board at  sea ;  but  though  in  extreme  danger,  did  not  lose  consciousness,
caught  hold  of  a  rope,  and  was  saved.  On  the  same  night,  perhaps  at  the
same  moment,  a  lady  with  whom  Captain  P.  had  made  a  death-compact,
saw  his  phantasm  in  her  room.  This  seems  precisely  the  kind  of  incident
which  Gurney's  last-quoted  sentences  have  in  view.

The  third  case  (vol.  i.  p.  427)  is  remarkable  inasmuch  as  the  phan-
tasmal figure  appeared  not  only  to  the  partner  in  the  compact,  but  also  to
a  child  unacquainted  with  the  decedent,  but  who  chanced  to  be  sleeping
in  a  room  near  to  that  occupied  by  the  said  partner.  It  is  not  known  which


44  CHAPTER    VII  [725

of  the  two  appearances  came  first ;  but  to  the  child  the  figure  appeared  as
though  groping  its  way.  The  death  occurred  on  the  same  night,  but  the
time-coincidence  is  not  more  precisely  known.

In  the  fourth  case1  (vol.  i.  p.  506)  the  coincidence  is  said  to  have
been  very  close  :  the  mother  dying  at  five  minutes  to  three,  and  the
son  seeing  the  figure  just  before  the  clock  struck  three.  It  is,  of  course,
impossible  to  say  whether  the  phantasm  precaeded  or  followed  actual
death.

Iks  fifth  case,  again,  given  in  Chapter  VI.  (667  A),  shows  us  the  phan-
tasm, which  had  been  promised  at  death,  appearing  when  the  agent  was  still
alive,  but  had  been  stunned  by  a  fall  from  a  coach,  which  left  for  some  time
much  mental  confusion.  The  case  is  interesting  as  showing  what  may
be  called  a  ready  dissociability  of  spirit  and  organism,  coincident  with
complete  obscuration  of  the  supraliminal  consciousness.

The  sixth  case  is  that  of  Captain  Colt  of  Gartsherrie.  I  quote  this  at
length  in  725  A,  since  it  is  probable — though  not  certain — that  the  agent
had  been  dead  for  some  hours  at  the  time  of  the  apparition.  Allowing  for
difference  of  time,  he  had  probably  been  shot  in  the  temple  some  fourteen
hours  before.  He  had  apparently  not  moved  after  he  was  shot.  He  had
been  previously  wounded  in  several  places,  and  no  surgical  aid  was  attain-
able. There  is  here  a  curious  analogy  with  the  narrative  of  the  red  scratch
already  given.  Captain  Colt  says,  "  I  saw  ...  a  wound  on  the  right
temple  with  a  red  stream  from  it.  His  face  was  of  a  waxy  pale  tint,"  &c.
The  "  red  stream  " — the  aspect  of  the  body  just  after  death — seems  to
have  been  made  prominent  for  an  evidential  purpose.  On  the  dead  man's
body  was  found  a  letter  from  his  brother,  the  percipient,  which  begged
him,  if  killed  in  battle,  to  manifest  himself  in  the  very  room  in  which  his
phantasm  did  actually  appear.

The  seventh  case  (vol.  i.  p.  531)  is  that  of  a  half-caste  Indian,  called
"Mountain  Jim,"  over  whom  the  well-known  traveller,  Mrs.  Bishop
(then  Miss  Bird),  had  established  a  great  influence.  At  their  last
parting  he  vowed  that  he  would  see  her  again  when  he  died ;  and,  in
fact,  some  hours  either  before  or  after  his  death  in  Colorado  she,  being
in  Switzerland,  saw  his  phantasm,  and  heard  the  words,  "  I  have  corce,  as
I  promised."

In  the  eighth  case — Chevalier  Fenzi's  (vol.  ii.  p.  63) — the  percipient
had  a  sudden  fit  of  deep  depression,  and  went  out  to  walk  on  the  sea-shore
in  the  midst  of  a  violent  thunderstorm.  There  he  thought  he  saw  his
brother — who  was  really  at  Florence,  seventy  miles  off — walking  a  little
way  off  over  some  rocks,  behind  one  of  which  the  figure  disappeared.
The  brother  died  at  the  time.  He  had  not  only  promised  to  try  to  appear
after  death,  but  had  at  the  same  time  predicted  to  Chevalier  Fenzi  that

1  Gurney  did  not  give  this  case  an  "  evidential  number,"  regarding  it  as  "  ambiguous  "
on  account  of  the  anxiety  subsisting  in  the  percipient's  mind.  For  the  present  purpose,
however,  it  plainly  ought  to  be  taken  into  consideration.


726]  PHANTASMS     OF  THE    DEAD  45

he  would  die  within  three  months.  The  prediction  was  fulfilled.  It  may,
of  course,  have  had  some  influence  in  producing  Chevalier  Fenzi's
experience.

In  the  ninth  case  (vol.  ii.  p.  253),  already  referred  to  above  (in  718),
the  decedent  was  still  living,  but  her  strong  desire  had  been  for  a  sight
of  the  percipient  before  her  own  death ;  and  this  she  appears  to  have
attained.

In  the  tenth  case  (which  is  given  at  second-hand  in  vol.  ii.  p.  477)
two  girl  friends  exchanged  rings,  with  the  promise  that  the  friend  who
died  first  would  restore  the  ring  to  the  survivor.  At  about  the  time  when
the  first  friend  died  the  surviving  friend  saw  her  standing  by  her  bedside,
and  holding  out  the  ring.

In  the  eleventh  case  (in  vol.  ii.  p.  489,  which  is  again  at  second-hand,
and  very  remote)  there  were  three  parties  to  the  compact,  and  two  of  these
successively  are  said  to  have  appeared  at  about  the  time  of  death  to  the
last  survivor.

The  twelfth  case  (vol.  ii.  p.  496)  although  second-hand  and  remote,
was  written  down  apparently  within  a  year  of  its  occurrence.  The  time-
coincidence  cannot  be  exactly  known,  as  the  decedent  was  shipwrecked.
His  appearance  was  that  of  a  drowned  man.

726.  In  three  of  these  twelve  cases  of  fulfilment  of  compact,  then,  the
agent  whose  phantasm  appeared  was  certainly  still  alive.  In  most  of  the
other  cases  the  exact  time-relation  is  obscure ;  in  a  few  of  them  there  is
strong  probability  that  the  agent  was  already  dead.  The  inference  will
be  that  the  existence  of  a  promise  or  compact  may  act  effectively  both
on  the  subliminal  self  before  death  and  also  probably  on  the  spirit  after
death.

This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  the  following  cases,  of  which  two
must  be  quoted  at  length  in  the  text,  as  specially  instructive.  I  first  give
one  in  which  the  deceased  person's  impulse  has  been  the  fulfilment  of  an
immediate  engagement.

From  Proceedings  S.  P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  214.  The  following  letter  was
addressed  to  the  late  Professor  Adams,  Cambridge  : —

ST.  LUKE'S  CHURCH,  CER  VAN  NESS  AVENUE,  AND  CLAY  STREET,
SAN  FRANCISCO,  CALIFORNIA,  September  \\th,  1890.

.  .  .  [A  few  weeks  ago]  my  choir-trainer,  a  man  in  robust  health
and  with  a  predisposition  against  anything  "  Spiritualistic,"  saw  plainly
the  apparition  of  one  of  his  choir,  a  man  of  fifty  years  old.  It  happened
thus  :—

Mr.  R[ussell],  the  bass-singer  of  the  choir,  fell  in  an  apoplectic  fit  upon  the
street  at  10  o'clock  on  a  certain  Friday;  he  died  at  n  o'clock  at  his  house.
My  wife,  learning  of  his  death,  sent  my  brother-in-law  down  to  the  house  of
the  choirmaster  [Mr.  Reeves]  to  ask  him  about  music  for  the  funeral.  The
messenger  reached  the  house  of  the  choirmaster  about  1.30  P.M.  He  was
told  that  the  choirmaster  was  upstairs,  busy  looking  over  some  music.  He


46  CHAPTER    VII  [726

accordingly  sat  down  in  the  drawing-room,  and,  while  waiting,  began  to  tell
the  ladies  (sister  and  niece  of  the  choirmaster)  about  Mr.  R.'s  death.  While
they  were  talking  they  heard  an  exclamation  in  the  hall-way.  Some  one  said,
"My  God!"  They  rushed  out,  and  half-way  down,  sitting  on  the  stairs,  saw
the  choirmaster  in  his  shirt-sleeves,  showing  signs  of  great  fright  and  con-
fusion. As  soon  as  he  saw  them  he  exclaimed,  "i  have  just  seen  R. !"  The
niece  at  once  said,  "  Why,  R.  is  dead ! "  At  this  the  choirmaster  without  a
word  turned  back  upstairs  and  went  to  his  room.  ^My  brother-in-law  followed
him  and  found  him  in  complete  prostration,  his  face  white,  &c.  He  then  told
my  brother-in-law  what  he  had  experienced.

He  had  been  looking  over  some  music ;  had  just  selected  a  "  Te  Deum  "
for  the  morning  service.  This  "  Te  Deum  "  closed  with  a  quartette  setting  for
two  bass  and  two  tenor  voices.  He  was  wondering  where  he  could  get  a
second  tenor.  Finally,  he  went  to  the  door  on  his  way  downstairs  to  look  up
another  "  Te  Deum."  At  the  door  he  saw  Mr.  R.,  who  stood  with  one  hand
on  his  brow,  and  one  hand  extended,  holding  a  sheet  of  music.  The  choir-
master advanced,  extended  his  hand,  and  was  going  to  speak,  when  the
figure  vanished.  Then  it  was  that  he  gave  the  exclamation  mentioned
above.

You  must  remember  that  he  knew  nothing  of  R.'s  death  until  he  heard  his
niece  spe"ak  of  it  as  detailed  above.

This  is  the  best  authenticated  ghost  story  I  ever  heard.  I  know  all  the
parties  well,  and  can  vouch  for  their  truthfulness.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the
choirmaster  saw  something,  either  subjectively  or  objectively.  Whatever  it
was,  the  experience  was  so  vivid  that  it  made  him  sick  for  days,  though  he  is  a
man  of  exceptional  physique.

At  finst  I  tried  to  explain  this  on  natural  grounds.  I  thought  possibly  he
had  been  in  the  room  overhead,  and  had  overheard,  unconsciously,  the  story
of  R.'s  death,  and  by  a  process  of  unconscious  cerebration  summoned  up  the
image,  of  the  dead  man.  But  this  is  impossible,  because  the  house  is  very
large,  the  rooms  widely  apart,  &c.

My  present  conviction  is  this  :  Mr.  R.  was  a  man  of  the  utmost  regularity
and  faithfulness  in  fulfilling  his  duties.  He  has  sung  for  us  without  pay  for
many  years.  His  first  thought  (or  one  of  the  first),  after  his  stroke  of  apoplexy,,
must  have  been  :  "  How  shall  I  get  word  to  the  choirmaster  that  I  cannot  go
to  rehearsal  to-morrow  night?"  In  an  hour  he  died,  without  ever  having
recovered  consciousness.  My  notion  is  that  in  some  way  he  was  enabled
to  make  himself  appear  to  the  choirmaster.  If  you  refer  to  the  attitude  in
which  he  appeared,  you  will  see  that  it  answers  to  my  supposition.  It  indicates
his  illness  (a  pain  in  the  head),  and  his  desire  to  give  up,  so  to  speak,  his  duty
as  singer.  .  .  .  WM.  W.  DAVIS,  Rector.

Mr.  Reeves'  own  account  is  reported  in  the  San  Francisco  Chronicle
(quoted  in  Light,  September  27th,  1890),  as  follows  : —

Early  on  Friday  morning  Edwin  Russell,  an  Englishman,  well  known  as  a
real  estate  agent,  was  walking  near  the  corner  of  Sutter  and  Mason  Streets
when  he  sustained  an  apoplectic  stroke,  from  the  effects  of  which  he  died
shortly  before  noon.  He  had  resided  in  the  city  ten  years,  and  was  well  and
favourably  known  in  the  commercial  world  here.


726]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  47

Mr.  Russell  was  a  member  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church,  and  also
the  possessor  of  a  rich  bass  voice.  This  made  him  a  welcome  addition  to  the
choir  of  St.  Luke's  Church,  and  brought  him  in  immediate  contact  with  the
Rev.  W.  W.  Davis,  vicar  of  the  church,  and  with  Harry  E.  Reeves,  the
recently  appointed  choir  leader.  Mr.  Reeves  is  a  nephew  of  the  distinguished
English  tenor  of  the  name,  and  conducted  the  musical  services  at  the  funeral
of  President  Chester  A.  Arthur.

It  was  to  Mr.  Reeves  that  the  very  sensational  and  startling  revelation
now  to  be  recorded  was  vouchsafed.  Mr.  Reeves  was  found  at  the  residence
of  his  sister,  Mrs.  Cavanagh,  2121  California  Street,  by  a  Chronicle  reporter.
He  became  evidently  agitated  when  asked  if  it  were  true  that  he  had  seen  the
apparition  of  Russell  before  hearing  of  the  latter's  death.  [Mr.  Reeves  stated
that  he  was  not  a  Spiritualist,  and  proceeded] : —

"  I  last  saw  Russell  alive  on  the  Saturday  night  previous  to  his  death.
Russell  came  to  the  choir  rehearsal.  I  said  to  him :  '  Do  you  know  where  I
can  get  a  good  cigar  ?  '  and  he  recommended  a  place.  I  went  there  with  him,
and  then  took  such  a  fancy  to  him  that  I  invited  him  to  come  to  my  house,  or
rather  my  sister's  house.  We  agreed  to  postpone  his  visit  till  the  following
Saturday,  and  he  said:  'Well,  I'll  call  on  you  next  week  anyhow.'  The
matter  passed  from  my  mind  until  Friday  afternoon,  about  three  o'clock.  I
always  make  it  a  point  to  look  over  my  music  for  Sunday  a  day  or  two  before,
and  on  this  occasion  I  was  sitting  in  the  parlour  and  took  up  two  Te  Deums
to  make  a  choice.  One  was  Starkweather's  in  G,  the  other  a  composition  of
KroelPs.  Just  as  I  had  taken  one  in  my  hand  and  was  going  upstairs  to  my
room  to  look  over  it  I  heard  the  front  door  bell  ring,  and  recognised  that
some  visitor  whom  I  did  not  then  know  had  called.  I  afterwards  learned
that  it  was  young  Mr.  Sprague,  who  can  tell  you  his  story  when  you  ask
him.

"  I  went  into  my  room.  I  lay  down  on  the  lounge  for  a  moment,  then  by
an  impulse  I  cannot  account  for,  I  walked  to  the  door.  The  head  of  the  stair-
way was  somewhat  dimly  lighted,  as  you  see  it  now,  but  not  so  dimly  but  what
I  could  at  once  see  what  appeared  to  be  the  figure  of  Russell.  It  was  so  real,  so
lifelike,  that  I  at  once  stepped  forward  and  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  was
about  to  speak  some  words  of  welcome.

"  The  figure  seemed  to  have  a  roll  of  music  in  one  hand  and  the  other  over
its  face,  but  it  was  Russell's  image.  I  am  quite  sure  of  that.  As  I  advanced
to  the  head  of  the  stairway  the  figure  seemed  to  turn,  as  if  about  to  descend,
and  faded  into  the  air.

"  I  remember  trying  to  speak  to  the  figure,  but  the  tongue  clung  to  the
roof  of  my  mouth.  Then  I  fell  against  the  wall  and  gasped  out.  *  Ah  !  My
God!'  just  like  that.  My  sister  and  niece,  with  the  other  folks,  came  up.
My  niece  said,  'Uncle  Harry,  what's  the  matter?'  I  went  on  to  explain
what  it  was,  but  was  so  scared  I  could  hardly  speak.  My  niece  said,  «  Don't
you  know  Russell  is  dead?'  Well,  that  flabbergasted  me;  it  only  made
matters  worse,  and  I  nearly  fainted.  Then  they  told  me  that  the  Rev.  Mr.
Davis  had  sent  Mr.  Sprague  to  tell  me  of  the  sad  news.  I  was  terribly
startled  by  the  affair,  and  feel  shaky  even  now,  but  I  am  not  given  to  super-
stitious fears,  and  I  suppose  it  can  be  explained.  Mr.  Sprague  had  been
waiting  nearly  half-an-hour  before  I  saw  him  and  obtained  corroboration  of
the  news  of  Russell's  death.  It  is  very  strange;  very  strange,  indeed.  I  saw
that  man  Russell  after  he  must  have  been  dead  three  hours  at  least,  as  plainly
as  I  see  you  in  that  chair."


48  CHAPTER  VII  [727

Mr.  Reeves  confirms  this  account  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Hodgson  as
follows : —

SAN  FRANCISCO,  September  i$th,  1890.

DEAR  SIR, — With  reference  to  your  favour  of  the  5th  inst,  just  received,  the
full  particulars  were  given  in  city  papers;   some  things  not  just  exactly  as
stated,  especially  the  word  "flabbergasted,"  which  is  foreign  to  me.
Apart  from  what  you  read,  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  given.

H.  E.  REEVES.

Dr.  Hodgson  received  the  following  independent  and  corroborative
account  from  Mr.  Sprague  : —

GRAND  FORKS,  DAK.,  November  2gth,  1890.

.  .  .  You  probably  know  all  about  Mr.  Russell's  death  and  connection  with
St.  Luke's  Church,  so  I  shall  only  give  you  the  facts  as  they  came  to  my
knowledge.

On  Friday  noon,  August  22nd,  a  young  lady  friend  of  the  Russells  came  to
my  brother-in-law's  (Mr.  Davis')  house  and  asked  to  see  Mr.  Davis.  As  Mr.
Davis  was  out,  his  wife  (my  sister)  saw  this  young  lady.  I  was  not  present  at
the  interview,  but  my  sister  told  me  shortly  afterwards  the  facts  of  Mr.  Russell's
death,  &c.,  and  said  that  this  young  lady  had  come  to  ask  Mr.  Davis  if  the
church  choir  would  be  willing  to  sing  at  Mr.  Russell's  funeral,  as  Mr.  R.'s  family
were  of  limited  means  and  could  not  afford  to  pay  the  choir.

As  I  was  going  to  Mr.  Reeves'  house  that  afternoon  my  sister  asked  me  to
tell  Mr.  Reeves  about  Russell's  death  and  ask  him  about  the  singing.  I  called
at  1 221  California  Street  about  three  o'clock  that  afternoon,  and  had  been
in  the  parlour  some  twenty  minutes  talking  with  Miss  Kavanagh  (Mr.
Reeves'  niece),  when  we  heard  Mr.  Reeves'  exclamation  on  the  stairs,  and  I
followed  Miss  Kavanagh  to  see  what  the  trouble  was.  We  found  Mr.  R.  sitting
on  the  stairs  in  his  shirt  sleeves  and  evidently  very  much  frightened.  Miss  K.
brought  him  a  glass  of  wine,  also  a  glass  of  water,  but  I  think  he  did  not  touch
either.  After  a  couple  of  minutes  Mr.  R.  went  up  to  his  room,  and  Miss
Kavanagh  asked  me  to  go  up  and  see  if  he  was  all  right,  as  she  was  afraid  to
go.  I  went  up  and  found  Mr.  Reeves  sitting  down  on  a  chair  near  the  window
with  his  legs  crossed.  He  had  no  coat  or  vest,  collar  or  necktie  on,  and  the
perspiration  seemed  to  roll  off  him.  He  seemed  greatly  agitated,  but  in  a  few
minutes  he  told  me  his  story,  and  I  left  him.  In  about  five  minutes  he  came
downstairs  and  began  to  talk  about  it,  and  continually  said,  "  It  is  the  strangest
thing ;  I  can't  understand  it."  GOLDWIN  S.  SPRAGUE.

727.  The  next  case  is  even  more  remarkable.  It  is  a  deflected  fulfil-
ment, occurring  two  days  before  death,  and  probably  during  sleep ;  the
agent  has  made  a  promise  to  one  friend,  but  is  only  perceptible  to
another  person  who  happens  to  be  in  that  friend's  company.  We  may
compare  a  case  quoted  in  our  last  chapter,  where  a  brother,  presumably
wishing  to  appear  to  his  sister,  is  perceived  only  by  the  sister's  black  nurse
(see  section  651).  The  following  is  quoted  from  the  "Report  on  the
Census  of  Hallucinations  "  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  284.


727]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  49

From  COUNTESS  EUGENIE  KAPNIST.

June  2^tht  1891.

A  Talta,  en  FeVrier,  1889,  nous  fimes  la  connaissance  de  M.  P.  et  de  sa
femme,  passant  la  soiree  chez  des  amis  communs  qui  avaient  tenu  a  nous
reunir.  A  cette  dpoque,  M.  P.  souffrait  deja  d'une  phthisic  assez  avancee ;
il  venait  de  perdre,  a  Pe'tersbourg,  son  frere,  atteint  de  la  meme  maladie.
On  pria  ma  sceur  de  faire  un  peu  de  musique,  et  elle  choisit  au  hasard  le
Prelude  de  Mendelssohn.  A  mon  dtontiement  je  vis  M.  P.,  que  nous  ne
connaissions,  que  de  ce  soir,  aller,  tres  e'motionne',  prendre  place  aupres  du
piano,  et  suivre  avec  une  espece  d'anxiete'  le  jeu  de  ma  soeur.  Lorsqu'elle
eut  fini,  il  dit  quo  pour  quelques  instants  elle  venait  de  faire  ressusciter  son
frere,  executant  absolument  de  la  meme  maniere  ce  morceau,  qu'il  jouait
frdquemment.  Depuis,  en  voyant  ma  soeur,  il  aimait  particulierement  a  causer
avec  elle.  Je  puis  certifier  ainsi  qu'elle  une  conversation  que  nous  eumes  a
une  soire'e,  au  mois  de  Mars.  Nous  parlions  de  la  mort,  chose  frdquente  a
Talta,  toujours  peuplee  de  malades  : — "  Savez-vous,"  disait-il  a  ma  soeur,  "il  me
semble  toujours  que  mon  esprit  est  tres  proche  du  v6tre ;  j'ai  la  certitude  de
vous  avoir  deja  connue  ;  nous  avons  dans  la  rdalitd  une  preuve  que  ce  n'est  pas
en  ce  monde — ce  sera  que  je  vous  aurais  vue  durant  quelqu'autre  vie  prece'dente  "
(il  dtait  un  peu  spirite).  "  Ainsi  done,  si  je  meurs  avant  vous,  ce  qui  est  bien
probable,  vu  ma  maladie,  je  reviendrai  vers  vous,  si  cela  m'est  possible,  et  je
vous  apparaitrai  de  fa^on  a  ne  pas  vous  effrayer  ddsagreablement."  Ma  sceur
lui  rdpondit,  prenant  la  chose  tres  au  s£neux,  qu'elle  lui  rendrait  la  pareille  si
elle  mourait  la  premiere,  et  j'etais  tdmoin  de  cette  promesse  mutuelle.

Ne'anmoins  nous  fimes  a  peine  connaissance  de  maison;  nous  nous
rencontrions  parfois  chez  des  amis  communs,  et  nous  le  voyions  souvent  se
promener  sur  le  quai  dans  un  paletot  couleur  noisette  qui  excitait  notre  hilarite
et  qui  nous  resta  dans  la  me'moire  je  ne  sais  plus  pourquoi.  Au  mois  de  Mai,
nous  partions  de  Talta,  et  depuis  nous  eumes  tant  d'impressions  diverses,  nous
vimes  tant  de  monde,  que  jusqu'a  1'hiver  suivant  nous  oubliames  comple'tement
M.  P.  et  sa  femme,  qui  reprdsentaient  pour  nous  des  connaissances  comme  on
en  a  par  centaines  dans  la  vie.

Nous  e'tions  a  Pe'tersbourg.  Le  n  Mars,  c'dtait  un  lundi  de  Careme  en
1890,  nous  allames  au  theatre  voir  une  representation  de  la  troupe  des
Meiningner.  Je  crois  qu'on  donnait  Le  Marchand  de  Venise.  Mile.  B.  dtait
avec  nous,  venue  de  Tsarskoe'  a  cette  occasion.  La  piece  termine'e,  nous
n'eumes  que  le  temps  de  rentrer  a  la  maison  changer  de  toilette,  apres  quoi
nous  accompagnames  Mile.  B.  a  la  gare.  Elle  partait  avec  le  dernier  train,
qui  quitte  pour  Tsarskoe  Selo  a  I  heure  de  la  nuit.  Nous  Pinstallames  en
wagon,  et  ne  Fy  laissames  qu'apres  la  seconde  cloche  de  depart.

Notre  domestique  allait  bien  en  avant  de  nous,  afin  de  retrouver  notre
voiture,  de  maniere  que,  gagnant  le  perron,  nous  la  trouvames  avanc£e  qui
nous  attendait.  Ma  soeur  s'assit  la  premiere ;  moi  je  la  fis  attendre,  descen-
dant plus  doucement  les  marches  de  Fescalier;  le  domestique  tenait  la  portiere
du  landau  ouverte.  Je  montai  a  demi,  sur  le  marchepied,  et  soudain  je
m'arretai  dans  cette  pose,  tenement  surprise  que  je  ne  compris  plus  ce  qui
m'arrivait.  II  faisait  sombre  dans  la  voiture,  et  pourtant  en  face  de  ma  sceur,
la  regardant,  je  vis  dans  un  petit  jour  gris  qu'on  eut  dit  factice,  s'e'claircissant
vers  le  point  qui  attachait  le  plus  mes  yeux,  une  figure  a  la  silhouette  e'mousse'e
diaphane,  plutot  qu'inde'cise.  Cette  vision  dura  un  instant,  pendant  lequel,

VOL.    II.  D


50  CHAPTER    VII  [727

pourtant,  mes  yeux  prirent  connaissance  des  moindres  details  de  ce  visage,  qui
me  sembla  connu :  des  traits  assez  pointus,  une  raie  un  peu  de  c6td,  un  nez
prononce',  un  menton  tres  maigre  a  barbe  rare  et  d'un  blond  foncd.  Ce  qui  me
frappe,  lorsque  j'y  pense  a  present,  c'est  d'avoir  vu  les  diffe'rentes  couleurs,
maigre'  que  la  lueur  grisatre,  qui  eclairait  a  peine  1'inconnu,  cut  e^e  insuffisante
pour  les  distinguer  dans  un  cas  normal.  II  e'tait  sans  chapeau,  et  en  meme
temps  dans  un  paletot  comme  on  en  porte  au  sud — de  couleur  plutot  claire —
noisette.  Toute  sa  personne  avait  un  cachet  de  grande  fatigue  et  de  maigreur.
Le  domestique,  tres  etonne'  de  ne  pas  me  voir  monter,  arrete'e  ainsi  sur  le
marchepied,  crut  que  j'avais  marche*  dans  ma  robe  et  m'aida  a  m'asseoir,
pendant  que  je  demandais  a  ma  sosur,  en  prenant  place  a  cotd  d'elle,  si  c'dtait
bien  notre  voiture  ?  A  tel  point  j'avais  perdu  la  tete,  ayant  senti  un  vrai
engourdissement  de  cerveau  en  voyant  cet  Stranger  install^  en  face  d'elle,  je
ne  m'e'tais  pas  rendu  compte  que,  dans  le  cas  d'une  presence  re'elle  d'un
semblable  vis-a-vis,  ni  ma  sceur,  ni  le  valet  de  pied  ne  resteraient  si  calme-
ment  a  1'envisager.  Lorsque  je  fus  assise,  je  ne  vis  plus  rien,  et  je  demandais
a  ma  soeur :— "  N'as-tu  rien  vu  en  face  de  toi?"  "Rien  du  tout,  et  quelle
ide*e  as-tu  cue  de  demander,  en  entrant  dans  la  voiture,  si  c'dtait  bien  la
n6tre  ?  "  rdpondit-elle  en  riant.  Alors,  je  lui  racontais  tout  ce  qui  precede,
ddcrivant  minutieusement  ma  vision.  "  Quelle  figure  connue,"  disait-elle,  "  et
a  paletot  noisette,  cette  raie  de  cSte*,  ou  done  1'avons  nous  vue  ?  Pourtant  nul
ne  ressemble  ici  a  ta  description ;  "  et  nous  nous  creusions  la  tete  sans  rien
trouver.  Rentre'es  a  la  maison,  nous  racontames  ce  fait  a  notre  mere ;  ma
description  la  fit  aussi  souvenir  vaguement  d'un  visage  analogue.  Le  lende-
main  soir  (12  Mars)  un  jeune  homme  de  notre  connaissance,  M.  M.  S.,  vint
nous  voir.  Je  lui  re'pe'tais  aussi  1'incident  qui  nous  e'tait  arrive'.  Nous  en
parlames  beaucoup,  mais  inutilement;  je  ne  pouvais  toujours  pas  appliquer
le  nom  voulu  a  la  personnalite'  de  ma  vision,  tout  en  me  souvenant  fort  bien
avoir  vu  un  visage  tout  pareil  parmi  mes  nombreuses  connaissances ;  mais
ou  et  a  quelle  dpoque  ?  Je  ne  me  souvenais  de  rien,  avec  ma  mauvaise
me'moire  qui  me  fait  souvent  ddfaut,  a  ce  sujet.  Quelques  jours  plus  tard,  nous
dtions  chez  la  grandmere  de  M.  M.  S. :— "  Savez  vous,"  nous  dit-elle,  "  quelle
triste  nouvelle  je  viens  de  recevoir  de  Talta?  M.  P.  vient  de  mourir,  mais
on  ne  me  donne  pas  de  details."  Ma  soeur  et  moi,  nous  nous  regardames.
A  ce  nom,  la  figure  pointue  et  le  paletot  noisette  retrouverent  leur  possesseur.
Ma  soeur  reconnut  en  meme  temps  que  moi,  grace  a  ma  description  precise.
Lorsque  M.  M.  S.  entra,  je  le  priai  de  chercher  dans  les  vieux  journaux  la
date  exacte  de  cette  mort.  Le  ddces  e'tait  marque'  au  14  du  mois  de  Mars,
done,  deux  jours  apres  la  vision  que  j'avais  cue.  J'e'crivis  a  Talta  pour  avoir
des  renseignements.  On  me  rdpondit  qu'il  gardait  le  lit  depuis  le  24
Novembre  et  qu'il  avait  &6  depuis  dans  un  £tat  de  faiblesse  extreme,  mais  le
sommeil  ne  1'avait  point  quitt^;  il  dormait  si  longtemps  et  si  profonde'ment,
meme  durant  les  dernieres  nuits  de  son  existence,  que  cela  faisait  espdrer  une
amelioration.  Nous  nous  etonnions  de  ce  que  j'aie  vu  M.  P.,  maigre'  sa
promesse  de  se  montrer  a  ma  sceur.  Mais  je  dois  ajouter  ici  qu'avant  le  fait
de'crit  ci-dessus,  j'avais  £te  voyante  un  certain  nombre  de  fois,  mais  cette
vision  est  bien  celle  que  j'ai  distingude  le  plus  nettement,  avec  des  details
minutieux,  et  avec  les  teintes  diverses  du  visage  humain,  et  meme  du
vetement.

COMTESSE  EUGENIE  KAPNIST.

COMTESSE  INA  KAPNIST.


729]  PHANTASMS     OF    THE    DEAD  51

The  second  signature  is  that  of  the  sister  who  was  present  at  the  time.
Mr.  Michael  Petrovo-Solovovo,  who  sent  us  the  case,  writes : —

I  have  much  pleasure  in  certifying  that  the  fact  of  Countess  Kapnist's
vision  was  mentioned,  among  others,  to  myself  before  the  news  of  Mr.  P.'s
death  came  to  Petersburg.  I  well  remember  seeing  an  announcement  of  his
demise  in  the  papers.

This  case  suggests  an  important  practical  reflection.  When  a  compact
to  appear,  if  possible,  after  death  is  made,  it  should  be  understood  that
the  appearance  need  not  be  to  the  special  partner  in  the  compact,  but  to
any  one  whom  the  agent  can  succeed  in  impressing.  It  is  likely
enough  that  many  such  attempts,  which  have  failed  on  account  of  the
surviving  friend's  lack  of  appropriate  sensitivity,  might  have  succeeded  if
the  agent  had  tried  to  influence  some  one  already  known  to  be  capable
of  receiving  these  impressions.  I  add  in  727  A  and  B  two  other  cases
which  may  be  regarded  as  deflected  fulfilments.  See  also  a  case  given
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  440,  in  which  a  lady,  having  made  a  com-
pact with  her  husband  and  also  with  a  friend,  her  phantom  is  seen  after
her  death  by  her  husband  and  daughter  and  the  latter's  nurse,  collec-
tively ;  but  not  by  the  friend,  who  was  living  elsewhere.

728.  Again,  we  cannot  tell-  how  long  the   spirit  may  continue  the
effort,  or,  so  to  say,  renew  the  experiment.     In  a  case  recorded  in  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  378,  the  compact  is  fulfilled  after  a  space  of
five  years.     In  another  case   (given  in  728  A),  there  had  been  no  formal
compact ;  yet  the  narrative  may  find  place  here.     There  is  an  attempt
to    express    gratitude   on  an  anniversary  of  death ;    and  this  implies  the
same  kind  of  mindful  effort  as  the  fulfilment  of  a  definite  promise.

I  conclude  this  group  by  quoting  in  728  B  another  compact  case
where  the  apparition  coincides  with  a  funeral,  and  itself  indicates  that  a
funeral  is  preparing.  This  forms  a  transition  to  the  next  group.

729.  I    have    now  traced    certain  post-mortem  manifestations   which
reveal  a  recollection  of  events  known  at  death,  and  also  a  persistence  of
purpose  in  carrying  out  intentions  formed   before  death.     In    this  next
group  I  shall  trace  the  knowledge  of  the  departed  a  little  further,  and  shall
discuss  some  cases  where  they  appear  cognisant  of  the  aspect  of  their
bodies  after  death,  or  of  the  scenes  in  which  those  bodies  are  temporarily
deposited  or  finally  laid.     Such  knowledge  may  appear  trivial, — unworthy
the   attention  of  spirits  transported  into    a  higher  world.     But  it   is  in
accordance  with  the  view  of  a  gradual  transference  of  interests  and  per-
ceptions,— a  period  of  intermediate  confusion,  such  as  may  follow  espe-
cially upon  a  death  of  a  sudden  or  violent  kind,  or  perhaps  upon  a  death
which  interrupts  very  strong  affections.

Thus  we  have  already  (in  717)  encountered  one  striking  case  of  this
type, — the  scratch  on  the  cheek,  perceived  by  the  departed  daughter,  as
we  may  conjecture,  by  reason  of  the  close  sympathy  which  united  her  to
the  mother  who  was  caring  for  her  remains.


52  CHAPTER    VII  [730

There  are  also  two  cases  closely  resembling  each  other,  though  from
percipients  in  widely  different  parts  of  the  world,  where  a  clairvoyant
vision  seems  to  be  presented  of  a  tranquil  death-chamber.  One  of  these
has  been  quoted  in  Chapter  VI.,  section  664.  In  the  other  (that  of  Mr.
Hector  of  Valencia,  South  Australia,  see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.
p.  353)  the  percipient  sees  in  a  dream  his  father  dying  in  the  room  he
usually  occupied,  with  a  candle  burning  on  a  chair  by  his  bed ;  and  the
father  is  found  dead  in  the  morning,  with  a  candle  by  his  bedside  in  the
position  seen  in  the  dream.  Perhaps  in  neither  of  these  cases  is  there
any  sure  indication  that  the  dead  or  dying  person  was  cognisant  of  his
own  body's  aspect  or  surroundings.  There  may  have  been  a  clairvoyant
excursion  on  the  percipient's  part,  evoked  by  some  impulse  from  the
agent  which  did  not  itself  develop  into  distinctness.

730.  But  in  certain  cases  of  violent  death  there  seems  to  have  been
an  intention  on  the  deceased  person's  part  to  show  the  condition  in  which
his  body  is  left.  Such  was  Mrs.  Storie's  dream,  or  rather  series  of  visions,
referred  to  earlier  in  this  chapter.  Such,  too,  was  Mrs.  Menneer's  dream
(429  A),  where  the  additional  evidence  obtained  since  our  first  publica-
tion of  the  case  brings  out  a  special  meaning  in  the  severed  head,  beyond
the  mere  fact  of  decapitation.  Such  was  an  equally  striking  dream,  which
I  have  left  for  quotation  in  this  place,  because  it  forms  a  link  between  this
group — where  post-mortem  knowledge  of  the  body's  aspect  is  in  ques-
tion— and  the  next  following  group,  which  will  deal  with  the  still  stranger
phenomenon  of  post-mortem  knowledge  of  dissemination  of  the  news  of
death.  The  case  is  taken  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  (1885 )  p.  95.

Mr.  D.,  the  narrator,  did  not  wish  his  name  to  be  published,  but
Gurney  saw  him,  and  talked  over  the  subject  with  him.  Mr.  D.  narrates
as  follows : —

I  am  the  owner  of  a  very  old  mechanical  business  in  Glasgow,  with  for
twenty  years  past  a  branch  in  London,  where  I  have  resided  for  that  period,
and  in  both  of  which  places  my  professional  reputation  is  of  the  highest  order.

Some  thirty-five  years  ago  I  took  into  my  employment  a  tender,  delicate-
looking  boy,  Robert  Mackenzie,  who,  after  some  three  or  four  years'  service,
suddenly  left,  as  I  found  out  afterwards,  through  the  selfish  advice  of  older
hands,  who  practised  this  frightening  away  systematically  to  keep  wages
from  being  lowered, — a  common  device,  I  believe,  among  workmen  in
limited  trades.  Passing  the  gate  of  the  great  workhouse  (Scottice  poor-
house)  in  the  Parliamentary  Road,  a  few  years  afterwards,  my  eye  was
caught  by  a  youth  of  some  eighteen  years  of  age  ravenously  devouring  a
piece  of  dry  bread  on  the  public  street,  and  bearing  all  the  appearance  of
being  in  a  chronic  state  of  starvation.  Fancying  I  knew  his  features,  I
asked  if  his  name  were  not  Mackenzie.  He  at  once  became  much  excited,
addressed  me  by  name,  and  informed  me  that  he  had  no  employment  ;
that  his  father  and  mother,  who  formerly  supported  him,  were  now  both
inmates  of  the  "  poorhouse,"  to  which  he  himself  had  no  claim  for  admis-
sion, being  young  and  without  any  bodily  disqualification  for  work,  and
that  he  was  literally  homeless  and  starving.  The  matron,  he  informed  me,


730]  PHANTASMS     OF    THE    DEAD  53

gave  him  daily  a  piece  of  dry  bread,  but  durst  not,  under  the  rules,  give  him
regular  maintenance.  In  an  agony  of  grief  he  deplored  his  ever  leaving  me
under  evil  advice,  and  on  my  unexpectedly  offering  to  take  him  back  he  burst
into  a  transport  of  thanks,  such  as  I  cannot  describe.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  he
resumed  his  work,  and  that,  under  the  circumstances,  I  did  everything  in  my
power  to  facilitate  his  progress.  All  this  was  mere  matter  of  course;  but  the
distinction  between  it  and  the  common  relations  of  master  and  servant  was  this,
that  on  every  occasion  of  my  entering  the  workshop  he  never,  so  far  as  possible,
took  off  his  eyes  from  following  my  movements.  Let  me  look  towards  him  at
any  moment,  there  was  the  pale,  sympathetic  face  with  the  large  and  wistful
eyes,  literally  yearning  towards  me,  as  Smike's  did  towards  Nicholas  Nickleby.
I  seemed  to  be  "the  polar  star  of  his  existence,"  and  this  intensity  of  gratitude
never  appeared  to  lessen  in  degree  through  lapse  of  time.  Beyond  this  he
never  ventured  to  express  his  feelings.  His  manhood,  as  it  were,  his  indivi-
duality and  self-assertion,  seemed  to  have  been  crushed  out  of  him  by  priva-
tions. I  was  apparently  his  sole  thought  and  consideration,  saving  the  more
common  concerns  of  daily  life.

In  1862  I  settled  in  London,  and  have  never  been  in  Glasgow  since.  Robert
Mackenzie,  and  my  workmen  generally,  gradually  lost  their  individuality  in  my
recollection.  About  ten  to  twelve  years  ago  my  employees  had  their  annual
soire'e  and  ball.  This  was  always  held,  year  after  year,  on  a  Friday  evening.
Mackenzie,  ever  shy  and  distant  as  usual,  refused  to  mingle  in  the  festivities,
and  begged  of  my  foreman  to  be  permitted  to  serve  at  the  buffet.  All  went  off
well,  and  the  Saturday  was  held  (more  workmen)  as  a  succeeding  day  of  fes-
tival. All  this,  however,  I  only  learned  after  what  I  am  now  about  to  relate.
On  the  Tuesday  morning  following,  immediately  before  8  A.M.,  in  my  house
on  Campden  Hill,  I  had  the  following  manifestation — I  cannot  call  it  a  dream ;
but  let  me  use  the  common  phraseology.  I  dreamt,  but  with  no  vagueness  as
in  common  dreams,  no  blurring  of  outline  or  rapid  passages  from  one  thing  dis-
connectedly to  another,  that  I  was  seated  at  a  desk,  engaged  in  a  business
conversation  with  an  unknown  gentleman,  who  stood  on  my  right  hand.
Towards  me,  in  front,  advanced  Robert  Mackenzie,  and  feeling  annoyed,  I
addressed  him  with  some  asperity,  asking  him  if  he  did  not  see  that  I  was
engaged.  He  retired  a  short  distance  with  exceeding  reluctance,  turned  again
to  approach  me,  as  if  most  desirous  for  an  immediate  colloquy,  when  I  spoke
to  him  still  more  sharply  as  to  his  want  of  manners.  On  this,  the  person  with
whom  I  was  conversing  took  his  leave,  and  Mackenzie  once  more  came  forward.
"  What  is  all  this,  Robert  ?  "  I  asked  somewhat  angrily.  "  Did  you  not  see  I
was  engaged  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir,"  he  replied  ;  "  but  I  must  speak  with  you  at  once."
"  What  about  ?  "  I  said ;  "  what  is  it  that  can  be  so  important  ?  "  "I  wish  to
tell  you,  sir,"  he  answered,  "that  I  am  accused  of  doing  a  thing  I  did  not
do,  and  that  I  want  you  to  know  it,  and  to  tell  you  so,  and  that  you  are  to
forgive  me  for  what  I  am  blamed  for,  because  I  am  innocent."  Then,  "  I  did
not  do  the  thing  they  say  I  did."  I  said,  "What?"  getting  same  answer.  I
then  naturally  asked,  "  But  how  can  I  forgive  you  if  you  do  not  tell  me  what
you  are  accused  of  ? "  I  can  never  forget  the  emphatic  manner  of  his  answer
in  the  Scottish  dialect,  "  Ye'll  sune  ken  "  (you'll  soon  know).  This  question  and
the  answer  were  repeated  at  least  twice — I  am  certain  the  answer  was  repeated
thrice,  in  the  most  fervid  tone.  On  that  I  awoke,  and  was  in  that  state  of
surprise  and  bewilderment  which  such  a  remarkable  dream,  quA  mere  dream,
might  induce,  and  was  wondering  what  it  all  meant,  when  my  wife  burst  into


54  CHAPTER    VII  [730

my  bedroom,  much  excited,  and  holding  an  open  letter  in  her  hand,  exclaimed,
"  Oh,  James,  here's  a  terrible  end  to  the  workmen's  ball— Robert  Mackenzie  has
committed  suicide  !  "  With  now  a  full  conviction  of  the  meaning  of  the  vision,
I  at  once  quietly  and  firmly  said,  "  No,  he  has  not  committed  suicide."
"How  can  you  possibly  know  that?"  "Because  he  has  just  been  here  to
tell  me."

I  have  purposely  not  mentioned  in  its  proper  place,  so  as  not  to  break  the
narrative,  that  on  looking  at  Mackenzie  I  was  struck  by  the  peculiar  appear-
ance of  his  countenance.  It  was  of  an  indescribable  bluish-pale  colour,  and  on
his  forehead  appeared  spots  which  seemed  like  blots  of  sweat.  For  this  I
could  not  account,  but  by  the  following  post  my  manager  informed  me  that  he
was  wrong  in  writing  me  of  suicide.  That  on  Saturday  night,  Mackenzie,  on
going  home,  had  lifted  a  small  black  bottle  containing  aqua  fortis  (which  he
used  for  staining  the  wood  of  birdcages,  made  for  amusement),  believing  this
to  be  whisky,  and  pouring  out  a  wine-glassful,  had  drunk  it  off  at  a  gulp,  dying
on  the  Sunday  in  great  agony.  Here  then,  was  the  solution  of  his  being
innocent  of  what  he  was  accused  of — suicide,  seeing  that  he  had  inadvertently
drunk  aqua  fortis,  a  deadly  poison.  Still  pondering  upon  the  peculiar  colour
of  his  countenance,  it  struck  me  to  consult  some  authorities  on  the  symptoms  of
poisoning  by  aqua  fortis,  and  in  Mr.  J.  H.  Walsh's  "  Domestic  Medicine  and
Surgery,"  p.  172,  I  found  these  words  under  symptoms  of  poisoning  by  sulphuric
acid.  ..."  The  skin  covered  with  a  cold  sweat ;  countenance  livid  and  ex-
pressive of  dreadful  suffering."  .  .  .  "  Aquafortis  produces  the  same  effect  as
sulphuric,  the  only  difference  being  that  the  external  stains,  if  any,  are  yellow
instead  of  brown."  This  refers  to  indication  of  sulphuric  acid,  "generally  out-
side of  the  mouth,  in  the  shape  of  brown  spots."  Having  no  desire  to
accommodate  my  facts  to  this  scientific  description,  I  give  the  quotations  freely,
only  at  the  same  time  stating  that  previously  to  reading  the  passage  in  Mr.
Walsh's  book,  I  had  not  the  slightest  knowledge  of  these  symptoms,  and  I
consider  that  they  agree  fairly  and  sufficiently  with  what  I  saw,  viz.,  a  livid
face  covered  with  a  remarkable  sweat,  and  having  spots  (particularly  on  the
forehead),  which,  in  my  dream,  I  thought  great  blots  of  perspiration.  It  seems
not  a  little  striking  that  I  had  no  previous  knowledge  of  these  symptoms,  and
yet  should  take  note  of  them.

I  have  little  remark  to  make  beyond  this,  that  in  speaking  of  this  matter,
to  me  very  affecting  and  solemn,  I  have  been  quite  disgusted  by  sceptics
treating  it  as  a  hallucination,  in  so  far  as  that  my  dream  must  have  been  on
the  Wednesday  morning,  being  that  after  the  receipt  of  my  manager's  letter
informing  me  of  the  supposed  suicide.  This  explanation  is  too  absurd  to
require  a  serious  answer.  My  manager  first  heard  of  the  death  on  the  Monday
— wrote  me  on  that  day  as  above — and  on  the  Tuesday  wrote  again  explaining
the  true  facts.  The  dream  was  on  the  Tuesday  morning,  immediately  before
the  8  A.M.  post  delivery,  hence  the  thrice  emphatic  "  Ye'll  sune  ken."  I  attribute
the  whole  to  Mackenzie's  yearning  gratitude  for  being  rescued  from  a  deplor-
able state  of  starvation,  and  his  earnest  desire  to  stand  well  in  my  opinion.  I
have  coloured  nothing,  and  leave  my  readers  to  draw  their  own  conclusions.

D.

The  following  is  Mrs.  D.'s  corroboration  : —

In  regard  to  the  remarkable  dream  my  husband  had  when  Robert
Mackenzie's  death  took  place  through  inadvertently  drinking  some  aqua  fortis,
I  beg  to  inform  you  of  what  took  place  as  far  as  I  am  concerned.


733]  PHANTASMS     OF    THE    DEAD  55

On  the  Tuesday  morning  after  the  occurrence  I  was  downstairs  early,  and
at  8  o'clock  was  handed  a  letter,  just  received  from  the  postman,  and  addressed
to  Mr.  D.  Seeing  it  was  from  our  manager  in  Glasgow,  I  opened  it,  and  was
much  grieved  to  find  that  it  was  to  tell  us  that  Robert  Mackenzie  had  com-
mitted suicide.  I  ran  upstairs  to  Mr.  D.'s  bedroom  with  the  letter  in  my  hand,
and  in  much  excitement.  I  found  him  apparently  just  coming  out  of  sleep,  and
hastily  cried  out  to  him,  exactly  as  he  has  described  to  you.  I  need  not  go
over  the  words,  which  have  often  been  repeated  amongst  us  since,  and  I  can
confirm  his  narrative  regarding  them,  as  given  to  you,  in  every  particular.  The
whole  affair  gave  us  a  great  shock,  and  put  an  end  to  the  workmen's  balls  for
some  four  or  five  years.  Mr.  D.^s  dream  was  a  frequent  subject  of  conversation
at  the  time.  I  knew  Mackenzie  well.  He  was  a  pale,  large-eyed,  and  earnest-
looking  young  man,  with  a  great  regard  for  Mr.  D.,  through  circumstances.
The  next  day's  post  brought  us  the  actual  facts.

J.  D.

731.  Here,  too,  may  be  placed  two  cases — those  of  Dr.  Bruce   (in
Chapter  IV.,  426  A)  and  Miss  Hall  (see  731  A) — where  there  are  successive
pictures  of  a  death  and  the  subsequent  arrangement  of  the  body.     The
milieux  of  the  percipients,  the  nature  of  the  deaths,  are  here  again  totally
disparate ;  yet  we  seem  to  see  the  same  unknown  laws  producing  effects
closely  similar.

In  Dr.  Bruce's  case  one  might  interpret  the  visions  as  coming  to  the
percipient  through  the  mind  of  his  wife,  who  was  present  at  the  scene  of
the  murder.  But  this  explanation  would  be  impossible  in  Miss  Hall's
case.  Rather  it  seems  as  though  some  telepathic  link,  set  up  between
the  dying  brother  and  the  sister,  had  been  maintained  after  death
until  all  duties  had  been  fulfilled  to  the  departed.  The  case  reminds
one  of  the  old  Homeric  notions  of  the  restless  appeal  of  unburied
comrades.

732.  In  the  case  of  Mrs.  Green,  already  quoted  in  Chapter  IV.,  429  D,
we  come  across  an  interesting  problem.     Two  women  are  drowned  under
very  peculiar  circumstances.     A  friend  has  apparently  a  clairvoyant  vision
of  the  scene,  yet  not  at  the  moment  when  it  occurred,  but  many  hours
afterwards,  and  about  the  time  when  another  person,  deeply  interested,
heard    of  the   death.     It    is    therefore    possible    to    suppose    that    the
apparently   clairvoyant   scene   was  in  reality  impressed  telepathically  on
the  percipient  by  another  living  mind.     I  think,  however,  that  both  the
nature  of  the  vision  and  certain  analogies,  which  will  appear  later  in  our
argument,  point  to  a  different  view,  involving  an  agency  both  of  the  dead
and  of  the  living.     I  conjecture  that  a  current  of  influence  may  be  started
by  a  deceased  person,  which,  however,  only  becomes  strong  enough  to  be
perceptible  to  its  object  when  reinforced  by  some  vivid  current  of  emotion
arising  in  living  minds.     I  do  not  say  that  this  is   yet  provable ;    yet  the
hint  may  be  of  value  when  the  far-reaching  interdependencies  of  telepathy
between  the  two  worlds  come  to  be  better  understood.

733.  Two  singular  cases  in  this  group  remain,  where  the  departed


56  CHAPTER    VII  [734

spirit,  long  after  death,  seems  pre-occupied  with  the  spot  where  his  bones
are  laid.  The  first  of  these  cases  (see  733  A)  approaches  farce ;  the
second  (in  which  the  skeleton  of  a  man  who  had  probably  been  murdered
about  forty  years  before  was  discovered  by  means  of  a  dream ;  see
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  35)  stands  alone  among  our  narratives  in
the  tragedy  which  follows  on  the  communication.  Mr.  Podmore  in  an
article  in  the  same  volume  (p.  303)  suggests  other  theories  to  account  for
this  case  without  invoking  the  agency  of  the  dead  :  but  to  me  the  least
impossible  explanation  is  still  the  notion  that  the  murdered  man's  dreams
harked  back  after  all  those  years  to  his  remote  unconsecrated  grave.  I
may  refer  further  to  another  case  (in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  155,
footnote)  where  feelings  of  horror  and  depression  were  constantly  experi-
enced in  a  room  over  which  a  baby's  body  was  afterwards  found.  This
case  makes,  perhaps,  for  another  explanation — depending  not  so  much  on
any  continued  influence  of  the  departed  spirit  as  on  some  persistent  influ-
ence inhering  in  the  bones  themselves — deposited  under  circumstances  of
terror  or  anguish,  and  possibly  in  some  way  still  radiating  a  malignant
memory.  Bizarre  as  this  interpretation  looks,  we  shall  find  some  con-
firmation of  such  a  possibility  in  our  chapter  on  Possession.  Yet  another
case  belonging  to  the  same  group,  and  given  in  733  B,  supplies  a  variant
on  this  view;  suggesting,  as  Edward  Gurney  has  remarked,  the  local
imprintation  of  a  tragic  picture,  by  whom  and  upon  what  we  cannot  tell.

I  think  it  well  to  suggest  even  these  wild  conjectures ;  so  long  as  they
are  understood  to  be  conjectures  and  nothing  more.  I  hold  it  probable
that  those  communications,  of  which  telepathy  from  one  spirit  to  another
forms  the  most  easily  traceable  variety,  are  in  reality  infinitely  varied  and
complex,  and  show  themselves  from  time  to  time  in  forms  which  must  for
long  remain  quite  beyond  our  comprehension.

734.  The  next  class  of  cases  in  this  series  well  illustrates  this
unexpectedness.  It  has  only  been  as  the  result  of  a  gradual  accumulation
of  concordant  cases  that  I  have  come  to  believe  there  is  some  reality  in
the  bizarre  supposition  that  the  departed  spirit  is  sometimes  specially
aware  of  the  time  at  which  news  of  his  death  is  about  to  reach  some
given  friend.  Proof  of  such  knowledge  on  his  part  is  rendered  harder  by
the  alternative  possibility  that  the  friend  may  by  clairvoyance  become
aware  of  a  letter  in  his  own  proximity.  As  was  shown  in  Phantasms  of
the  Living,  there  is  some  evidence  for  such  clairvoyance  even  in  cases
where  the  letter  seen  is  quite  unimportant  (see  also  421  H  and  J  and
656  B).  May  there  be  here  also  some  conjuncture  of  the  spheres  of
knowledge  of  the  departed  and  the  incarnate  spirits,  so  that  a  glimpse  ob-
tained by  the  one  in  some  way  reinforces  a  glimpse  obtained  by  the  other?

I  quote  a  typically  difficult  instance  of  this  coincidence  of  an
apparition  with  the  arrival  of  the  news  of  a  death.

From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  409.  The  case  was  sent  to  us  by
the  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  the  percipient  being  the  Rev.  G.  M.  Tandy,  vicar


735]  PHANTASMS    OF   THE    DEAD  57

of  West  Ward,  near  Wigton,  Cumberland,  formerly  of  Loweswater,  who
writes  : — l

When  at  Loweswater,  I  one  day  called  upon  a  friend,  who  said,  "You  do
not  see  many  newspapers;  take  one  of  those  lying  there."  I  accordingly  took
up  a  newspaper  bound  with  a  wrapper,  put  it  into  my  pocket,  and  walked  home.
In  the  evening  I  was  writing,  and  wanting  to  refer  to  a  book,  went  into
another  room  where  my  books  were.  I  placed  the  candle  on  a  ledge  of  the
bookcase,  took  down  a  book  and  found  the  passage  I  wanted,  when,  happening
to  look  towards  the  window,  which  was  opposite  to  the  bookcase,  I  saw  the  face
of  an  old  friend  whom  I  had  known  well  at  Cambridge,  but  had  not  seen  for
ten  years  or  more,  Canon  Robinson  (of  the  Charity  and  School  Commission).
I  was  so  sure  I  saw  him  that  I  went  out  to  look  for  him,  but  could  find  no  trace
of  him.  I  went  back  into  the  house,  and  thought  I  would  take  a  look  at  my  news-
paper. I  tore  off  the  wrapper,  unfolded  the  paper,  and  the  first  piece  of  news
that  I  saw  was  the  death  of  Canon  Robinson  ! 2

Mr.  Tandy  further  writes  : —

In  reply  to  your  note,  October  6th,  I  may  state,  with  regard  to  the  narrative
I  detailed  to  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  that  I  saw  the  face  looking  through  the
window,  by  the  light  of  a  single  Ozokerit  candle,  placed  on  a  ledge  of  the  book-
case, which  stood  opposite  the  window ;  that  I  was  standing,  with  the  candle
by  my  side,  reading  from  a  book  to  which  I  had  occasion  to  refer,  and  raising
my  eyes  as  I  read,  I  saw  the  face  clearly  and  distinctly,  ghastly  pale,  but  with
the  features  so  marked  and  so  distinct  that  I  recognised  it  at  once  as  the  face
of  my  most  dear  and  intimate  friend,  the  late  Canon  Robinson,  who  was  with
me  at  school  and  college,  and  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  many  years  past  (ten  or
eleven  at  the  very  least).  Almost  immediately  after,  fully  persuaded  that  my
old  friend  had  come  to  pay  me  a  surprise  visit,  I  rushed  to  the  door,  but  seeing
nothing  I  called  aloud,  searched  the  premises  most  carefully,  and  made  inquiry
as  to  whether  any  stranger  had  been  seen  near  my  house,  but  no  one  had  been
heard  of  or  seen.  When  last  I  saw  Canon  Robinson  he  was  apparently  in
perfect  health,  much  more  likely  to  outlive  me  than  I  him,  and  before  I  opened
the  newspaper  announcing  his  death  (which  I  did  about  an  hour  or  so  after
seeing  the  face)  I  had  not  heard  or  read  of  his  illness  or  death,  and  there  was
nothing  in  the  passage  of  the  book  I  was  reading  to  lead  me  to  think  of  him.

The  time  at  which  I  saw  the  face  was  between  ten  and  eleven  P.M.,  the
night  dark,  and  I  was  reading  in  a  room  where  no  shutter  was  closed  or  blind
drawn.

I  may  answer  in  reply  to  your  question — "  whether  I  have  ever  had  any  other
vision  or  hallucination  of  any  kind?" — that,  though  I  never  saw  any  apparition,
I  have  heard  mysterious  noises  which  neither  my  friends  nor  I  were  able  satis-
factorily to  account  for.

735.  This  incident,  taken  alone  and  without  any  apparent  connection
with  other  forms  of  action  of  the  departed,  seems  almost  too  quaint  to  be
included  in  a  more  or  less  coherent  series  like  the  present.  But  a  hint

1  The  narrative  is  undated,  but  the  first  part  of  it  was  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.
for  January  1885.

2  As  we  do  not  know  what  newspaper  this  was,  it  is  not  possible  to  ascertain  the
precise  interval  which  had  elapsed  since  the  death.


58  CHAPTER    VII  [736

towards  its  comprehension  is  given  by  certain  other  cases  where  the  per-
cipient states  that  a  cloud  of  unreasonable  depression  fell  upon  him  about
the  time  of  his  friend's  death  at  a  distance,  and  continued  until  the  actual
news  arrived ;  when,  instead  of  becoming  intensified,  it  lifted  suddenly.
In  one  or  two  such  cases  there  was  an  actual  presence  or  apparition,  which
seemed  to  hang  about  until  the  news  arrived,  and  then  disappeared.
Or,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  sometimes  a  happy  vision  of  the  departed
preluding  the  news,  as  though  to  prepare  the  percipient's  mind  for  the
shock  (735  A).  The  suggested  inference  is  that  in  such  cases  the  spirit's
attention  is  more  or  less  continuously  directed  to  the  survivor  until  the
news  reaches  him.  This  does  not,  of  course,  explain  how  the  spirit  learns
as  to  the  arrival  of  the  news ;  yet  it  makes  that  piece  of  knowledge  seem  a
less  isolated  thing.

736.  And  here  I  will  quote  a  case  so  divergent  from  accepted  types
that  the  ordinary  retailer  of  ghost  stories  might  well  be  tempted  to  pass  it
over  in  silence  as  incomprehensibly  absurd.  As  will  presently  be  seen,
however,  it  fits  with  singular  appropriateness  into  just  this  place  in  my  series.

The  case  was  sent  to  Professor  James,  and  I  quote  it  from  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  220.

,  Wis.,  September  22nd,  1890.

A  very  unusual  thing  occurred  to  the  writer  and  one  other  person — my

sister,  Miss   Mary  Q. — at  the   city  of ,  Wisconsin,   on  the   5th   day  of

November  1885,  at  10  o'clock  P.M.

Our  mother,  Mrs.  Mary  Margaret  Q.  R.,  died  at  our  home,  in  said  city  of

,  Wisconsin,  on  the  above  date,  at  8.40  P.M.,  very  suddenly,  of  pneumonia.

Our  youngest  half-brother,  Robert  B.  R.,  was  working  at  S ,  N.  Dakota,  at

that  time,  about  700  miles  distant  from ,  Wisconsin.     At  9.45  we  retired  to

the  guests'  chamber,  a  room  over  the  south  parlour,  and  about  the  same
dimensions  as  said  parlour,  having  two  windows  to  the  south  and  one  to  the
east.  There  were  two  beds  in  this  large  room,  and  I  lay  on  one  and  my  sister
on  the  other,  trying  to  compose  our  broken  hearts,  for  we  loved  our  mother  very
dearly.  The  night  was  cold  and  the  windows  were  all  closed,  except  the  east
was  down  at  the  top  a  few  inches,  when,  lo !  we  both  distinctly  heard  at  the
same  instant  my  brother,  Robert  B.  R.,  singing,  "  We  had  better  bide  a  wee,"
in  a  clear,  deep  tenor,  accompanied  by  a  high-pitched  soprano  and  an  old-
fashioned  small  melodeon  accompaniment,  and  it  sounded  as  though  they  were
upon  a  level  with  our  windows,  about  15  feet  from  the  ground;  and  I  arose
and  threw  up  the  south-west  window,  from  whence  the  sounds  seemed  to
proceed,  and  then  they — the  singing — moved  to  the  next,  or  south-east,  window,
and  sang  another  verse.  And  I  threw  that  up  and  saw  nothing,  but  still  dis-
tinctly heard  the  words  as  well  as  the  music,  and  so  round  to  the  east  window,
where  they  sang  the  last  verse,  and  then  the  music  seemed  to  float  away  to  the
north.  But  the  queer  part  of  this  occurrence  is  the  fact  that  at  the  very  time

that  we  heard  my  brother  singing  in ,  Wisconsin,  he  'was  singing  the  same

song  before  an  audience,  with  the  identical  accompaniment,  an  old,  tiny
melodeon,  and  a  high-pitched  soprano  young  lady — a  Miss  E.,  of  North
Dakota — as  we  learned  two  days  afterwards,  when  he  came  home  in  response
to  our  telegram  announcing  the  death  of  our  mother.

Any  verification  of  the  above  facts  will  be  cheerfully  made.

(Signed)  [Miss  Q.]


736]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  59

,  WlS.,  October  \\th,  1890.

DEAR  STR,— Yours  of  the  6th  inst  was  duly  received,  and  in  reply  to  your
request  for  corroborative  testimony  relative  to  the  "phenomenal  occurrence"
on  the  night  of  November  5th,  1885,  at  Janesville,  Rock  Co.,  Wisconsin— that
is,  the  hearing  music  and  two  human  voices,  and  the  words  distinctly  audible-
one  voice  perfectly  familiar  to  us  as  that  of  our  half-brother,  Robert  B.  R.,
then  of  N.  Dakota,  and  the  other  voice  that  of  a  strange  lady — soprano,  and
they,  my  said  brother  R.  B.  R.,  and  Miss  Sarah  E.,  of  N.  Dak.,  'were  singing
the  same  song,  "We  had  better  bide  a  wee,"  at  an  entertainment  given  by  a

church  society  of  S ,  a  printed  programme  of  which  my  brother  afterwards

sent  to  us.

I  am  an  exceedingly  busy  person,  but  a  lover  of  the  truth,  and  interested  in
the  progress  of  the  race;  but  my  sister,  Miss  Mary  Q.,  of  this  city,  is  very
conservative  and  proud,  and  when  I  asked  her  for  an  affidavit  of  her  experience
on  that  eventful  5th  of  November  1885,  she  replied,  "  I  do  not  wish  the  world
to  think  me  or  you  a  '  crank'  or  Spiritualist,  and  do  not  wish  our  names  pub-
lished." I  will  add  that  my  sister,  who  is  blind,  is  very  intuitive  and  clairvoyant,
and  there  is  much  in  her  experience  to  deeply  interest  the  psychical  student.  It
seems  to  me  that  the  loss  of  her  sight  has  been  compensated  by  another  sense
— a  super-intuition.

I  have  written  to  my  brother,  R.  B.  R.,to  reply  to  your  request,  and  also  to

obtain  a  programme  of  the  church  entertainments  at  S ,  N.  Dak.,  on

November  5th,  1885,  at  which  he  and  Miss  Sarah  E.  sang,  "We  had  better
bide  a  wee/'  and  also  to  state  the  exact  hour  when  they  were  called  in  the
programme,  for  as  Robert  stated  to  us  when  he  arrived  on  that  sad  occasion
—the  death  of  our  good  mother— he  informed  us  that  the  telegram  was  brought
to  him,  and  was  held  by  the  operator  so  as  not  to  spoil  the  entertainment  by
telling  him  before  he  sang,  and  we — my  sister  Mary  Q.  and  I — both  heard
every  note  and  word  of  that  song  sung  about  seven  hundred  miles  away,
while  our  mother's  remains  were  in  the  parlour  under  our  bedroom. — Cordially
yours,  (Signed)  [Miss  Q.]

Miss  Mary  Q.  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  as  follows  : —

,  Wis.,  November  i$th,  1890.

DEAR  SIR, — [In  reply  to]  your  kind  note  of  inquiry,  relative  to  my  experi-
ences on  the  night  of  November  5th,  1885,  they  were  such  as  have  been
described  by  my  sister  [Miss  Q.],  who  is  a  lover  of  scientific  research,  and  is
not  so  timid  as  I  and  my  brother;  the  latter  is  very  much  opposed  to  either
of  us  making  known  our  experience  on  that  night,  and  has  urged  me  not  to
tell  any  one  of  the  occurrences  of  that  eventful  time,  and  he  refuses  to  furnish
the  printed  programme  of  the  entertainment,  at  which  he  and  Miss  E.  were
singing,  "We  had  better  bide  a  wee,"  insisting  that  people  will  believe  us  all
"  luny  "  if  we  make  known  all  the  facts ;  and  so  in  deference  to  his  prejudices  I
must  respectfully  decline  to  make  any  further  disclosures  at  present. — Respect-
fully yours,  [Miss  MARY  Q.]

Dr.  Hodgson  adds  : —

December  igth. — A  letter  of  inquiry  sent  to  Mr.  Robert  B.  "  R.,"  and  an
envelope,  with  official  stamp  of  our  Society  on  the  cover,  has  been  returned  to
me,  unopened,  by  Mr.  Robert  B.  "  R.,"  so  that  further  corroboration  is  lacking,
at  least  for  the  present. — R.  H.


60  CHAPTER    VII  [737

It  will  be  observed  that  Miss  Mary  Q.'s  letter  is  virtually  a  confirma-
tion of  Miss  Q.'s  account ;  and  that  Mr.  Q.'s  action  is  in  harmony  with
his  sister's  belief  that  he  cannot  deny,  but  does  not  wish  to  confirm,  the
truth  of  this  singular  narrative.

Now  here  the  two  minds  aware  of  the  mother's  death  were  the  mother's
own  mind  and  the  telegraphist's.  The  telegraphist  was  certainly  aware
that,  when  the  song  came  to  an  end,  he  should  have  to  communicate  to  the
singer  a  painful  shock.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  telegraphist  did  not
know  the  senders  of  the  telegram ;  had  no  means  of  picturing  them  or
their  surroundings.  I  think,  therefore,  that  it  will  be  more  in  accordance
with  analogy  to  suppose  that  the  mother's  mind  was  aware  of  the  impend-
ing communication,  and  transmitted,  perhaps  scarce  consciously,  to  her
daughters  the  sensation  of  the  trivial  and  tiresome  cause  of  delay.  I
give  in  736  A  an  incident  equally  grotesque,  where  also  the  indication
is  of  impatience  on  the  part  of  the  deceased  person,  who  perceives  the
news  of  his  death  kept  back  by  vexatious  accidents.  And  I  add  thereto
Mr.  Cameron  Grant's  case  (736  B),  where  the  date  of  arrival  of  the  news
of  Lord  Z.'s  death  was  specially  difficult  to  calculate  by  ordinary  means
— Mr.  Grant  being  in  a  wild  part  of  Brazil.  Mr.  Grant's  impulse  to
draw  what  turned  out  to  be  Lord  Z.'s  death-scene  might  place  this  case
among  motor  automatisms.  There  is  naturally  no  clear  line  between
seeing  a  scene  in  one's  mind's  eye  and  feeling  an  impulse  to  draw  it
on  paper.  Finally,  I  quote  in  736  C  a  case  where  a  phantasmal  appear-
ance became  visible  while  the  percipient  actually  held  in  her  hand
an  unopened  letter,  announcing,  not  the  decedent's  death,  but  her
dangerous  illness.  And  on  the  strength  of  all  these  cases,  and  of  some
less  striking,  I  repeat  my  suggestion  that  in  our  ignorance  as  to  the  degree
of  knowledge  of  earthly  affairs  possessed  by  the  departed,  and  of  the  causes
which  permit  or  stimulate  their  apparition,  this  possibility  of  their  following
the  diffusion  of  news  of  their  own  death  may  be  well  worth  our  continued
attention.

737.  Having  thus  discussed  a  number  of  cases  where  the  apparition
shows  varying  degrees  of  knowledge  or  memory,  I  pass  on  to  the  some-
what commoner  type,  where  the  apparition  lacks  the  power  or  the  impulse
to  communicate  any  message  much  more  definite  than  that  all-important
one — of  his  own  continued  life  and  love.  These  cases,  nevertheless,
might  be  subdivided  on  many  lines.  Each  apparition,  even  though  it  be
momentary,  is  a  phenomenon  complex  in  more  ways  than  our  minds  can
follow.  We  must  look  for  some  broad  line  of  demarcation,  which  may
apply  to  a  great  many  different  incidents,  while  continuing  to  some  extent
the  series  which  we  have  already  been  descending — from  knowledge  and
purpose  on  the  deceased  person's  part  down  to  vagueness  and  apparent
automatism.

Such  a  division — gradual,  indeed,  but  for  that  very  reason  the  more
instructive — exists  between  personal  and  local  apparitions ;  between  mani-


739]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE     DEAD  61

festations  plainly  intended  to  impress  the  minds  of  certain  definite
survivors  and  manifestations  in  accustomed  haunts,  some  of  which,
indeed,  may  be  destined  to  impress  survivors,  but  which  degenerate  and
disintegrate  into  sights  and  sounds  too  meaningless  to  prove  either  purpose
or  intelligence.

738.  Let  us  look,  then,  for  these  characteristics,  not  expecting,  of
course,  that  our  series  will  be  logically  simple;  for  it  must  often  happen
that  the  personal  and  local  impulses  will  be  indistinguishable,  as  when
the  desired  percipient  is  inhabiting  the  familiar  home.     But  we  may  begin
with  some  cases  where  the   apparition  has  shown   itself  in  some  scene
altogether  strange  to  the  deceased  person.

We  have  had,  of  course,  a  good  many  cases  of  this  type  already.  Such
was  the  case  of  the  apparition  with  the  red  scratch  (717)  ;  such  was  the
apparition  in  the  Countess  Kapnist's  carriage  (727),  and  the  apparition
to  Mrs.  B.  at  Fiesole  (728  B).  Such  cases,  indeed,  occur  most  frequently
— and  this  fact  is  itself  significant — among  the  higher  and  more  de-
veloped forms  of  manifestation.  Among  the  briefer,  less -developed  appar-
itions with  which  we  have  now  to  deal,  these  invasions  by  the  phantasm
of  quite  unknown  territory  are  relatively  few.  I  will  begin  by  referring
to  a  curious  case,  where  the  impression  given  is  that  of  a  spiritual  pre-
sence which  seeks  and  finds  the  percipient,  but  is  itself  too  confused  for
coherent  communication  (Mrs.  Lightfoot's  case,  429  B).  It  will  be  seen
that  this  narrative  is  thoroughly  in  accordance  with  previous  indications
of  a  state  of  posthumous  bewilderment  supervening  before  the  spirit  has
adjusted  its  perceptions  to  the  new  environment.

739.  In  cases  like  Mrs.  Lightfoot's,  where  the  percipient's  surroundings
are  unknown  to  the  deceased  person,  and  especially  in  cases  where  the
intimation  of  a  death  reaches  the  percipient  when  at  sea  (as  in  739  A),
there  is  plainly  nothing  except  the  percipient's  own  personality  to  guide
the  spirit  in  his  search.     We  have  several  narratives  of  this  type.     In  one
of  these — Archdeacon  Farler's,  already  referred  to  in  710 — the  appari-
tion  appears  twice,  the    second   appearance   at   least   being  subsequent
to   the   death.     It  is  plain  that  if  in  such  a  case  the  second  apparition
conveys  no  fresh  intelligence,  we   cannot  prove  that  it  is  more  than  a
subjective  recrudescence  of  the  first.     Yet  analogy  is  in   favour  of   its
veridical  character,  since  we  have  cases  (like  Miss  Hall's,  cited  in  713  A)
where  successive  manifestations  do  bring  fresh  knowledge,  and  seem  to
show  a   continued   effort  to  communicate.     In    this    connection  I    may
refer  to  an  experience  of  a  witness  who  has  had  many  experiences,  Mr.
Keulemans  (see,  662  A,  &c.),  where  his  little  son  appeared  to  him  both
about  the  time  of  death  and  again  after  death  (739  0).     In  that  case  the
child,  it  would  appear,  sought  his  father  first  in  familiar,  then  in  unfamiliar
surroundings.

Then,  again,  there  are  auditory  cases  where  the  phantasmal  peech  has
occurred  in  places  not  known  to  the  deceased  person.  One  such  case
is  that  of  Mr.  V/ambey  (see  735  A).  In  739  B  I  give  a  case  in  which  an


62  CHAPTER    VII  [740

apparition  was  seen  several  weeks  after  death,  the  death  being  unknown
to  the  percipient.

740.  One  specially  impressive  characteristic  of  apparitions  (as  has
been  already  remarked)  is  their  occasional  collectivity — the  fact  that  more
percipients  than  one  sometimes  see  or   hear   the  phantasmal  figure  or
voice  simultaneously.     When  one  is  considering  the  gradual  decline  in
definiteness    and    apparent   purpose  from   one  group  of  apparitions  to
another,  it  is  natural  to  ask  whether  this  characteristic — in  my  view  so
important — is  found  to  accompany  especially  the  higher,  more  intelligent
manifestations.

I  cannot  find  that  this  is  so.  On  the  contrary,  it  is,  I  think,  in  cases
of  mere  haunting  that  we  oftenest  find  that  the  figure  is  seen  by  several
persons  at  once,  or  else  (a  cognate  phenomenon)  by  several  persons
successively.  I  know  not  how  to  explain  this  apparent  tendency.  Could
we  admit  the  underlying  assumptions,  it  would  suit  the  view  that  the
"  haunting  "  spirits  are  "  earthbound,"  and  thus  somehow  nearer  to  matter
than  spirits  more  exalted.  Yet  instances  of  collectivity  are  scattered
through  all  classes  of  apparitions ;  and  the  irregular  appearance  of  a
characteristic  which  seems  to  us  so  fundamental  affords  another  lesson
how  great  may  be  the  variety  of  inward  mechanism  ih  cases  which  to  us
might  seem  constructed  on  much  the  same  type.1

741.  I  pass  on  to  a  group  of  cases  which  are  both  personal  and
local;    although   the    personal    element    in   most   of    them — the   desire
to   manifest   to  the  friend — may  seem  more  important   than  the  local
element — the  impulse  to  revisit  some  accustomed  haunt.

In  the  first  case  which  I  shall  cite  the  deceased  person's  image  is  seen
simultaneously  by  several  members  of  his  own  household,  in  his  own
house.  Note  the  analogy  to  a  collective  crystal  vision.

The  account  is  taken  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  213.
It  is  given  by  Mr.  Charles  A.  W.  Lett,  of  the  Military  and  Royal  Naval
Club,  Albemarle  Street,  W.

December  yd,  1885.

On  the  5th  April  1873  my  wife's  father,  Captain  .Towns,  died  at  his
residence,  Cranbrook,  Rose  Bay,  near  Sydney,  N.  S.  Wales.  About  six  weeks
after  his  death  my  wife  had  occasion,  one  evening  about  nine  o'clock,  to  go  to
one  of  the  bedrooms  in  the  house.  She  was  accompanied  by  a  young  lady,
Miss  Berthon,  and  as  they  entered  the  room — the  gas  was  burning  all  the  time
— they  were  amazed  to  see,  reflected  as  it  were  on  the  polished  surface  of  the
wardrobe,  the  image  of  Captain  Towns.  It  was  barely  half  figure,  the  head,
shoulders,  and  part  of  the  arms  only  showing — in  fact,  it  was  like  an  ordinary
medallion  portrait,  but  life-size.  The  face  appeared  wan  and  pale,  as  it  did
before  his  death,  and  he  wore  a  kind  of  grey  flannel  jacket,  in  which  he  had
been  accustomed  to  sleep.  Surprised  and  half  alarmed  at  what  they  saw,  their
first  idea  was  that  a  portrait  had  been  hung  in  the  room,  and  that  what  they
saw  was  its  reflection  ;  but  there  was  no  picture  of  the  kind.

1  Certain  appearances,  collectively  seen,  in  the  actual  death-chamber,  are  discussed
in  740  A.


742]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  63

Whilst  they  were  looking  and  wondering,  my  wife's  sister,  Miss  Towns,
came  into  the  room,  and  before  either  of  the  others  had  time  to  speak  she
exclaimed,  "  Good  gracious !  Do  you  see  papa  ?  "  One  of  the  housemaids
happened  to  be  passing  downstairs  at  the  moment,  and  she  was  called
in,  and  asked  if  she  saw  anything,  and  her  reply  was,  "  Oh,  miss !  the
master."  Graham — Captain  Towns'  old  body  servant — was  then  sent
for,  and  he  also  immediately  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  Lord  save  us !  Mrs.  Lett,
it's  the  Captain  !  "  The  butler  was  called,  and  then  Mrs.  Crane,  my  wife's
nurse,  and  they  both  said  what  they  saw.  Finally,  Mrs.  Towns  was  sent  for,
and,  seeing  the  apparition,  she  advanced  towards  it  with  her  arm  extended  as
if  to  touch  it,  and  as  she  passed  her  hand  over  the  panel  of  the  wardrobe
the  figure  gradually  faded  away,  and  never  again  appeared,  though  the  room
was  regularly  occupied  for  a  long  time  after.

These  are  the  simple  facts  of  the  case,  and  they  admit  of  no  doubt ;  no  kind
of  intimation  was  given  to  any  of  the  witnesses ;  the  same  question  was  put  to
each  one  as  they  came  into  the  room,  and  the  reply  was  given  without
hesitation  by  each.  It  was  by  the  merest  accident  that  I  did  not  see  the
apparition.  I  was  in  the  house  at  the  time,  but  did  not  hear  when  I  was
called.  C.  A.  W.  LETT.

We,  the  undersigned,  having  read  the  above  statement,  certify  that  it  is
strictly  accurate,  as  we  both  were  witnesses  of  the  apparition.

SARA  LETT.

SIBBIE  SMYTH  (ne'e  TOWNS).
Gurney  writes : —

Mrs.  Lett  assures  me  that  neither  she  nor  her  sister  ever  experienced  a
hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any  other  occasion.  She  is  positive  that  the
recognition  of  the  appearance  on  the  part  of  each  of  the  later  witnesses  was
independent,  and  not  due  to  any  suggestion  from  the  persons  already  in  the
room.

I  add  in  741  A  another  collective  case  noticeable  from  the  fact  that
the  departed  spirit  appears  to  influence  two  persons  at  a  distance  from
each  other  in  a  concordant  way,  so  that  one  of  them  becomes  conscious
of  the  appearance  to  the  other.  Compare  with  this  the  incident  given
at  the  end  of  751  A,  when  Miss  Campbell  has  a  vision  of  her  friend
seeing  an  apparition  at  a  time  when  this  is  actually  occurring.

742.  In  the  case  which  I  shall  next  quote,  the  evidence,  though
coming  from  a  young  boy,  is  clear  and  good,  and  the  incident  itself  is
thoroughly  characteristic.  The  decedent  was  satisfying  both  a  local  and
a  personal  attraction.

We  owe  this  case  (which  I  quote  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.
viii.  p.  173)  to  the  kindness  of  Lady  Gore  Booth,  from  whom  I  first  heard
the  account  by  word  of  mouth.  Her  son  (then  a  schoolboy  aged  10)  was
the  percipient,  and  her  youngest  daughter,  then  aged  15,  also  gives  a  first-
hand account  of  the  incident  as  follows  : —

LlSSADELL,  SLIGO,  February  1891.

On  the  loth  of  April  1889,  at  about  half-past  nine  o'clock  A.M.,  my  youngest
brother  and  I  were  going  down  a  short  flight  of  stairs  leading  to  the  kitchen,  to


64  CHAPTER    VII  [742

fetch  food  for  my  chickens,  as  usual.  We  were  about  half-way  down,  my
brother  a  few  steps  in  advance  of  me,  when  he  suddenly  said — "Why,  there's
John  Blaney,  I  didn't  know  he  was  in  the  house !  "  John  Blaney  was  a  boy
who  lived  not  far  from  us,  and  he  had  been  employed  in  the  house  as  hall-boy
not  long  before.  I  said  that  I  was  sure  it  was  not  he  (for  I  knew  he  had  left
some  months  previously  on  account  of  ill-health),  and  looked  down  into  the
passage,  but  saw  no  one.  The  passage  was  a  long  one,  with  a  rather  sharp
turn  in  it,  so  we  ran  quickly  down  the  last  few  steps,  and  looked  round  the
corner,  but  nobody  was  there,  and  the  only  door  he  could  have  gone  through
was  shut.  As  we  went  upstairs  my  brother  said,  "  How  pale  and  ill  John
looked,  and  why  did  he  stare  so  ?  "  I  asked  what  he  was  doing.  My  brother
answered  that  he  had  his  sleeves  turned  up,  and  was  wearing  a  large  green
apron,  such  as  the  footmen  always  wear  at  their  work.  An  hour  or  two  after-
wards I  asked  my  maid  how  long  John  Blaney  had  been  back  in  the  house  ?
She  seemed  much  surprised,  and  said,  "  Didn't  you  hear,  miss,  that  he  died
this  morning  ?  "  On  inquiry  we  found  he  had  died  about  two  hours  before  my
brother  saw  him.  My  mother  did  not  wish  that  my  brother  should  be  told  this,
but  he  heard  of  it  somehow,  and  at  once  declared  that  he  must  have  seen  his
ghost.  MABEL  OLIVE  GORE  BOOTH.

The  actual  percipient's  independent  account  is  as  follows  : —

March  1891.

We  were  going  downstairs  to  get  food  for  Mabel's  fowl,  when  I  saw  John
Blaney  walking  round  the  corner.  I  said  to  Mabel,  "  That's  John  Blaney !  "
but  she  could  not  see  him.  When  we  came  up  afterwards  we  found  he  was
dead.  He  seemed  to  me  to  look  rather  ill.  He  looked  yellow ;  his  eyes  looked
hollow,  and  he  had  a  green  apron  on.  MORDAUNT  GORE  BOOTH.

We  have  received  the  following  confirmation  of  the  date  of  death  : —

THE  PRESBYTERY,  BALLINGAL,  SLIGO,

loth  February  1891.

I  certify  from  the  parish  register  of  deaths  that  John  Blaney  (Dunfore)  was
interred  on  the  I2th  day  of  April  1889,  having  died  on  the  loth  day  of  April
1889.  P.  J.  SHEMAGHS,  C.  C.

Lady  Gore  Booth  writes  : —

May  3U/,  1890.

When  my  little  boy  came  upstairs  and  told  us  he  had  seen  John  Blaney,  we
thought  nothing  of  it  till  some  hours  after,  when  we  heard  that  he  was  dead.
Then  for  fear  of  frightening  the  children,  I  avoided  any  allusion  to  what  he  had
told  us,  and  asked  every  one  else  to  do  the  same.  Probably  by  now  he  has
forgotten  all  about  it,  but  it  certainly  was  very  remarkable,  especially  as  only
one  child  saw  him,  and  they  were  standing  together.  The  place  where  he
seems  to  have  appeared  was  in  the  passage  outside  the  pantry  door,  where
John  Blaney's  work  always  took  him.  My  boy  is  a  very  matter-of-fact  sort  of
boy,  and  I  never  heard  of  his  having  any  other  hallucination.

G.  GORE  BOOTH.

Now  this  apparition — unless  we  explain  it  as  a  telepathic  impression
projected  at  the  moment  of  death  and  remaining  latent  for  some  hours
before  it  attained  externalisation — may  possibly  be  taken  as  showing
something  of  continued  memory  in  the  departed  boy.  Something  of  him


744]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  65

or  from  him,  it  may  be  said,  reverted  to  well-known  haunts,  and  was
discerned  in  habitual  surroundings.  But  even  of  this  there  is  no  sure
indication.  If  it  be  suggested  that  the  dead  boy  waited  to  manifest  until
his  young  master  reached  a  suitable  spot,  it  may  be  replied  that  the  living
boy's  presence  in  that  spot  merely  enabled  him  to  discern  some  influence
which  might  have  been  discernible  in  that  spot  possibly  at  any  moment
during  some  hours,  if  the  fitting  percipient  had  been  at  hand.  Or  else,
and  perhaps  more  simply,  we  may  suppose  that  there  was  a  mere
influence  transmitted  from  the  departed  mind  to  the  living  mind,  which
influence  the  living  mind  discerned  when  in  surroundings  in  which  its
own  recollection  of  the  decedent  might  most  readily  be  evoked.

I  add  in  742  A  a  somewhat  similar  case.  The  figure  of  the  grand-
mother looking  at  the  clock  resembles  the  figure  of  the  pantry-boy  seen  in
the  offices,  but  was  seen  by  both  persons  in  a  position  to  see  it,  instead
of  by  one  only.  See  also  an  account  given  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.
p.  93,  by  the  Rev.  G.  Lewis  of  his  seeing  an  apparition  of  a  young  man
who — unknown  to  him — had  died  three  days  before.  The  young  man
had  much  wished  to  see  Mr.  Lewis  before  he  died,  but  Mr.  Lewis,  not
having  heard  of  his  illness,  had  not  been  to  visit  him.  This  narrative,  if
interpreted  in  the  way  which  the  percipient  suggests,  might  have  been
placed  among  cases  where  the  figure  communicates  a  message ;  the  re-
proachful expression  implying  a  recollected  sense  of  injury.  It  is,  at  any
rate,  an  example  of  the  class  now  under  discussion.

743.  The  case  given  in  743  A — which  comes  from  excellent  inform-
ants— is  one  of  those  which  correspond  most  nearly  to  what  one  would
desire  in  a  posthumous  message.     I  may  refer  also  to  General  Campbell's
case   (in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  476)   in  which  a  long-continued
series  of  unaccountable  noises  and  an  apparition  twice  seen  by  a  child  in
the  house  suggested  to  the  narrator  the  agency  of  his  dead  wife.     The
case,  which  depends  for  its  evidential  force  on  a  great  mass  of  detail,
is   too  long  for   me   to  quote;    but   it   is  worth   study,  as   is    any   case
where  there  seems  evidence  of  persistent  effort  to  manifest,  meeting  with
one  knows  not  what  difficulty.     It  may  be  that   in  such  a  story  there
is  nothing  but  strange  coincidence,  or  it  may  be  that  from  records  of
partially  successful  effort,  renewed  often  and  in  ambiguous  ways,  we  shall
hereafter  learn  something  of  the  nature  of  that  curtain  of  obstruction  which
now  seems  so  arbitrary  in  its  sudden  lifting,  its  sudden  fall.

744.  I  will  conclude  this  group  with  three  cases  closely  similar,  all
well  attested,  and  all  of  them  capable  of  explanation  either  on  local  or
personal  grounds.     In  the  first  (see  744  A)  an  apparition  is  seen  by  two
persons  in  a  house  in  Edinburgh,  a  few  hours  before  the  death  of  a  lady
who  had  lived  there,  and  whose  body  was  to  be  brought  back  to  it.     In
the  second  (see  744  B)  the  dead  librarian  haunts  his  library,  but  in  the
library  are  members  of  his  old  staff.     In  the  third,  the  dead  wife  loiters
round  her  husband's  tomb,  but  near  it  passes  a  gardener  who  had  been

VOL.  II.  E


66  CHAPTER    VII

in  her  employ.  This  last — the  case  of  Mrs.  de  Fre'ville  and  the  gar-
dener Bard — I  must  insert  in  the  text.  As  often  happens  when  (as  I
do  here)  one  knows  the  percipient  and  his  milieu,  even  the  very  plot  of
ground  on  which  he  dodged  about  to  watch  the  phantom,  one  feels  a
reality  in  the  incident  which  the  most  satisfactory  depositions  from  a
distance  will  not  always  bring.  The  case  is  quoted  from  Phantasms  of
the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  212.  Gurney  there  remarks  of  it : —

The  next  case  again  exhibits  the  slight  deferment  of  the  percipient's  expe-
rience which  I  have  already  mentioned.  But  its  chief  interest  is  as  illustrating
what  may  be  called  a  local,  as  distinct  from  a  personal,  rapport  between  the
parties  concerned.  The  percipient,  at  the  moment  of  his  impression,  was
contemplating  a  spot  with  which  the  agent  was  specially  connected,  and  which
may  even  have  had  a  very  distinct  place  in  her  dying  thoughts;  and  it  is
natural  to  find  in  this  fact  a  main  condition  why  he,  of  all  people,  should  have
been  the  one  impressed.

The  first  account  of  it  was  sent  to  us  by  the  Rev.  C.  T.  Forster,  Vicar
of  Hinxton,  Saffron  Walden,  as  follows  : —

August  6th,  1885.

My  late  parishioner,  Mrs.  de  Fre'ville,  was  a  somewhat  eccentric  lady,  who
was  specially  morbid  on  the  subject  of  tombs,  &c.

About  two  days  after  her  death,  which  took  place  in  London,  May  8th,  in
the  afternoon,  I  heard  that  she  had  been  seen  that  very  night  by  Alfred  Bard.
I  sent  for  him,  and  he  gave  me  a  very  clear  and  circumstantial  account  of  what
he  had  seen.

He  is  a  man  of  great  observation,  being  a  self-taught  naturalist,  and  I  am
quite  satisfied  that  he  desires  to  speak  the  truth  without  any  exaggeration.

I  must  add  that  I  am  absolutely  certain  that  the  news  of  Mrs.  de  FreVille's
death  did  not  reach  Hinxton  till  the  next  morning,  May  Qth.  She  was  found
dead  at  7.30  P.M.  She  had  been  left  alone  in  her  room,  being  poorly,  but  not
considered  seriously  or  dangerously  ill.  C.  T.  FORSTER.

The  following  is  the  percipient's  own  account : —

July  2ist,  1885.

I  am  a  gardener  in  employment  at  Sawston.  I  always  go  through  Hinxton
churchyard  on  my  return  home  from  work.  On  Friday,  May  8th,  1885,  I  was
walking  back  as  usual.  On  entering  the  churchyard,  I  looked  rather  carefully
at  the  ground,  in  order  to  see  a  cow  and  donkey  which  used  to  lie  just  inside
the  gate.  In  so  doing,  I  looked  straight  at  the  square  stone  vault  in  which  the
late  Mr.  de  Fre'ville  was  at  one  time  buried.  I  then  saw  Mrs.  de  Fre'ville
leaning  on  the  rails,  dressed  much  as  I  had  usually  seen  her,  in  a  coal-scuttle
bonnet,  black  jacket  with  deep  crape,  and  black  dress.  She  was  looking  full
at  me.  Her  face  was  very  white,  much  whiter  than  usual.  I  knew  her  well,
having  at  one  time  been  in  her  employ.  I  at  once  supposed  that  she  had  come,
as  she  sometimes  did,  to  the  mausoleum  in  her  own  park,  in  order  to  have  it
opened  and  go  in.  I  supposed  that  Mr.  Wiles,  the  mason  from  Cambridge,
was  in  the  tomb  doing  something.  I  walked  round  the  "tomb,  looking  carefully
at  it,  in  order  to  see  if  the  gate  was  open,  keeping  my  eye  on  her,  and  never
more  than  five  or  six  yards  from  her.  Her  face  turned  and  followed  me.  I
passed  between  the  church  and  the  tomb  (there  are  about  four  yards  between


745]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  67

the  two),  and  peered  forward  to  see  whether  the  tomb  was  open,  as  she  hid  the
part  of  the  tomb  which  opened.  I  slightly  stumbled  on  a  hassock  of  grass,  and
looked  at  my  feet  for  a  moment  only.  When  I  looked  up  she  was  gone.  She
could  not  possibly  have  got  out  of  the  churchyard,  as  in  order  to  reach  any  of
the  exits  she  must  have  passed  me.1  So  I  took  for  granted  that  she  had  quickly
gone  into  the  tomb.  I  went  up  to  the  door,  which  I  expected  to  find  open,  but
to  my  surprise  it  was  shut  and  had  not  been  opened,  as  there  was  no  key  in
the  lock.  I  rather  hoped  to  have  a  look  into  the  tomb  myself,  so  I  went  back
again  and  shook  the  gate  to  make  sure,  but  there  was  no  sign  of  any  one's
having  been  there.  I  was  then  much  startled  and  looked  at  the  clock,  which
marked  9.20.  When  I  got  home  I  half  thought  it  must  have  been  my  fancy,
but  I  told  my  wife  that  I  had  seen  Mrs.  de  FreVille.

Next  day,  when  my  little  boy  told  me  that  she  was  dead,  I  gave  a  start,
which  my  companion  noticed,  I  was  so  much  taken  aback.

I  have  never  had  any  other  hallucination  whatever.

ALFRED  BARD.

Mrs.  Bard's  testimony  is  as  follows  : —

July  &t&,  1885.

When  Mr.  Bard  came  home,  he  said,  "  I  have  seen  Mrs.  de  Fre'ville  to-
night, leaning  with  her  elbow  on  the  palisade,  looking  at  me.  I  turned  again
to  look  at  her  and  she  was  gone.  She  had  cloak  and  bonnet  on."  He  got
home  as  usual  between  nine  and  ten.  It  was  on  the  8th  of  May  1885.

SARAH  BARD.

The  Times  obituary  confirms  the  date  of  the  death.

From  information  more  recently  received  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.
v.  p.  415)  we  learn  that  the  lady  was  found  dead  at  2  P.M. — not  7.30  P.M.
as  stated  above — so  that  the  apparition  was  seen  about  seven  and  a  half
hours  after  the  death.  This,  as  Gurney  remarked,  makes  it  still  more
difficult  to  regard  the  case  as  a  telepathic  impression  transmitted  at  the
moment  of  death,  and  remaining  latent  in  the  mind  of  the  percipient.
The  incident  suggests  rather  that  Bard  had  come  upon  Mrs.  de
Fre"ville's  spirit,  so  to  say,  unawares.  One  cannot  imagine  that  she
specially  wished  him  to  see  her,  and  to  see  her  engaged  in  what  seems
so  needless  and  undignified  a  retracing  of  currents  of  earthly  thought.
Rather  this  seems  a  rudimentary  haunting — an  incipient  lapse  into  those
aimless,  perhaps  unconscious,  reappearances  in  familiar  spots  which  may
persist  (as  it  would  seem)  for  many  years  after  death.

A  somewhat  similar  case  is  that  of  Colonel  Crealock  (in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  432)  where  a  soldier  who  had  been  dead  some  hours  was
seen  by  his  superior  officer  in  camp  at  night  rolling  up  and  taking  away
his  bed.

745.     It  is,  indeed,  mainly  by  dwelling  on  these  intermediate  cases,

1  I  was  conducted  over  Hinxton  churchyard  by  Mr.  Forster,  and  can  attest  the  sub-
stantial accuracy  of  Mr.  Bard's  description  of  the  relative  position  of  the  church,  the
tomb,  and  the  exits.  The  words  "  must  have  passed  me,"  however,  give  a  slightly
erroneous  impression ;  "  must  have  come  very  near  me,"  would  be  the  more  correct
description.— F.  W.  H.  M.


68  CHAPTER    VII  [745

between  a  message-bringing  apparition  and  a  purposeless  haunt,  that  we
have  most  hope  of  understanding  the  typical  haunt  which,  while  it  has
been  in  a  sense  the  most  popular  of  all  our  phenomena,  is  yet  to  the
careful  inquirer  one  of  the  least  satisfactory.  One  main  evidential  diffi-
culty generally  lies  in  identifying  the  haunting  figure,  in  finding  anything
to  connect  the  history  of  the  house  with  the  vague  and  often  various
sights  and  sounds  which  perplex  or  terrify  its  flesh  and  blood  inhabitants.
We  must,  at  any  rate,  rid  ourselves  of  the  notion  that  some  great  crime  or
catastrophe  is  always  to  be  sought  as  the  groundwork  of  a  haunt  of  this
kind.  To  that  negative  conclusion  the  cases  now  to  be  described,  and
the  cases  which  have  just  been  described,  do  concordantly  point  us.  Mrs.
de  Fre"ville  was  concerned  in  no  tragedy ;  she  was  merely  an  elderly  lady
with  a  fancy  for  sepulchres.  And  as  to  the  cases  to  which  I  now  pro-
ceed— although  in  Sir  Arthur  Becher's  case,  for  example  (see  745  A),
there  was  at  least  a  rumour  of  some  crime,1  and  in  Mrs.  M.'s  case
(745  B)  of  past  troubles,  in  which  the  percipients,  of  course,  were  in  no
way  concerned — yet  in  Mr.  Husbands'  and  Mrs.  Clerke's  cases  (745  C
and  D),  and  Mrs.  Lewin's  case  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  462),  there
was  nothing,  so  far  as  we  know,  which  could  trouble  the  departed  spirit  with
importunate  memories  of  his  earthly  home.  Again,  Mr.  Husbands'  case,
Mrs.  Lewin's,  Mrs.  Clerke's,  have  much  in  common.  In  each  case  the
apparition  is  seen  by  a  stranger,  several  months  after  the  death,  with  no
apparent  reason  for  its  appearance  at  that  special  time.  This  last  point  is
of  interest  in  considering  the  question  whether  the  hallucinatory  picture
could  have  been  projected  from  any  still  incarnate  mind.  In  another
case — the  vision  of  the  Bishop  of  St.  Brieuc  (given  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  v.  p.  460),  there  was  such  a  special  reason; — the  Bishop's  body,
unknown  to  the  percipient,  was  at  that  moment  being  buried  at  the
distance  of  a  few  miles.  Mr.  Podmore  suggests  (op.  cit.,  vol.  vi.  p.  301)
that  it  was  from  the  minds  of  the  living  mourners  that  the  Bishop's
phantasm  was  generated.  That  hypothesis  may  have  its  portion  of  truth ;
the  surrounding  emotion  may  have  been  one  of  the  factors  which  made
the  apparition  possible.  But  the  assumption  that  it  was  the  only
admissible  factor — that  the  departed  Bishop's  own  possible  agency  must
be  set  aside  altogether — lands  us,  I  think,  in  difficulties  greater  than
those  which  we  should  thus  escape.  The  reader  who  tries  to  apply
it  to  the  apparitions  quoted  in  my  earlier  groups  will  find  himself  in
a  labyrinth  of  complexity.  Still  more  will  this  be  the  case  in  dealing  with
the  far  fuller  and  more  explicit  motor  communications,  by  automatic
writing  or  speech,  which  we  shall  have  to  discuss  in  the  two  next  chapters.
Unless  the  actual  evidence  be  disallowed  in  a  wholesale  manner,  we  shall
be  forced,  I  think,  to  admit  the  continued  action  of  the  departed  as  a
main  element  in  these  apparitions.

I  do  not  say  as  the  only  element.     I  myself  hold,  as  already  implied,
1  See  also  the  case  of  Mrs.  Pennee  in  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  60.


747]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE     DEAD  69

that  the  thought  and  emotion  of  living  persons  does  largely  intervene,  as
aiding  or  conditioning  the  independent  action  of  the  departed.  I  even
believe  that  it  is  possible  that,  say,  an  intense  fixation  of  my  own  mind  on
a  departed  spirit  may  aid  that  spirit  to  manifest  at  a  special  moment — and
not  even  to  me,  but  to  a  percipient  more  sensitive  than  myself.  In  the
boundless  ocean  of  mind  innumerable  currents  and  tides  shift  with  the
shifting  emotion  of  each  several  soul.

746.  But  now  we  are  confronted  by  another  possible  element  in  these
vaguer  classes  of  apparitions,  harder  to  evaluate  even  than  the  possible
action  of  incarnate  minds.     I  mean  the  possible  results  of  past  mental
action,  which,  for  ought  we  know,  may  persist  in  some  perceptible  manner,
without  fresh  reinforcement,  just  as  the  results  of  past  bodily  action  per-
sist.    This  question  leads  to  the  still  wider  question  of  retrocognition,  and
of  the  relation  of  psychical  phenomena   to  time  generally — a   problem
whose    discussion   cannot  be  attempted   in  this  chapter.     Yet  we  must
remember  that  such  possibilities  exist ;  they  may  explain  certain  pheno-
mena into  which  little  of  fresh  intelligence  seems  to  enter,  as,  for  instance,
the   alleged   persistence,  perhaps  for  years,  of  meaningless  sounds  in  a
particular  room  or  house.

747.  And  since  we  are  coming  now  to  cases  into  which  this  element
of  meaningless  sound  will  enter  largely,  it  seems  right  to  begin  their  dis-
cussion with  a  small  group  of  cases  where  there  is  evidence  for  the  definite
agency  of  some  dying  or  deceased  person  in  connection  with  inarticulate
sounds,  or  I  should  rather  say  of  the  connection  of  some  deceased  person
with  the  sounds;  since  the  best  explanation  may  perhaps  be  that  they
are  sounds  of  welcome — before  or  after  actual  death — corresponding  to
those  apparitions  of  welcome  of  which -we  have  already  had  specimens.     I
give  one  of  these  cases  in  full  in  the  text,  and  a  second  in  747  A.     A
third  has  already  been  cited  in  the  "Peak  in  Darien"  group   (718  A).
The  following  is  taken  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  639.

A  gentleman  who  is  a  master  at  Eton  College  wrote  to  us,  on  February
3rd,  1884  :—

I  enclose  a  copy  of  a  memorandum  made  a  few  days  after  the  event  referred
to.  My  memorandum  has  been  copied  for  me  by  Miss  H.,  whose  name  occurs
in  it.  She  is  my  matron — a  sensible,  middle-aged,  active,  and  experienced
woman.  None  of  the  people  concerned  were  young,  flighty,  or  fanciful.  I
have  the  doctor's  letter;  his  name  is  G.,  and  he  still  resides  here.  Miss  H.
only  wishes  to  add  that  it  must  have  occurred  from  twenty  minutes  to  perhaps
thirty  after  dissolution,  and  she  says  that  she  has  never  heard  anything  like  the
extreme  sweetness  of  the  sound.  H.  E.  L.

The  memorandum  is  as  follows : —

ETON  COLLEGE,  August  6tk,  1881.

I  wish  to  write  down,  before  there  is  time  for  confusion,  the  following  fact,
occurring  on  Thursday  morning,  July  28th,  1881,  when  my  dear  mother  died,


7o  CHAPTER    VII  [747

whom  God  rest  !  After  all  was  over,  Miss  E.  I.,  Eliza  W.,  Dr.  G.,  and  myself
being  in  the  room,  Miss  I.  heard  a  sound  of  "  very  low,  soft  music,  exceedingly
sweet,  as  if  of  three  girls'  voices  passing  by  the  house."  She  described  further
the  sound  as  if  girls  were  going  home  singing,  only  strangely  low  and  sweet;  it
seemed  to  come  from  the  street,  past  the  house  towards  the  College  buildings
(the  road  ends  there  in  a  cul-de-sac},  and  so  passed  away.  She  looked  to  call
my  attention,  and  thought  I  perceived  it.  She  noticed  that  the  doctor  heard
it,  and  that  he  went  to  the  window  to  look  out.  The  window  faces  S.E.  Eliza
W.  being  in  the  room  at  the  same  time  heard  a  sound  of  a  very  low,  sweet
singing.  She  recognised  the  tune  and  words  of  the  hymn,  "  The  strife  is  o'er,
the  battle  done."  Miss  I.  recognised  no  tune,  but  felt  "  that  the  music  sounded,
as  it  were,  familiar."  As  a  very  accomplished  musician,  especially  remarkable
for  her  quick  memory  of  music,  had  words  or  air  been  those  of  a  well-known
hymn,  she  would  almost  certainly  have  remembered  it.  These  two  spoke  to
each  other  when  alone  about  what  they  had  heard.  Miss  I.  gives  the  time  at
about  ten  minutes  after  my  dear  mother  expired.  They  were  then  unaware  of
this  additional  circumstance.  Miss  H.  had  left  the  room,  and  had  summoned
Charlotte  C,  with  whom  she  had  procured  something  required  for  laying  out
the  body.  As  the  two  returned  upstairs  they  heard  a  sound  of  music,  and  both
stopped.  Charlotte  said  to  Miss  H.,  "  What  is  this  ?  "  After  a  pause  she  said,
"  It  must  be  Miss  I.  singing  to  comfort  master."  They  afterwards  entered  the
room,  of  which  the  door  had  been  shut  all  along.  Charlotte  further  described
the  sound  as  very  sweet  and  low,  seeming  to  pass  by  them.  She  felt  as  if,  had
she  only  been  able  to  listen,  she  could  have  distinguished  the  words.  It  did
not  occur  to  her  that  her  description  was  most  incongruous.  She  could  not
listen  attentively,  but  felt  "as  if  rapture  were  all  around  her."  It  was  not
until  afterwards,  when  she  mentioned  to  Eliza  having  heard  Miss  I.  singing,
and  how  strangely  it  sounded,  that  they  found  that  each  had  heard  the  sound.
Miss  H.  described  the  sound  as  very  peculiar  and  sweet,  seeming  to  pass  by
them  and  pass  away,  as  they  both  stopped  on  the  stairs.  All  the  staircase
windows  give  north-west.  I  heard  nothing,  and  I  should  have  given  no  weight
to  a  sound  heard  or  described  by  these  women  in  the  room  after  communicating
with  each  other,  or  by  these  women  out  of  the  room  respectively  ;  but  the  coin-
cidence of  each  party  hearing  it  separately  and  independently  without  previous
communication,  as  well  as  the  matter-of-fact  explanation  suggested  for  it  by
one  of  them,  seeming  to  imply  that  their  thoughts  were  not  dwelling  on  the
supernatural,  added  so  much  weight  to  this  account  that  I  wrote  to  the  doctor,
who  answers:  —  "  I  quite  remember  hearing  the  singing  you  mention;  it  was  so
peculiar  that  I  went  to  the  window  and  looked  out,  but  although  quite  light  I
could  see  no  one,  and  cannot  therefore  account  for  it."  The  time  must  have
been  about  2  A.M.  on  July  28th,  1881.

Miss  I.  writes  :  —

13  PARK  STREET,  WINDSOR,  February  22nd,  1884.

I  will  copy  the  memorandum  which  I  made  in  my  diary  just  after  the  death
of  my  dear  friend  and  connection,  Mrs.  L.


1881.

"Just  after  dear  Mrs.  L.'s  death  between  two  and  three  A.M.,  I  heard  a  most
sweet  and  singular  strain  of  singing  outside  the  windows  ;  it  died  away  after
passing  the  house.  All  in  the  room  heard  it,  and  the  medical  attendant,  who


747]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  71

was  still  with  us,  went  to  the  window  as  I  did,  and  looked  out,  but  there  was
nobody.  It  was  a  bright  and  beautiful  night.  It  was  as  if  several  voices  were
singing  in  perfect  unison  a  most  sweet  melody,  which  died  away  in  the  distance.
Two  persons  had  gone  from  the  room  to  fetch  something,  and  were  coming  up-
stairs at  the  back  of  the  house,  and  heard  the  singing  and  stopped,  saying,
'What  is  that  singing?'  They  could  not  naturally  have  heard  any  sound
outside  the  windows  in  the  front  of  the  house  from  where  they  were.  I  cannot
think  that  any  explanation  can  be  given  to  this — as  I  think — supernatural
singing ;  but  it  would  be  very  interesting  to  me  to  know  what  is  said  by  those
who  have  made  such  matters  a  subject  of  study.  E.  I."

Dr.  G.  writes  in  1884  : —

ETON,  WINDSOR.

I  remember  the  circumstance  perfectly.  Poor  Mrs.  L.  died  on  July  28th,
1 88 1.  I  was  sent  for  at  about  midnight,  and  remained  until  her  death  at  about
2.30  A.M.  As  there  was  no  qualified  nurse  present,  I  remained  and  assisted  the
friends  to  "  lay  out  "  the  body.  Four  or  five  of  us  assisted,  and  at  my  request
the  matron  of  Mr.  L.'s  house  and  a  servant  went  to  the  kitchen  department  to
find  a  shutter  or  flat  board  upon  which  to  place  the  body.  Soon  after  their
departure,  and  whilst  we  were  waiting  for  their  return,  we  distinctly  heard  a
few  bars  of  lovely  music — not  unlike  that  from  an  ^olian  harp — which  seemed
to  fill  the  air  for  a  few  seconds.  I  went  to  the  window  and  looked  out,  thinking
there  must  be  some  one  outside,  but  could  see  no  one,  although  it  was  quite
light  and  clear.  Strangely  enough  those  who  went  to  the  kitchen  heard  the
same  sounds  as  they  were  coming  upstairs,  quite  at  the  other  side  of  the  door.
These  are  the  facts,  and  I  think  it  right  to  tell  you  that  I  have  not  the  slightest
belief  in  the  supernatural,  spiritualism,  &c.,  &c.  J.  W.  G.

The  fact  that  Mr.  L.  did  not  share  the  experience  is  strong  evidence
that  the  sounds  were  not  objectively  caused  by  persons  singing  outside
the  house ;  and  this  is  further  confirmed  by  the  slight  difference  which
there  appears  to  have  been  between  the  impressions  received.

I  have  already  discussed  (Chapter  VI.,  643  and  655)  the  nature  of
these  phantasmal  sounds: — nor  is  it  contrary  to  our  analogies  that  the
person  most  deeply  concerned  in  the  death  should  in  this  case  fail  to
hear  them.  But  the  point  on  which  I  would  here  lay  stress  is  that
phantasmal  sounds — even  non- articulate  sounds — may  be  as  clear  a  mani-
festation of  personality  as  phantasmal  figures.  Among  non-articulate
noises  music  is,  of  course,  the  most  pleasing;  but  sounds,  for  instance,
which  imitate  the  work  of  a  carpenter's  shop,  may  be  equally  human
and  intelligent.  In  some  of  the  cases  of  this  class  we  see  apparent
attempts  of  various  kinds  to  simulate  sounds  such  as  men  and  women
— or  manufactured,  as  opposed  to  natural,  objects — are  accustomed  to
produce  To  claim  this  humanity,  to  indicate  this  intelligence,  seems  the
only  motive  of  sounds  of  this  kind.1

1  See,  however,  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  remarks  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  79-80),
as  to  the  rarity  of  any  indication  of  intelligence  in  such  sounds,  and  the  possibility  of
reading  more  intelligence  into  them  than  they  really  possess.  There  is  now,  of  course,
more  evidence  as  to  these  sounds  than  there  was  at  the  date  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper

(1885).


72  CHAPTER    VII  [748

748.  These  sounds,  in  their  rudimentary  attempt  at  showing  intelli-
gence, are  about  on  a  level  with  the  exploits  of  the  "  Poltergeist,"  where
coals  are  thrown  about,  water  spilt,  and  so  forth.     Physical  phenomena  of
that  type  will  fall  to  be  dealt  with  in  a  later  chapter ;  but  it  is  a  curious
fact  that   Poltergeist   phenomena   should   so    seldom  coincide  with    the
ordinary  phenomena  of  a  haunt.     We  have  one  remarkable  case — to  be
mentioned  later — where    Poltergeist   phenomena  coincide  with  a   death
(868  B)  ;  and  a  few  cases  where  they  are  supposed  to  follow  on  a  death ;
but,  as  a  rule,  where  figures  appear  there  are  no  movements ;  and  where
there  are  movements  no  apparition  is  seen.     If  alleged  Poltergeist  pheno-
mena  are  always   fraudulent,  there   would   be   nothing   to  be  surprised
at  here.     If,  as  I  suspect,  they  are  sometimes  genuine,  their  dissociation
from  visual  hallucinations  may  sometimes  afford  us  a  hint  of  value.

749.  But  after  Poltergeists  have  been  set  aside — after  a  severe  line
has  been  drawn  excluding  all  those  cases  (in  themselves  singular  enough)
where  the  main  phenomena  observed  consist  of  non-articulate  sounds, —
there  remains  a  great   mass  of  evidence  to  haunting, — that  is,  broadly
speaking,  to  the  fact  that  there  are  many  houses  in  which  more  than  one
person  has  independently  seen  phantasmal  figures,  which  usually,  though
not  always,  bear  at  least  some  resemblance  to  each  other.1     The  facts
thus   baldly  stated  are  beyond   dispute.     Their  true  interpretation  is  a
very  difficult  matter.     Mrs.  Sidgwick  gives  four  hypotheses,  which  I  must
quote  at  length  as  the  first  serious  attempt  ever  made  (so  far  as  I  know)  to
collect  and  face  the  difficulties  of  this  problem,  so  often,  but  so  loosely,
discussed  through  all  historical  times.     (From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.
pp.  146-8.)

"  I  will,  therefore,  proceed  briefly  to  state  and  discuss  the  only  four
theories  that  have  occurred  to  me.

"  The  two  which  I  will  take  first  in  order  assume  that  the  apparitions
are  due  to  the  agency  or  presence  of  the  spirits  of  deceased  men.

"There  is  first  the  popular  view,  that  the  apparition  is  something
belonging  to  the  external  world — that,  like  ordinary  matter,  it  occupies  and
moves  through  space,  and  would  be  in  the  room  whether  the  percipient
were  there  to  see  it  or  not.  This  hypothesis  involves  us  in  many  diffi-
culties, of  which  one  serious  one — that  of  accounting  for  the  clothes  of
the  ghost — has  often  been  urged,  and  never,  I  think,  satisfactorily  answered.
Nevertheless,  I  am  bound  to  admit  that  there  is  some  little  evidence

1  Thus  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  even  as  far  back  as  1885  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  142),
writes  .  "  I  can  only  say  that  having  made  every  effort — as  my  paper  will,  I  hope,  have
shown — to  exercise  a  reasonable  scepticism,  I  yet  do  not  feel  equal  to  the  degree  of
unbelief  in  human  testimony  necessary  to  avoid  accepting,  at  least  provisionally,  the  con-
clusion that  there  are,  in  a  certain  sense,  haunted  houses,  i.e.  that  there  are  houses  in
which  similar  quasi-human  apparitions  have  occurred  at  different  times  to  different
inhabitants,  under  circumstances  which  exclude  the  hypothesis  of  suggestion  or
expectation."


749]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE  DEAD  73

tending  to  suggest  this  theory.  For  instance,  in  the  account,1  of  which  I
have  given  an  abstract,  of  the  weeping  lady  who  has  appeared  so  frequently
in  a  certain  house,  the  following  passage  occurs : — '  They  went  after  it
(the  figure)  together  into  the  drawing-room ;  it  then  came  out,  and  went
down  the  aforesaid  passage  (leading  to  the  kitchen),  but  was  the  next
minute  seen  by  another  Miss  [M.]  .  .  .  come  up  the  outside  steps  from  the
kitchen.  On  this  particular  day,  Captain  [M.'s]  married  daughter  happened
to  be  at  an  upstairs  window  .  .  .  and  independently  saw  the  figure  con-
tinue her  course  across  the  lawn  and  into  the  orchard.'  A  considerable
amount  of  clear  evidence  to  the  appearance  of  ghosts  to  independent
observers  in  successive  points  in  space  would  certainly  afford  a  strong
argument  for  their  having  a  definite  relation  to  space ;  but  in  estimating
evidence  of  this  kind  it  would  be  necessary  to  know  how  far  the  observer's
attention  had  been  drawn  to  the  point  in  question.  If  it  had  been  a  real
woman  whom  the  Miss  [M.'s]  were  observing,  we  should  have  inferred,  with
perfect  certainty,  from  our  knowledge  that  she  could  not  be  in  two  places
at  once,  that  she  had  been  successively,  in  a  certain  order,  in  the  places
where  she  was  seen  by  the  three  observers.  If  they  had  noted  the
moments  at  which  they  saw  her,  and  comparing  notes  afterwards,  found
that  according  to  these  notes  they  had  all  seen  her  at  the  same  time,  or  in
some  other  order  to  that  inferred,  we  should  still  feel  absolute  confidence
in  our  inference,  and  should  conclude  that  there  must  be  something  wrong
about  the  watches  or  the  notes.  From  association  of  ideas,  it  would  be
perfectly  natural  to  make  the  same  inference  in  the  case  of  a  ghost  which
looks  exactly  like  a  woman.  But  in  the  case  of  the  ghost  the  inference
would  not  be  legitimate,  because,  unless  the  particular  theory  of  ghosts
which  we  are  discussing  be  true,  there  is  no  reason,  so  far  as  we  know,  why
it  should  not  appear  in  two  or  more  places  at  once.  Hence,  in  the  case
of  the  ghost,  a  well-founded  assurance  that  the  appearances  were  successive
would  require  a  careful  observation  of  the  times,  which,  so  far  as  I  know,
has  never  been  made.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  I  must  dismiss  the
popular  theory  as  not  having,  in  my  opinion,  even  a  prima  fade  ground  for
serious  consideration.

"  The  theory  that  I  will  next  examine  seems  to  me  decidedly  more
plausible,  from  its  analogy  to  the  conclusion  to  which  I  am  brought  by  the
examination  of  the  evidence  for  phantasms  of  the  living.  This  theory  is
that  the  apparition  has  no  real  relation  to  the  external  world,  but  is  a
hallucination  caused  in  some  way  by  some  communication,  without  the
intervention  of  the  senses,  between  the  disembodied  spirit  and  the  per-
cipient, its  form  depending  on  the  mind  either  of  the  spirit  or  of  the
percipient,  or  of  both.  In  the  case  of  haunted  houses,  however,  a  diffi-
culty meets  us  that  we  do  not  encounter,  or  at  least  rarely  encounter,  in
applying  a  similar  hypothesis  to  explain  phantasms  of  the  living,  or  phan-
tasms of  the  dead  other  than  fixed  local  ghosts.  In  these  cases  we  have
1  This  case  is  given  in  751  A.


74  CHAPTER    VII  [749

generally  to  suppose  a  simple  rapport  between  mind  and  mind,  but  in  a
haunted  house  we  have  a  rapport  complicated  by  its  apparent  dependence
on  locality.  It  seems  necessary  to  make  the  improbable  assumption,  that
the  spirit  is  interested  in  an  entirely  special  way  in  a  particular  house
(though  possibly  this  interest  may  be  of  a  subconscious  kind),  and  that  his
interest  in  it  puts  him  into  connection  with  another  mind,  occupied  with
it  in  the  way  that  that  of  a  living  person  actually  there  must  consciously
or  unconsciously  be,  while  he  does  not  get  into  similar  communication
with  the  same,  or  with  other  persons  elsewhere.

"  If,  notwithstanding  these  difficulties,  it  be  true  that  haunting  is  due
in  any  way  to  the  agency  of  deceased  persons,  and  conveys  a  definite  idea
of  them  to  the  percipients  through  the  resemblance  to  them  of  the  appari-
tion, then,  by  patiently  continuing  our  investigations,  we  may  expect,  sooner
or  later,  to  obtain  a  sufficient  amount  of  evidence  to  connect  clearly  the
commencement  of  hauntings  with  the  death  of  particular  persons,  and  to
establish  clearly  the  likeness  of  the  apparition  to  those  persons.  The  fact
that  almost  everybody  is  now  photographed  ought  to  be  of  material  assist-
ance in  obtaining  evidence  of  this  latter  kind.

"  My  third  theory  dispenses  with  the  agency  of  disembodied  spirits,
but  involves  us  in  other  and  perhaps  equally  great  improbabilities.  It  is
that  the  first  appearance  is  a  purely  subjective  hallucination,  and  that  the
subsequent  similar  appearances,  both  to  the  original  percipient  and  to
others,  are  the  result  of  the  first  appearance;  unconscious  expectancy
causing  them  in  the  case  of  the  original  percipient,  and  some  sort  of  tele-
pathic communication  from  the  original  percipient  in  the  case  of  others.
In  fact,  it  assumes  that  a  tendency  to  a  particular  hallucination  is  in  a  way
infectious.  If  this  theory  be  true,  I  should  expect  to  find  that  the  appa-
rently independent  appearances  after  the  first  depended  on  the  percipient's
having  had  some  sort  of  intercourse  with  some  one  who  had  seen  the
ghost  before,  and  that  any  decided  discontinuity  of  occupancy  would  stop
the  haunting.  I  should  also  expect  to  find,  as  we  do  in  one  of  the  cases
I  have  quoted,  that  sometimes  the  supposed  ghost  would  follow  the  family
from  one  abode  to  another,  appearing  to  haunt  them  rather  than  any
particular  house.

"  The  fourth  theory  that  I  shall  mention  is  one  which  I  can  hardly
expect  to  appear  plausible,  and  which,  therefore,  I  only  introduce  because
I  think  that  it  corresponds  best  to  a  certain  part  of  the  evidence  ; — and,  as
I  have  already  said,  considering  the  altogether  tentative  way  in,  which  we
are  inevitably  dealing  with  this  obscure  subject,  it  is  as  well  to  express
definitely  every  hypothesis  which  an  impartial  consideration  of  the  facts
suggests.  It  is  that  there  is  something  in  the  actual  building  itself — some
subtle  physical  influence — which  produces  in  the  brain  that  effect  which,
in  its  turn,  becomes  the  cause  of  a  hallucination.  It  is  certainly  difficult
on  this  hypothesis  alone  to  suppose  that  the  hallucinations  of  different
people  would  be  similar,  but  we  might  account  for  this  by  a  combination


750]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  75

of  this  hypothesis  and  the  last.  The  idea  is  suggested  by  the  case,  of
which  I  have  given  an  abstract,  where  the  haunting  continued  through
more  than  one  occupancy,  but  changed  its  character ;  and  if  there  be  any
truth  in  the  theory,  I  should  expect  in  time  to  obtain  a  good  deal  more
evidence  of  this  kind,  combined  with  evidence  that  the  same  persons  do
not  as  a  rule  encounter  ghosts  elsewhere.  I  should  also  expect  evidence
to  be  forthcoming  supporting  the  popular  idea  that  repairs  and  alterations
of  the  building  sometimes  cause  the  haunting  to  cease."  l

750.  These  hypotheses— none  of  which,  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick  expressly
states  (op.  cit.,  p.  145),  seemed  to  herself  satisfactory — did  nevertheless,  I
think,  comprise  all  the  deductions  which  could  reasonably  be  made  from
the  evidence  as  it  at  that  time  stood.  A  few  modifications,  which  the
experience  of  subsequent  years  has  led  me  to  introduce,  can  hardly  be
said  to  afford  further  explanation,  although  they  state  the  difficulties  in
what  now  seems  to  me  a  more  hopeful  way.

In  the  first  place  then — as  already  explained  in  Chapter  VI. — I  in
some  sense  fuse  into  one  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  two  first  hypotheses  by  my  own
hypothesis  of  actual  presence,  actual  spatial  changes  induced  in  the  mete-
therial,  but  not  in  the  material  world.  I  hold  that  when  the  phantasm  is
discerned  by  more  than  one  person  at  once  (and  on  some  other,  but  not
all  other  occasions)  it  is  actually  effecting  a  change  in  that  portion  of
space  where  it  is  perceived,  although  not,  as  a  rule,  in  the  matter
which  occupies  that  place.  It  is,  therefore,  not  optically  nor  acoustically
perceived ;  perhaps  no  rays  of  light  are  reflected  nor  waves  of  air  set  in
motion ;  but  an  unknown  form  of  supernormal  perception,  not  necessarily
acting  through  the  sensory  end-organs,  comes  into  play.  In  the  next
place,  I  am  inclined  to  lay  stress  on  the  parallel  between  these  narratives
of  haunting  and  those  phantasms  of  the  living  which  I  have  already
classed  as  psychorrhagic.  In  each  case,  as  it  seems  to  me,  there  is  an  in-
voluntary detachment  of  some  element  of  the  spirit,  probably  with  no  know-
ledge thereof  at  the  main  centre  of  consciousness.  Those  "  haunts  by  the
living,"  as  they  may  be  called  (see  Chapter  VI.,  649)  where,  for  instance,
a  man  is  seen  phantasmally  standing  before  his  own  fireplace — seem  to  me
to  be  repeated,  perhaps  more  readily,  after  the  spirit  is  freed  from  the  flesh.


1  In  an  earlier  part  of  this  paper,  I  mentioned  cases  of  haunted  houses  where  the
apparitions  are  various,  and  might  therefore  all  of  them  be  merely  subjective  hallucina-
tions, sometimes,  perhaps,  caused  by  expectancy.  It  is,  of  course,  also  possible  to
explain  these  cases  by  the  hypothesis  we  are  now  discussing.  Another  class  of  cases  is,
perhaps,  worth  mentioning  in  this  connection.  We  have  in  the  collection  two  cases  of
what  was  believed  by  the  narrators  to  be  a  quite  peculiar  feeling  of  discomfort,  in  houses
where  concealed  and  long  since  decomposed  bodies  were  subsequently  found.  Such
feelings  are  seldom  clearly  defined  enough  to  have  much  evidential  value,  for  others,  at
any  rate,  than  the  percipient ;  even  though  mentioned  beforehand,  and  definitely  con-
nected with  the  place  where  the  skeleton  was.  But  if  there  be  really  any  connection
between  the  skeleton  and  the  feeling,  it  may  possibly  be  a  subtle  physical  influence  such
as  I  am  suggesting. — E.  M.  S.


76  CHAPTER    VII  [751

751.  Again,  I  think  that  the  curious  question  as  to  the  influence  of
certain  houses  in  generating  apparitions  may  be  included  under  the  broader
heading  of  Retrocognition.     That  is  to  say,  we  are  not  here  dealing  with  a
special  condition  of  certain  houses,  but  with  a  branch  of  the  wide  problem
as  to  the  relation  of  supernormal  phenomena  to   time.     Manifestations
which  occur  in  haunted  houses  depend,  let  us  say,  on  something  which
has  taken  place  a  long  time  ago.     In  what  way  do  they  depend  on  that
past  event?     Are  they  a  sequel,  or  only  a  residue?     Is  there  fresh  opera-
tion going  on,  or  only  fresh  perception  of  something  already  accomplished  ?
Or  can  we  in  such  a  case  draw  any  real  distinction  between  a  continued
action  and  a  continued  perception  of  a  past  action?     The  closest  parallel,
as  it  seems  to  me,  although  not  at  first  sight  an  obvious  one,  lies  between
these  phenomena  of  haunting,  these   persistent  sights  and  sounds,  and
certain  phenomena  of  crystal-vision  and  of  automatic  script,  which  also
seem  to  depend  somehow  upon  long-past  events, — to  be  their  sequel  or
their  residue.     One  specimen  case  I  give  in  an  Appendix  (751  A),  where
the  connection  of  the  haunting  apparition  with  a  certain  person  long  de-
ceased may  be  maintained  with  more  than  usual  plausibility.     From  that
level  the  traceable  connections  get  weaker  and  weaker  (see  751  B) ,  until
we  come  to  phantasmal  scenes  where  there  is  no  longer  any  even  apparent
claim  to  the  contemporary  agency  of  human  spirits.     Such  a  vision,  for
instance,  as  that  of  a  line  of  spectral  deer  crossing  a  ford,  may  indeed,
if  seen  in  the  same  place  by  several  independent  observers,  be  held  to  be
something  more  than  a  mere  subjective  fancy ;  but  what  in  reality  such  a
picture  signifies  is  a  question  which  brings  us  at  once  to  theories  of  the
permanence  or  simultaneity  of  all  phenomena  in  a  timeless  Universal
Soul.

Such  conceptions,  however  difficult,  are  among  the  highest  to  which
our  mind  can  reach.  Could  we  approach  them  more  nearly,  they  might
deeply  influence  our  view,  even  of  our  own  remote  individual  destiny.
So,  perhaps,  shall  it  some  day  be ;  at  present  we  may  be  well  satisfied  if  we
can  push  our  knowledge  of  that  destiny  one  step  further  than  of  old,  even
just  behind  that  veil  which  has  so  long  hung  impenetrably  before  the  eyes
of  men.

752.  Here,  then,  is  a  natural  place  of  pause  in  our  inquiry.     We  have
worked  as  far  as  we  can  on  the  data  which  we  have  had  under  our  view.
The   sensory  automatisms   with  which  we   have  dealt   in   this   and   the
preceding  chapter  have  proved  to  us,  in  my  view,  the  connection  of  defi-
nite apparitions  with  individual  men,  both  during  bodily  life  and  after
bodily  death.     They  have,  in  short,  proved  by  logical  reasoning  the  exist-
ence and  the  persistence  of  a  spirit  in  man.

But  great  as  this  achievement  is,  it  opens  out  more  problems  than  it
solves ;  it  leaves  us  even  more  eager  than  at  first  for  a  fuller  insight  into
this  new  dim-lit  world.  We  crave  for  some  wider  field  of  induction,  for  some
more  potent  engine  of  analysis.  We  feel  that,  important  though  the  facts


753]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  77

of  phantasmal  appearances  may  be,  they  yet  are  in  a  sense  somewhat
jejune  and  external ;  we  want  to  get  deeper,  to  reach  some  psychological
discussion  not  dependent  on  time-coincidences  nor  on  the  details  of  some
evanescent  observation.  We  instinctively  seek,  in  short,  just  that  know-
ledge which  will  now  be  in  some  measure  afforded  to  us  through  the  study
of  that  wide  range  of  phenomena  which  I  have  classed  together  as  motor
automatisms.

The  line  of  demarcation  indeed  between  sensory  and  motor  automa-
tisms is  by  no  means  distinct.  Neither  class,  to  begin  with,  is  more
veridical,  more  inspired  from  without  than  the  other.  In  neither  case
have  we  any  clear  subjective  criterion  as  to  the  origin  of  the  message ;
whether  it  comes  merely  from  the  automatist's  own  mind,  or  from  minds
of  the  living,  or  from  minds  of  the  departed.  Even  in  mere  external  form,
again,  the  two  groups  are  often  closely  mixed.  It  makes  little  difference
whether  one  sees  words  written  in  a  crystal,  or  writes  them  oneself  with
unknowing  hand.  But  nevertheless  it  must  on  the  whole  be  admitted
that  motor  automatisms  have  thus  far  been,  and  seem  likely  to  continue,
the  more  instructive  of  the  two  classes.  The  suddenness,  the  brevity  of
an  apparition  may  be  actually  an  evidential  aid  if  we  are  simply  estab-
lishing, say,  a  death  coincidence.  But  when  we  have  proceeded  to  a
somewhat  further  stage — when  we  are  looking  for  information  from  the
inside  as  to  the  nature  of  spiritual  operations — then,  as  I  have  said,  the
power  of  question  and  answer,  of  prolonged  scrutiny,  becomes  all-important.
We  certainly  cannot,  I  repeat,  claim  any  more  universal  trustworthiness
for  motor  than  for  sensory  automatisms.  The  proportion  of  misleading  to
veridical  written  messages  is  probably  even  greater  than  the  proportion  of
merely  subjective  to  veridical  apparitions.  But  while  the  apparition  is
gone  in  a  moment,  the  written  or  spoken  matter  may  renew  itself  for
years,  allowing  us  to  test  both  its  authenticity  and  its  truthfulness —
two  different  matters — with  every  touchstone  which  our  leisure  can
devise.

It  must  be,  then,  on  the  study  of  motor  automatisms  that  our  general
view  of  the  metetherial  world  now  opening  to  us  must  mainly  be  based.
Those  longer  colloquies  of  automatic  speech  and  script  will  introduce  us
to  points  of  philosophy  which  fleeting  apparitions  cannot  teach.

753.  And  yet  it  is  by  no  means  needful,  it  would  be  by  no  means  wise,
to  close  even  this  earlier  branch  of  the  inquiry  without  some  few  words  on
its  ethical,  its  religious  aspect.  If  one  hopes  to  influence  opinion,  one
must  realise  where  that  opinion  at  present  stands  which  one  would  fain
lead  into  further  truth.  The  novelties  of  this  book  are  intended  to  work
upon  preconceptions  which  are  ethical  quite  as  much  as  intellectual.  It
would  be  mere  pedantry  to  avoid  all  mention  of  ethical  implications,  when
matters  are  touched  upon  which  the  majority  of  thinking  men  are  agreed
to  regard  from  a  point  of  view  which  is  as  yet  ethical  rather  than  scientific.
If  the  new  facts,  of  such  far-reaching  import,  are  to  enter  deeply  into


78  CHAPTER    VII  [753

the  consciousness  of  our  race,  they  must  be  seen  to  be  morally,  as  well  as
intellectually,  coherent  and  acceptable.

For  the  most  part,  indeed,  such  discussion  may  be  postponed  to  my
concluding  chapter.  But  one  point  already  stands  out  from  the  evidence —
at  once  so  important  and  so  manifest,  that  it  seems  well  to  call  attention
to  it  at  once — as  a  solvent  more  potent  than  any  Lucretius  could  apply
to  human  superstition  and  human  fears.

In  this  long  string  of  narratives,  complex  and  bizarre  though  their
details  may  be,  we  yet  observe  that  the  character  of  the  appearance  varies
in  a  definite  manner  with  their  distinctness  and  individuality.  Haunting
phantoms,  incoherent  and  unintelligent,  may  seem  restless  and  unhappy.
But  as  they  rise  into  definiteness,  intelligence,  individuality,  the  phantoms
rise  also  into  love  and  joy.  I  cannot  recall  one  single  case  of  a  proved
posthumous  combination  of  intelligence  with  wickedness.  Such  evil  as
our  evidence  will  show  us, — we  have  as  yet  hardly  come  across  it  in  this
book — is  scarcely  more  than  monkeyish  mischief,  childish  folly.  In  deal-
ing with  automatic  script,  for  instance,  we  shall  have  to  wonder  whence
come  the  occasional  vulgar  jokes  or  silly  mystifications.  We  shall  discuss
whether  they  are  a  kind  of  dream  of  the  automatist's  own,  or  whether  they
indicate  the  existence  of  unembodied  intelligences  on  the  level  of  the  dog
or  the  ape.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  all  that  world-old  conception  of  Evil
Spirits,  of  malevolent  Powers,  which  has  been  the  basis  of  so  much  of
actual  devil-worship  and  of  so  much  more  of  vague  supernatural  fear ; — all
this  insensibly  melts  from  the  mind  as  we  study  the  evidence  before  us.

Hunc  igitur  terrorem  animi  tenebrasque  necessest
Non  radii  soils  neque  lucida  tela  diei
Discutiant,  sed  naturae  species  ratioque.

Here  surely  is  a  fact  of  no  little  meaning.  Our  narratives  have  been
collected  from  men  and  women  of  many  types,  holding  all  varieties  of
ordinary  opinion.  Yet  the  upshot  of  all  these  narratives  is  to  emphasise
a  point  which  profoundly  differentiates  the  scientific  from  the  superstitious
view  of  spiritual  phenomena.  The  terror  which  shaped  primitive  theologies
still  tinges  for  the  populace  every  hint  of  intercourse  with  disembodied
souls.  The  transmutation  of  savage  fear  into  scientific  curiosity  is  of  the
essence  of  civilisation.  Towards  that  transmutation  each  separate  fragment
of  our  evidence,  with  undesigned  concordance,  indisputably  tends.  In
that  faintly  opening  world  of  spirit  I  can  find  nothing  worse  than  living
men;  I  seem  to  discern  not  an  intensification  but  a  disintegration  of
selfishness,  malevolence,  pride.  And  is  not  this  a  natural  result  of  any
cosmic  moral  evolution?  If  the  selfish  man  (as  Marcus  Antoninus  has
it)  "is  a  kind  of  boil  or  imposthume  upon  the  universe,"  must  not  his
egoistic  impulses  suffer  in  that  wider  world  a  sure,  even  if  a  painful,
decay ;  finding  no  support  or  sustenance  among  those  permanent  forces
which  maintain  the  stream  of  things  ?


754]  PHANTASMS    OF    THE    DEAD  79

754.  I  have  thus  indicated  one  point  of  primary  importance  on  which
the  undesignedly  coincident  testimony  of  hundreds  of  first-hand  narratives
supports  a  conclusion,  not  yet  popularly  accepted,  but  in  harmony  with
the  evolutionary  conceptions  which  rule  our  modern  thought.  Nor  does
this  point  stand  alone.  I  can  find,  indeed,  no  guarantee  of  absolute  and
idle  bliss;  no  triumph  in  any  exclusive  salvation.  But  the  student  of
these  narratives  will,  I  think,  discover  throughout  them  uncontradicted
indications  of  the  persistence  of  Love,  the  growth  of  Joy,  the  willing
submission  to  Law.

These  indications,  no  doubt,  may  seem  weak  and  scattered  in  com-
parison with  the  wholesale,  thorough-going  assertions  of  philosophical
or  religious  creeds.  Their  advantage  is  that  they  occur  incidentally  in  the
course  of  our  independent  and  cumulative  demonstration  of  the  pro-
foundest  cosmical  thesis  which  we  can  at  present  conceive  as  susceptible
of  any  kind  of  scientific  proof.  Cosmical  questions,  indeed,  there  may  be
which  are  in  thtmselves  of  deeper  import  thari  our  own  survival  of  bodily
death.  The  nature  of  the  First  Cause  ;  the  blind  or  the  providential  order-
ing of  the  sum  of  things ; — these  are  problems  vaster  than  any  which  affect
only  the  destinies  of  men.  But  to  whatever  moral  certainty  we  may  attain
on  those  mightiest  questions,  we  can  devise  no  way  whatever  of  bringing
them  to  scientific  test.  They  deal  with  infinity;  and  our  modes  of
investigation  have  grasp  only  on  finite  things.

But  the  question  of  man's  survival  of  death  stands  in  a  position
uniquely  intermediate  between  matters  capable  and  matters  incapable  of
proof.  It  is  in  itself  a  definite  problem,  admitting  of  conceivable  proof
which,  even  if  not  technically  rigorous,  might  amply  satisfy  the  scientific
mind.  And  at  the  same  time  the  conception  which  it  involves  is  in  itself
a  kind  of  avenue  and  inlet  into  infinity.  Could  a  proof  of  our  survival  be
obtained,  it  would  carry  us  deeper -into  the  true  nature  of  the  universe
than  we  should  be  carried  by  an  even  perfect  knowledge  of  the  material
scheme  of  things.  It  would  carry  us  deeper  both  by  achievement  and  by
promise.  The  discovery  that  there  was  a  life  in  man  independent  of  blood
and  brain  would  be  a  cardinal,  a  dominating  fact  in  all  science  and  in  all
philosophy.  And  the  prospect  thus  opened  to  human  knowledge,  in  this
or  in  other  worlds,  would  be  limitless  indeed.

I  do  not  venture  to  suppose  that  the  evidence  set  forth  in  these  volumes,
even  when  considered  in  connection  with  other  evidence  now  accessible
in  our  Proceedings,  will  at  once  convince  the  bulk  of  my  readers  that  the
momentous,  the  epoch-making  discovery  has  been  already  made.  Nay,
I  cannot  even  desire  that  my  own  belief  should  at  once  impose  itself  upon
the  world.  Let  men's  minds  move  in  their  wonted  manner :  great  con-
victions are  sounder  and  firmer  when  they  are  of  gradual  growth.  But
I  do  think  that  to  the  candid  student  it  should  by  this  time  become
manifest  that  the  world-old  problem  can  now  in  reality  be  hopefully
attacked ;  that  there  is  actual  and  imminent  possibility  that  the  all-impor-


8o  CHAPTER    VII  [755

tant  truth  should  at  last  become  indisputably  known ;  and,  therefore,  that
it  befits  all  "  men  of  goodwill "  to  help  toward  this  knowing  with  what
zeal  they  may.

755.  And  this  leads  me  to  conclude  this  chapter  with  one  urgent
word — at  once  of  gratitude  and  of  appeal.  To  the  informants,  to  whose
care  and  kindness  we  owe  the  evidence  collected  in  this  work,  I  must
express  the  cordial  acknowledgment  of  the  wh'ole  group  of  inquirers  to
whom  their  indispensable  aid  has  been  given.  Especial  thanks  are  due
to  those  exceptionally  gifted  persons  who  have  permitted  us  to  witness
and  to  test  their  supernormal  powers.  Viewed  from  the  standpoint  of
our  own  personal  claim,  or  absence  of  claim,  upon  our  informants'  time
and  attention,  the  amount  of  collaboration  offered  to  us  has  been
generous  indeed.

But  another  point  of  view  must  be  considered.  The  research  on
which  my  friends  and  I  are  engaged  is  not  the  mere  hobby  of  a  few
enthusiasts.  Our  opinions,  of  course,  are  individual  and  disputable ;  but
the  facts  presented  here  and  in  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings  are  a  very  dif-
ferent matter.  Neither  the  religious  nor  the  scientific  reader  can  longer
afford  to  ignore  them,  to  pass  them  by.  They  must  be  met,  they  must
be  understood,  unless  Science  and  Religion  alike  are  to  sink  into  mere
obscurantism.  And  the  one  and  only  way  to  understand  them  is  to  learn
more  of  them  ;  to  collect  more  evidence,  to  try  more  experiments,  to  bring
to  bear  on  this  study  a  far  more  potent  effort  of  the  human  mind  than  the
small  group  who  have  thus  far  been  at  work  can  possibly  furnish.  Judged
by  this  standard,  the  needed  help  has  still  to  come.  Never  was  there  a
harvest  so  plenteous  with  labourers  so  few.


800]


CHAPTER   VIII

MOTOR    AUTOMATISM

fAOvov  arvfJL7rv€lv  TO>  Treptc^ovrt  depi,  dAA?  77877  KCU
TW  Trepte^ovTt  Travra  vo€p<3.

—MARCUS  AURELIUS.

800.  In  the  pursuit  of  the  vast  and  inchoate  inquiry  to  which  this
work  is  devoted,  we  are  inevitably  driven  to  push  on  in  several  directions
in  turn,  along  an  irregular  line  of  advance.  And  it  will  be  well  to  look
back  for  a  moment  from  this  point  on  the  paths  by  which  we  have  thus
far  travelled,  to  realise  what  we  have  already  achieved,  and  to  make  a
preliminary  survey  of  the  ground  which  still  lies  before  us.

Our  main  theme,  I  repeat  once  more,  is  the  analysis  of  human  per-
sonality, undertaken  with  the  object  of  showing  that  in  its  depths  there  lie
indications  of  life  and  faculty  not  limited  to  a  planetary  existence,  or  to
this  material  world.

In  the  first  chapter  this  thesis  was  explained,  and  each  chapter  that  has
followed  has  advanced  us  a  step  towards  its  establishment.  In  the  second
chapter  we  found  that  the  old-fashioned  conception  of  human  personality
as  a  unitary  consciousness  known  with  practical  completeness  to  the
waking  self  needed  complete  revision.  We  began  by  tracing  instances  in
which  that  consciousness  was  disintegrated  in  various  ways ;  and  even
among  those  morbid  cases  we  found  traces  of  the  action  of  a  profounder
self.  In  the  third  chapter,  dealing  with  the  phenomena  of  so-called
genius,  we  found  further  indications  of  a  deeper  self  possessing  habitually
a  higher  degree  of  faculty  than  the  superficial  self  can  readily  employ.  In
the  fourth  chapter  certain  phenomena  connected  with  sleep — manifesta-
tions of  supernormal  faculty  both  telsesthetic,  telepathic,  and  premonitory
— led  us  on  to  the  conception  of  a  highly  evolved  subliminal  self  operating
with  unknown  faculty  in  an  unknown  environment.  Nay,  we  have  thus
been  led  to  think  that  this  subliminal  self  represents,  more  fully  than  the
supraliminal  self,  our  central  and  abiding  being,  so  that,  when  the  slumber
of  the  supraliminal  self  leaves  it  comparatively  free,  it  performs  two
functions  of  profound  importance ;  in  the  first  place  restoring  and
rejuvenating  the  bodily  organism  by  drafts  upon  the  energy  of  the  spiritual
world  with  which  it  is  in  communion,  and  in  the  second  place  itself

VOL.    II.  8z  F


82  CHAPTER    VIII  [800

entering  into  closer  connection  with  that  spiritual  world,  apart  from  the
bodily  organism.

Our  fifth  chapter,  on  Hypnotism,  served  as  an  experimental  illustration
of  this  view.  We  there  found  that  we  could,  by  empirical  processes,
deepen  the  sleeping  phase  of  personality,  and  thus  increase  both  the
subliminal  self  s  power  of  renovating  the  organism,  both  in  familiar  and  in
unfamiliar  ways,  and  also  its  power  of  operating  in  a  quasi-independent
manner  in  the  spiritual  world.  In  the  hypnotic  trance,  moreover,  that
hidden  self  was  able  to  come  to  the  surface,  to  speak  and  to  answer ;  to
present  itself  as  an  independent  agent  with  which  we  could  directly  deal.
We  seemed  to  see  here  an  opening  which  might  lead  us  far,  if  we  could
learn  to  intensify  the  trance,  and  at  the  same  time  to  keep  the  subliminal
self  sufficiently  alert  and  near  to  us  to  be  still  able  to  describe  its  experiences
as  they  occur.  If,  then,  my  evidence  had  ended  at  this  point,  I  should
already  have  ventured  to  say,  not  indeed  that  my  far-reaching  theses  had
received  adequate  proof,  but  yet  that  I  had  offered  an  intelligible  and
coherent  hypothesis  which  would  be  found  to  cover  a  multitude  of  pheno-
mena which  at  present  stand  in  the  text-books  with  no  adequate  explana-
tion, as  well  as  a  multitude  of  phenomena  which  the  text-books  altogether
ignore.

But  the  evidence  has  not  in  fact  ended  with  my  fifth  chapter.  On  the
contrary  it  has  from  that  point  taken  a  fresh  start ;  has  become  more
explicitly  and  manifestly  corroborative  of  my  initial  thesis.  For  we  have
gone  on  to  find  that  this  subliminal  self,  whose  more  remarkable  workings
had  thus  far  mainly  been  apparent  in  the  sleeping  phase  of  our  personality,
is  active,  at  any  rate  at  occasional  moments,  during  waking  hours  as  well.
We  proceeded  in  the  sixth  chapter  to  the  study  of  automatisms,  that  is  to
say,  of  manifestations  of  submerged  mental  processes,  which  do  not  enter
into  ordinary  consciousness.  For  convenience'  sake  I  have  divided  these
automatisms  into  sensory  and  motor:  on  the  one  hand;  the  sights  and
sounds  which  we  see  and  hear  through  some  subliminal  faculty  rather  than
through  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  motions
which  we  perform,  the  words  which  we  utter,  moved  in  like  manner  by
some  unknown  impulse  from  the  deeps  within.

The  sensory  automatisms  with  which  the  sixth  chapter  dealt  might  be
regarded,  then,  as  messages  transmitted  from  the  subliminal  to  the  supra-
liminal  self.  Many  of  those  sensory  messages  seemed  plainly  to  have  been
originated  in  the  automatist's  own  mind.  These  illustrated  in  a  new  way
the  coexistence  of  different  series  of  thought  and  expressions  of  thought  in
the  same  organism,  but  did  not  add  to  the  evidence  of  supernormal
operations.  Other  sensory  messages,  however,  there  were  which  the
agency  of  a  second  person  also  was  manifestly  needed  to  explain.  Such
were  the  telepathic  or  coincidental  hallucinations  for  which  so  much
evidence  has  been  adduced.  These  definitely  indicate, — I  should  rather
say  that  they  distinctly  prove^ — a  communication  between  the  minds


801]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  83

living  persons,  independently  of  the  action  of  the  recognised  organs  of
sense.

But  this  was  not  all.  In  the  seventh  chapter  I  went  on  to  show  that
there  was  no  valid  reason  to  suppose  that  bodily  death  put  a  stop  to  the
despatch  of  telepathic  messages.  By  a  long  series  of  narratives  I  endea-
voured to  prove  that  departed  spirits,  perhaps  as  frequently  as  incarnate
spirits,  have  communicated  with  incarnate  spirits, — with  living  persons, —
by  telepathic  sensory  messages  of  the  same  general  type.

Here  then  we  found  a  class  of  evidence — the  ghost-story  of  all  ages —
which  has  always  hung  loosely  present  in  human  belief,  but  which  now  at
last  attains  to  a  real  cogency,  partly  by  the  improvement  in  its  quality  as
well  as  in  its  quantity,  but  largely  also  by  its  juxtaposition  with  all  that
other  telepathic  evidence  with  which  it  is  in  fact  of  kindred  type, — and
which  shows  the  old  ghostly  stories  as  no  supernatural  anomaly,  but  as
merely  an  advanced  term  in  a  progressive  series  of  incidents  dependent  on
some  coherent,  though  as  yet  incomprehensible,  law.

At  this  point,  one  may  broadly  say,  we  reach  the  end  of  the  pheno-
mena whose  existence  is  vaguely  familiar  to  popular  talk.  And  here,  too,
I  might  fairly  claim,  the  evidence  for  my  primary  thesis, — namely,  that
the  analysis  of  man's  personality  reveals  him  as  a  spirit,  surviving  death, —
has  attained  an  amplitude  which  would  justify  the  reader  in  accepting  that
view  as  the  provisional  hypothesis  which  comes  nearest  to  a  comprehensive
co-ordination  of  the  actual  facts.  What  we  have  already  recounted  seems,
indeed,  impossible  to  explain  except  by  supposing  that  our  inner  vision
has  widened  or  deepened  its  purview  so  far  as  to  attain  some  glimpses  of
a  spiritual  world  in  which  the  individualities  of  our  departed  friends  still
actually  subsist.

801.  The  reader,  however,  who  has  followed  me  thus  far  must  be
well  aware  that  a  large  class  of  phenomena,  of  high  importance,  is  still
awaiting  discussion.  Motor  automatisms, — though  less  familiar  to  the
general  public  than  the  phantasms  which  I  have  classed  as  sensory  auto-
matisms,— are  in  fact  even  commoner,  and  even  more  significant.

Motor  automatisms,  as  I  define  them,  are  phenomena  of  very  wide
range.  We  have  encountered  them  already  many  times  in  this  book.  We
met  them  in  the  first  place  in  a  highly  developed  form  in  connection  with
multiplex  personality  in  Chapter  II.  Numerous  instances  were  there
given  of  motor  effects,  initiated  by  secondary  selves  without  the  knowledge
of  the  primary  selves,  or  sometimes  in  spite  of  their  actual  resistance.  All
motor  action  of  a  secondary  self  is  an  automatism  in  this  sense,  in  relation
to  the  primary  self.  And  of  course  we  might  by  analogy  extend  the  use
of  the  word  still  further,  and  might  call  not  only  post- epileptic  acts,  but
;  also  maniacal  acts,  automatic ;  since  they  are  performed  without  the
;  initiation  of  the  presumedly  sane  primary  personality.  Those  degenera-
tive phenomena,  indeed,  are  not  to  be  discussed  in  this  chapter.  Yet  it
will  be  well  to  pause  here  long  enough  to  make  it  clear  to  the  reader  just


84  CHAPTER    VIII  [802

what  motor  automatisms  I  am  about  to  discuss  as  evolutive  phenomena,
and  as  therefore  falling  within  the  scope  of  this  treatise; — and  what
kind  of  relation  they  bear  to  the  dissolutive  motor  phenomena  which
occupy  so  much  larger  a  place  in  popular  knowledge.

802.  In  order  to  meet  this  last  question,  I  must  here  give  more
distinct  formulation  to  a  thesis  which  has  already  suggested  itself  more
than  once  in  dealing  with  special  groups  of  our  phenomena.

//  may  be  expected  that  supernormal  vital  phenomena  will  manifest  them-
selves as  far  as  possible  through  the  same  channels  as  abnormal  or  morbid
vital  phenomena,  when  the  same  centres  or  the  same  synergies  are  involved.

To  illustrate  the  meaning  of  this  theorem,  I  may  refer  to  a  remark
long  ago  made  by  Edmund  Gurney  and  myself  in  dealing  with  "  Phan-
tasms of  the  Living,"  or  veridical  hallucinations,  generated  (as  we  main-
tained) ,  not  by  a  morbid  state  of  the  percipient's  brain,  but  by  a  telepathic
impact  from  an  agent  at  a  distance.  We  observed  that  if  a  hallucination
— a  subjective  image — is  to  be  excited  by  this  distant  energy,  it  will  prob-
ably be  most  readily  excited  in  somewhat  the  same  manner  as  the  morbid
hallucination  which  follows  on  a  cerebral  injury.  We  urged  that  this  is
likely  to  be  the  case — we  showed  ground  for  supposing  that  it  is  the  case —
both  as  regards  the  mode  of  evolution  of  the  phantasm  in  the  percipient's
brain,  and  the  mode  in  which  it  seems  to  present  itself  to  his  senses.

And  here  I  should  wish  to  give  a  much  wider  generality  to  this  prin-
ciple, and  to  argue  that  if  there  be  within  us  a  secondary  self  aiming  at
manifestation  by  physiological  means,  it  seems  probable  that  its  readiest
path  of  externalisation — its  readiest  outlet  of  visible  action, — may  often  lie
along  some  track  which  has  already  been  shown  to  be  a  line  of  low
resistance  by  the  disintegrating  processes  of  disease.  Or,  varying  the  meta-
phor, we  may  anticipate  that  the  partition  of  the  primary  and  the  secondary
self  will  lie  along  some  plane  of  cleavage  which  the  morbid  dissociations  of
our  psychical  synergies  have  already  shown  themselves  disposed  to  follow.
If  epilepsy,  madness,  &c.,  tend  to  split  up  our  faculties  in  certain  ways,
automatism  is  likely  to  split  them  up  in  ways  somewhat  resembling  these.

This  argument  might  be  illustrated  by  various  physical  analogies.  Let
us  choose  as  a  simple  one  a  musical  instrument  of  limited  range.  The
consummate  musician  can  get  effects  out  of  this  instrument  which  the
ordinary  player  cannot  rival.  But  he  does  this  at  the  risk  of  evoking
occasional  sounds  such  as  only  the  most  blundering  of  beginners  is  wont
to  produce.

Savages  take  epilepsy  for  inspiration.  They  are  thus  far  right,  that
epilepsy  is  (so  to  speak)  the  temporary  destruction  of  the  personality  in
consequence  of  its  own  instability,  whereas  inspiration  was  assumed  to  be
the  temporary  subjugation  of  the  personality  by  invasion  from  without.  The
one  case  (if  I  may  use  the  metaphor)  was  a  spontaneous  combustion ;  the
other  an  enkindlement  by  heavenly  fire.  In  less  metaphorical  language,
explosion  and  exhaustion  of  the  highest  nervous  centres  must  have  some-


803]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  85

what  the  same  look,  whatever  may  have  been  the  nature  of  the  stimulus
which  overcame  their  stability.

803.  But  in  what  way  then,  it  will  be  asked,  do  you  distinguish  the
supernormal  from  the  merely  abnormal?  Why  assume  that  in  these  aber-
rant states  there  is  anything  besides  hysteria,  besides  epilepsy,  besides
insanity  ?

The  answer  to  this  question  has  virtually  been  given  in  previous  chap-
ters of  this  book.  The  reader  is  already  accustomed  to  the  point  of  view
which  regards  all  psychical  as  well  as  all  physiological  activities  as  neces-
sarily either  developmental  or  degenerative,  tending  to  evolution  or  to  dis-
solution. And  now,  whilst  altogether  waiving  any  teleological  speculation,
I  will  ask  him  hypothetically  to  suppose  that  an  evolutionary  nisus,  some-
thing which  we  may  represent  as  an  effort  towards  self-development,  self-
adaptation,  self-renewal,  is  discernible  especially  on  the  psychical  side  of
at  any  rate  the  higher  forms  of  life.  Our  question,  Supernormal  or  abnor-
mal ? — may  then  be  phrased,  Evolutive  or  dissolutive  ?  And  in  studying
each  psychical  phenomenon  in  turn  we  shall  have  to  inquire  whether  it
indicates  a  mere  degeneration  of  powers  already  acquired,  or,  on  the  other
hand,  the  "promise  and  potency,"  if  not  the  actual  possession,  of  powers
as  yet  unrecognised  or  unknown.

Thus,  for  instance,  Telepathy  is  surely  a  step  in  evolution}-  To  learn
the  thoughts  of  other  minds  without  the  mediation  of  the  special  senses,
manifestly  indicates  the  possibility  of  a  vast  extension  of  psychical  powers.
And  any  knowledge  which  we  can  amass  as  to  the  conditions  under  which
telepathic  action  takes  place,  will  form  a  valuable  starting-point  for  an  in-
quiry as  to  the  evolutive  or  dissolutive  character  of  unfamiliar  psychical
states.2

For  example,  we  may  learn  from  our  knowledge  of  telepathy  that  the
superficial  aspect  of  certain  stages  of  psychical  evolution,  like  the  super-

1  To  avoid  misconception,  I  may  point  out  that  this  view  in  no  way  negatives  the
possibility  that  telepathy  (or  its  correlative  telergy)  may  be  in  some  of  its  aspects  com-
moner, or  more  powerful,  among  savages  than  among  ourselves.   Evolutionary  processes
are  not  necessarily  continuotts.     The  acquirement  by  our  lowly-organised  ancestors  of  the
sense  of  smell  (for  instance)  was  a  step  in  evolution.     But  the  sense  of  smell  probably
reached  its  highest  energy  in  races  earlier  than  man  ;  and  it  has  perceptibly  declined
even  in  the  short  space  which  separates  civilised  man  from  existing  savages.     Yet  if,
with  some  change  in  our  environment,  the  sense  of  smell  again  became  useful,  and  we
reacquired  it,  this  would  be  none  the  less  an  evolutionary  process  because  the  evolution
had  been  interrupted.

2  I  do  not  wish  to  assert  that  all  unfamiliar  psychical  states  are  necessarily  evolutive
or  dissolutive  in  any  assignable  manner.    I  should  prefer  to  suppose  that  there  are  states
which  may  better  be  styled  allotropic  ; — modifications  of  the  arrangements  of  nervous
elements   on  which  our  conscious  identity  depends,  but  with  no  more  conspicuous
superiority  of  the  one  state  over  the  other  than  (for  instance)  charcoal  possesses  over
graphite  or  graphite  over  charcoal.     But  there  may  also  be  states  in  which  the  (meta-
phorical) carbon  becomes  diamond ; — with  so  much  at  least  of  advance  on  previous  states
as  is  involved  in  the  substitution  of  the  crystalline  for  the  amorphous  structure.


86  CHAPTER    VIII  [804

ficial  aspect  of  certain  stages  of  physiological  evolution,  may  resemble  mere
inhibition,  or  mere  perturbation.  But  the  inhibition  may  involve  latent
dynamogeny,  and  the  perturbation  may  mask  evolution.  The  hypnotised
subject  may  pass  through  a  lethargic  stage  before  he  wakes  into  a  state  in
which  he  has  gained  community  of  sensation  with  the  operator ;  somewhat
as  the  silkworm  (to  use  the  oldest  and  the  most  suggestive  of  all  illustra-
tions) passes  through  the  apparent  torpor  of  the  cocoon-stage  before  evolv-
ing into  the  moth.  Again,  the  automatist's  hand  (as  we  shall  presently  see)
is  apt  to  pass  through  a  stage  of  inco-ordinated  movements,  which  might
almost  be  taken  for  choreic,  before  it  acquires  the  power  of  ready  and  in-
telligent writing.  Similarly  the  development,  for  instance,  of  a  tooth  may
be  preceded  by  a  stage  of  indefinite  aching,  which  might  be  ascribed  to
the  formation  of  an  abscess,  did  not  the  new  tooth  ultimately  show  itself.
And  still  more  striking  cases  of  a  perturbation  which  masks  evolution  might
be  drawn  from  the  history  of  the  human  organism  as  it  develops  into  its
own  maturity,  or  prepares  for  the  appearance  of  the  fresh  human  organism
which  is  to  succeed  it.

Analogy,  therefore,  both  physiological  and  psychical,  warns  us  not  to
conclude  that  any  given  psychosis  is  merely  degenerative  until  we  have
examined  its  results  closely  enough  to  satisfy  ourselves  whether  they  tend
to  bring  about  any  enlargement  of  human  powers,  to  open  any  new  inlet
to  the  reception  of  objective  truth.  If  such  there  prove  to  be,  then,  with
whatever  morbid  activities  the  psychosis  may  have  been  intertwined,  it
contains  indications  of  an  evolutionary  nisus  as  well.

804.  These  remarks,  I  hope,  may  have  sufficiently  cleared  the
ground  to  admit  of  our  starting  afresh  on  the  consideration  of  such  motor
automatisms  as  are  at  any  rate  not  morbid  in  their  effect  on  the  organ-
ism, and  which  I  now  have  to  show  to  be  evolutive  in  character.  I
maintain  that  we  have  no  valid  ground  for  assuming  that  the  movements
which  are  not  due  to  our  conscious  will  must  be  less  important,  and
less  significant,  than  those  that  are.  We  observe,  of  course,  that  in  the
organic  region  the  movements  which  are  not  due  to  conscious  will  are
really  the  most  important  of  all,  though  the  voluntary  movements  by
which  a  man  seeks  food  and  protects  himself  against  enemies  are  also
of  great  practical  importance — he  must  first  live  and  multiply  if  he
is  to  learn  and  know.  But  we  must  guard  against  confusing  import-
ance for  immediate  practical  life  with  importance  for  science — on  which
even  practical  life  ultimately  depends.  As  soon  as  the  task  of  living  and
multiplying  is  no  longer  all- engrossing,  we  begin  to  change  our  relative
estimate  of  values,  and  to  find  that  it  is  not  the  broad  and  obvious
phenomena,  but  the  residual  and  elusive  phenomena,  which  are  oftenest
likely  to  introduce  us  to  new  avenues  of  knowledge.  I  wish  to  persuade
my  readers  that  this  is  quite  as  truly  the  case  in  psychology  as  in  physics.

I  may  say  at  once  that  some  of  the  automatic  movements  with  which
we  shall  have  to  deal — certain  utterances  and  writings  given  in  a  state  of


805]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  87

"  possession  " — must  rank,  in  my  view,  among  the  most  important  pheno-
mena yet  observed  by  man.  For  their  proper  study  we  need  far  more  of
introductory  matter  than  in  these  volumes  I  can  possibly  give.  I  shall  at
any  rate,  therefore,  make  no  apology  for  the  ambages  et  longa  exorsa — the
long  and  tortuous  approach — through  which  my  reader,  I  fear,  must  follow
me,  if  he  is  at  last  to  discover  any  connection  and  congruity  between  those
trance-messages  and  the  structure  of  his  own  previous  knowledge.  I  shall
at  any  rate  not  attempt  to  conceal  my  own  ignorances  and  uncertainties ;
but  shall  grope  about,  so  to  say,  before  my  reader's  eyes,  indicating  again
and  again  where  our  insight  at  present  ends,  and  repeating  again  and
again,  from  different  points  of  view,  and  with  fresh  illustrations,  those  im-
perfect, yet  important,  fragments  of  knowledge  which  I  hold  that  we  have
in  fact  attained.

805.  As  a  first  step  in  our  analysis,  we  may  point  out  certain  main
characters  which  unite  in  a  true  class  all  the  automatisms  which  we  are
here  considering — greatly  though  these  may  differ  among  themselves  in
external  form.

In  the  first  place,  then,  our  automatisms  are  independent  phenomena  ;
they  are  what  the  physician  calls  idiognomonic.  That  is  to  say,  they  are  not
merely  symptomatic  of  some  other  affection,  or  incidental  to  some  pro-
founder  change.  The  mere  fact,  for  instance,  that  a  man  writes  messages
which  he  does  not  consciously  originate  will  not,  when  taken  alone,  prove
anything  beyond  this  fact  itself  as  to  the  writer's  condition.  He  may  be
perfectly  sane,  in  normal  health,  and  with  nothing  unusual  observable
about  him.  This  characteristic — provable  by  actual  observation  and
experiment — distinguishes  our  automatisms  from  various  seemingly  kindred
phenomena.  Thus  we  may  have  to  include  in  our  class  the  occasional
automatic  utterance  of  words  or  sentences.  But  the  continuous  exhausting
vociferation  of  acute  mania  does  not  fall  within  our  province ;  for  those
shouts  are  merely  symptomatic ;  nor,  again,  does  the  cri  hydrocephalique
(or  spontaneous  meaningless  noise  which  sometimes  accompanies  water  on
the  brain)  ;  for  that,  too,  is  no  independent  phenomenon,  but  the  direct
consequence  of  a  definite  lesion.  Furthermore,  we  shall  have  to  include
in  our  class  certain  simple  movements  of  the  hands,  co-ordinated  into  the
act  of  writing.  But  here,  also,  our  definition  will  lead  us  to  exclude
choreic  movements,  which  are  merely  symptomatic  of  nervous  mal-nutri-
tion  :  or  which  we  may,  if  we  choose,  call  idiopathic,  as  constituting  an
independent  malady.  But  our  automatisms  are  not  idiopathic  but  idio-
gnomonic ;  they  may  indeed  be  associated  with  or  facilitated  by  certain
states  of  the.  organism,  but  they  are  neither  a  symptom  of  any  other  malady,
nor  are  they  a  malady  in  themselves.

Agreeing,  then,  that  our  peculiar  class  consists  of  automatisms  which  are
idiognomonic, — whose  existence  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  existence
of  some  profounder  affection  already  known  as  producing  them, — we  have
still  to  look  for  some  more  positive  bond  of  connection  between  them


88  CHAPTER    VIII  [806

some  quality  common  to  all  of  them,  and  which  makes  them  worth  our
prolonged  investigation.

This  we  shall  find  in  the  fact  that  they  are  all  of  them  message-bearing
or  nunciative  automatisms.  I  do  not,  of  course,  mean  that  they  all  of
them  bring  messages  from  sources  external  to  the  automatist's  own  mind.
In  some  cases  they  probably  do  this ;  but  as  a  rule  the  so-called  messages
seem  more  probably  to  originate  within  the  automatist's  own  personality.
Why,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  do  I  call  them  messages  ?  We  do  not  usually
speak  of  a  man  as  sending  a  message  to  himself.  The  answer  to  this
question  involves,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  the  profoundest  conception
of  these  automatisms  to  which  we  can  as  yet  attain.  They  present  them-
selves to  us  as  messages  communicated  from  one  stratum  to  another
stratum  of  the  same  personality.  Originating  in  some  deeper  zone  of  a
man's  being,  they  float  up  into  superficial  consciousness  as  deeds,  visions,
words,  ready-made  and  full-blown,  without  any  accompanying  perception
of  the  elaborative  process  which  has  made  them  what  they  are.

806.  Can  we  then  (we  may  next  ask)  in  any  way  predict  the  possible
range  of  these  motor  automatisms  ?  Have  we  any  limit  assignable  a  priori,
outside  which  it  would  be  useless  to  look  for  any  externalisation  of  an
impulse  emanating  from  sub-conscious  strata  of  our  being?

The  answer  to  this  must  be  that  no  such  limit  can  be  with  any  con-
fidence suggested.  We  have  not  yet  learnt  with  any  distinctness  even
how  far  the  wave  from  a  conscwusfy-perceived  stimulus  will  spread,  or  what
changes  its  motion  will  assume.  Still  less  can  we  predict  the  limitations
which  the  resistance  of  the  organism  will  impose  on  the  radiation  of  a
stimulus  originated  within  itself.  We  are  learning  to  consider  the  human
organism  as  a  practically  infinite  complex  of  interacting  vibrations ;  and
each  year  adds  many  new  facts  to  our  knowledge  of  the  various  trans-
formations which  these  vibrations  may  undergo,  and  of  the  unexpected
artifices  by  which  we  may  learn  to  cognise  some  stimulus  which  is  not
directly  felt.

A  few  concrete  instances  will  make  my  meaning  plainer.  And  my
first  example  shall  be  taken  from  those  experiments  in  muscle-reading—
less  correctly  termed  mind-reading — with  which  the  readers  of  these
Proceedings  are  already  familiar.  Let  us  suppose  that  I  am  to  hide  a  pin,
and  that  some  accomplished  muscle-reader  is  to  take  my  hand  and  find
the  pin  by  noting  my  muscular  indications.1  I  first  hide  the  pin  in  the
hearth-rug ;  then  I  change  my  mind  and  hide  it  in  the  bookshelf.  I  fix
my  mind  on  the  bookshelf,  but  resolve  to  make  no  guiding  movement.
The  muscle-reader  takes  my  hand,  leads  me  first  to  the  rug,  then  to  the
bookshelf,  and  finds  the  pin.  Now,  what  has  happened  in  this  case?
What  movements  have  I  made?

Firstly,  I  have  made  no  voluntary  movement ;  and  secondly,  I  have
made  no  conscious  involuntary  movement.     But,  thirdly,  I  have  made  an
1  See,  for  instance,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  i.  p.  291.


807]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  89

unconscious  involuntary  movement  which  directly  depended  on  conscious
ideation.  I  strongly  thought  of  the  bookshelf,  and  when  the  bookshelf
was  reached  in  our  vague  career  about  the  room  I  made  a  movement —
say  rather  a  tremor  occurred — in  my  hand,  which,  although  beyond  both
my  knowledge  and  my  control,  was  enough  to  supply  to  the  muscle-
reader's  delicate  sensibility  all  the  indication  required.  All  this  is  now
admitted,  and,  in  a  sense,  understood ;  we  formulate  it  by  saying  that  my
conscious  ideation  contained  a  motor  element;  and  that  this  motor
element,  though  inhibited  from  any  conscious  manifestation,  did  yet
inevitably  externalise  itself  in  a  peripheral  tremor.

But,  fourthly,  something  more  than  this  has  clearly  taken  place.
Before  the  muscle-reader  stopped  at  the  bookshelf  he  stopped  at  the  rug.
I  was  no  longer  consciously  thinking  of  the  rug ;  but  the  idea  of  the  pin
in  the  rug  must  still  have  been  reverberating,  so  to  say,  in  my  sub-con-
scious region  •  and  this  unconscious  memory,  this  unnoted  reverberation,
revealed  itself  in  a  peripheral  tremor  nearly  as  distinct  as  that  which
(when  the  bookshelf  was  reached)  corresponded  to  the  strain  of  conscious
thought.

This  tremor,  then,  was  in  a  certain  sense  a  message-bearing  auto-
matism. It  was  the  externalisation  of  an  idea  which,  once  conscious,  had
become  unconscious,  though  in  the  slightest  conceivable  degree — namely,
by  a  mere  slight  escape  from  the  field  of  direct  attention.

807.  Having,  then,  considered  an  instance  where  the  automatic
message  passes  only  between  two  closely-adjacent  strata  of  consciousness,
externalising  an  impulse  derived  from  an  idea  which  has  only  recently
sunk  out  of  consciousness  and  which  could  easily  be  summoned  back
again ; — let  us  find  our  next  illustration  in  a  case  where  the  line  of
demarcation  between  the  strata  of  consciousness  through  which  the
automatic  message  pierces  is  distinct  and  impassable  by  any  effort
of  will.

Let  us  take  a  case  of  post-hypnotic  suggestion  — say,  for  instance,  an
experiment  of  Edmund  Gurney's  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  319).
The  subject  had  been  trained  to  write  with  planchette,  after  he  had  been
awakened,  the  statements  which  had  been  made  to  him  when  in  the
hypnotic  trance.  He  wrote  the  desired  words,  or  something  like  them,
but  while  he  wrote  them  his  waking  self  was  entirely  unaware  of  what  his
hand  was  writing.  Thus,  having  been  told  in  the  trance,  "  It  has  begun
snowing  again,"  he  wrote  after  waking,  "  It  begun  snowing,"  while  he  read
aloud,  with  waking  intelligence,  from  a  book  of  stories,  and  was  quite
unconscious  of  what  his  hand  (placed  on  a  planchette  behind  a  screen)
was  at  the  same  time  writing.

Here  we  have  an  automatic  message  of  traceable  origin ;  a  message
implanted  in  the  hypnotic  stratum  of  the  subject's  self,  and  cropping  up
—like  a  fault — in  the  waking  stratum, — externalised  in  automatic  move-
ments which  the  waking  self  could  neither  predict  nor  guide.


90  CHAPTER    VIII

808.  Yet  once  more.  In  the  discussion  which  will  follow  we  shall
have  various  instances  of  the  transformation  (as  I  shall  regard  it)  of
psychical  shock  into  definite  muscular  energy  of  apparently  a  quite  alien
kind.  Such  transformations  of  so-called  psychical  into  physical  force —
of  will  into  motion — do  of  course  perpetually  occur  within  us.  But  the
nature  of  these  is  commonly  much  obscured  by  the  problem  as  to  the
true  efficacy  of  the  will ;  and  it  seems  desirable  to  cite  one  or  two
examples  of  such  transmutation  where  the  process  is  what  we  call  auto-
matic, and  we  seem  to  detect  the  simple  muscular  correlative — the  motor
equivalent — to  some  emotion  or  sensation  which  contains  no  obvious
motor  element  at  all.

An  easy,  though  a  rough,  way  of  testing  transmutations  of  this  kind
is  afforded  by  the  dynamometer.  It  is  necessary  first  to  discover  the
amount  of  pressure  which  the  subject  of  experiment  can  exert  on  the
dynamometer,  by  squeezing  it  with  all  the  force  at  his  command,  in  his
ordinary  condition.  After  he  has  had  a  little  practice  his  highest  attain-
able force  of  squeeze  becomes  nearly  constant ;  and  it  is  then  possible  to
subject  him  to  various  stimuli,  and  to  measure  the  degree  of  response ;
that  is,  the  degree  in  which  his  squeeze  becomes  either  more  or  less  power-
ful while  the  stimulus  is  applied.  The  experiments  are,  in  fact,  a  sort  of
elaboration  of  a  familiar  phenomenon.  I  take  a  child  to  a  circus ;  he  sits
by  me  holding  my  hand ;  there  is  a  discharge  of  musketry  and  his  grip
tightens.  Now  in  this  case  we  should  call  the  child's  tightened  grip
automatic.  But  suppose  that,  instead  of  merely  holding  my  hand,  he  is
trying  with  all  his  might  to  squeeze  the  dynamometer,  and  that  the  sudden
excitation  enables  him  to  squeeze  it  harder — are  we  then  to  describe  that
extra  squeeze  as  automatic?  or  as  voluntary?

However  phrased,  it  is  the  fact  (as  amply  established  by  M.  Fe"r6
and  others1)  that  excitations  of  almost  any  kind — whether  sudden  and
startling  or  agreeable  and  prolonged — do  tend  to  increase  the  subject's
dynamometrical  power.  In  the  first  place,  and  this  is  in  itself  an  impor-
tant fact,  the  average  of  squeezing-power  is  found  to  be  greater  among
educated  students  than  among  robust  labouring  men,  thus  showing  that  it
is  not  so  much  developed  muscle  as  active  brain  which  renders  possible  a
sudden  concentration  of  muscular  force.  But  more  than  this ;  M.  F£r£
finds  that  with  himself  and  his  friends  the  mere  listening  to  an  interesting
lecture,  or  the  mere  stress  of  thought  in  solitude,  or  still  more  the  act  of
writing  or  of  speech,  produces  a  decided  increase  of  strength  in  the  grip,
especially  of  the  right  hand.  The  same  effect  of  dynamogeny  is  produced
with  hypnotic  subjects,  by  musical  sounds,  by  coloured  light,  especially  red
light,  and  even  by  a  hallucinatory  suggestion  of  red  light.  "  All  our
sensations,"  says  M.  Fer£  in  conclusion,  "are  accompanied  by  a  develop-
ment of  potential  energy,  which  passes  into  a  kinetic  state,  and  externalises

1  Sensation  et  Mouvement,  par  Ch.  Fere.     Paris  :  Alcan,  1887.


809]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  91

itself  in  motor  manifestations  which  even  so  rough  a  method  as  dynamo-
metry  is  able  to  observe  and  record."

I  would  beg  the  reader  to  keep  these  words  in  mind.  We  shall  pre-
sently find  that  a  method  apparently  even  rougher  than  dynamographic
tracings  may  be  able  to  interpret,  with  far  greater  delicacy,  the  automatic
tremors  which  are  coursing  to  and  fro  within  us.  If  once  we  can  get  a
spy  into  the  citadel  of  our  own  being,  his  rudest  signalling  will  tell  us
more  than  our  subtlest  inferences  from  outside  of  what  is  being  planned
and  done  within.

809.  Further  illustrations  might  easily  be  here  given.  But  for  brevity's
sake  I  pass  on  to  the  automatic  messages  which  form  our  special  subject,
trusting  that  the  specimens  above  given  of  motor  externalisations  of  unex-
pected kinds  may  have  led  the  reader  to  feel  that  experiment  alone  can
tell  us  how  far  such  delicate  motor  indications  may  in  fact  be  traceable ;
how  much  of  information  may  pass  from  one  stratum  of  our  consciousness
to  another,  and  in  a  form  how  strangely  transmuted.  And  having  now  to
deal  with  what  I  define  as  messages  conveyed  by  one  stratum  in  man  to
another  stratum,  I  must  first  consider  in  what  general  ways  human  mes-
sages can  be  conveyed.  Writing  and  speech  have  become  predominant
in  the  intercourse  of  civilised  men,  and  it  is  to  writing  and  speech  that  we
look  with  most  interest  among  the  communications  of  the  subliminal
self.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  the  subliminal  self  will  always  have
such  complex  methods  at  its  command.  We  have  seen  already  that  it
often  finds  it  hard  to  manage  the  delicate  co-ordinations  of  muscular  move-
ment required  for  writing, — that  the  attempt  at  automatic  script  ends  in  a
thump  and  a  scrawl.  Does  the  history  of  animal  communication  suggest
to  us  to  try  any  easier,  more  rudimentary  plan  ?

The  first  communications  of  animals  are  by  gesture ;  and  even  when
sound  is  added  this  is  at  first  only  a  specialised  kind  of  gesture.  The
higher  animals  discriminate  their  calls ;  man  develops  speech ;  and  the
message-giving  impulse  parts  into  the  main  channels  of  movement — move-
ment of  the  throat  and  movement  of  the  hand.  The  hand-gestures —
"  high  as  heaven,"  "  horned  like  a  stag,"  and  so  forth — develop  in  their
turn  into  the  rude  drawing  of  objects;  and  this  graphic  impulse  again
divides  along  two  channels.  On  the  one  hand  it  develops  into  the
pictorial  and  plastic  arts,  conveying  its  messages  through  what  may  be
termed  a  direct,  as  opposed  to  an  arbitrary  symbolism.  On  the  other
hand  it  assimilates  itself  to  the  laws  of  speech,  it  becomes  ideographic ;
and  gradually  merging  direct  into  arbitrary  symbolism  it  becomes  alpha-
betical script,  arithmetic,  algebra,  telegraphy.

But  the  word  telegraphy  suggests  to  us  that  in  recent  times  a  fresh
beginning  has  had  to  be  made  in  human  communication;  modes  have
had  to  be  invented  by  which  a  civilised  man,  disposing  only  of  a  few
simple  movements, — the  deflections  of  the  indicating  needle, — might  attain
to  the  precision  of  grammatical  speech.  This,  as  we  know,  has  been  easily


92  CHAPTER    VIII  [809

effected;  and  the  mere  repetition  of  one  or  two  simple  movements  at
varied  intervals  suffices,  to  eye  or  ear,  for  all  the  purposes  of  an  alphabet.

Now  we  shall  find,  perhaps,  among  the  communications  of  the  sub-
liminal self  parallels  to  all  these  varying  modes  of  communication.  But
since  the  subliminal  self,  like  the  telegraphist,  begins  its  effort  with  full
knowledge,  indeed,  of  the  alphabet,  but  with  only  weak  and  rude  command
over  our  muscular  adjustments,  it  is  a  priori  likely  that  its  easiest  mode
of  communication  will  be  through  a  repetition  of  simple  movements,  so
arranged  as  to  correspond  to  letters  of  the  alphabet.

And  here,  I  think,  we  have  attained  to  a  conception  of  the  mysterious
and  much-derided  phenomenon  of  "  table-tilting  "  which  enables  us  to
correlate  it  with  known  phenomena,  and  to  start  at  least  from  an  intelligible
basis,  and  on  a  definite  line  of  inquiry.

A  few  words  are  needed  to  explain  what  are  the  verifiable  phenomena,
and  the  less  verifiable  hypotheses,  connoted  by  such  words  as  "  table-
turning,"  "spirit-rapping,"  and  the  like.

If  one  or  more  persons  of  a  special  type, — at  present  definable  only
by  the  question-begging  and  barbarous  term  "  mediumistic," — remain
quietly  for  some  time  with  hands  in  contact  with  some  easily  movable
object,  and  desiring  its  movement,  that  object  will  sometimes  begin  to
move.  If,  further,  they  desire  it  to  indicate  letters  of  the  alphabet  by  its
movements, — as  by  tilting  once  for  #,  twice  for  ^,  &c.,  it  will  often  do  so,
and  answers  unexpected  by  any  one  present  will  be  obtained.

Thus  far,  whatever  our  interpretation,  we  are  in  the  region  of  easily
reproducible  facts,  which  many  of  my  readers  may  confirm  for  themselves
if  they  please.

But  beyond  the  simple  movements — or  table-turning — and  the  intelli-
gible responses — or  table-tilting — both  of  which  are  at  least  primd  fade
physically  explicable  by  the  sitters'  unconscious  pressure,  without  postu-
lating any  unknown  physical  force  at  all, — it  is  alleged  by  many  persons
that  further  physical  phenomena  occur ;  namely,  that  the  table  moves  in  a
direction,  or  with  a  violence,  which  no  unconscious  pressure  can  explain ;
and  also  that  percussive  sounds  or  "  raps  "  occur,  which  no  unconscious
action,  or  indeed  no  agency  known  to  us,  could  produce.  These  raps
communicate  messages  like  the  tilts,  and  it  is  to  them  that  the  name  of
"  spirit-rapping  "  is  properly  given.  But  spiritualists  generally  draw  little
distinction  between  these  four  phenomena — mere  table-turning,  responsive
table-tilting,  movements  of  inexplicable  vehemence,  and  responsive  raps —
attributing  all  alike  to  the  agency  of  departed  spirits  of  men  and  women,
or  at  any  rate  to  disembodied  intelligences  of  some  kind  or  other.

I  am  not  at  present  discussing  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,
and  I  shall  therefore  leave  on  one  side  all  the  alleged  movements  and
noises  of  this  kind  for  which  unconscious  pressure  will  not  account.  I  do
not  prejudge  the  question  as  to  their  real  occurrence ;  but  assuming  that
such  disturbances  of  the  physical  order  do  occur,  there  is  at  least  no  primd,


810]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  93

facie  need  to  refer  them  to  disembodied  spirits.  If  a  table  moves  when
no  one  is  touching  it,  this  is  not  obviously  more  likely  to  have  been
effected  by  my  deceased  grandfather  than  by  myself.  We  cannot  tell  how
/  could  move  it ;  but  then  we  cannot  tell  how  he  could  move  it  either.
The  question  must  be  argued  on  its  merits  in  each  case ;  and  our  present
argument  is  not  therefore  vitiated  by  our  postponement  of  this  further
problem.

810.  Before  M.  Richet 1 1  believe  that  no  writer,  outside  the  Spiritual-
istic group,  so  much  as  showed  any  practical  knowledge  of  this  phenomenon,
— still  less  endeavoured  to  explain  it.  Faraday's  well-known  explanation  of
table-turning  as  the  result  of  the  summation  of  many  unconscious  move-
ments— obviously  true  as  it  is  for  some  of  the  simplest  cases  of  table-
movement — does  not  touch  this  far  more  difficult  question  of  the
origination  of  these  intelligent  messages,  conveyed  by  distinct  and  repeated
movements  of  some  object  admitting  of  ready  displacement.  The  ordinary
explanation — I  am  speaking,  of  course,  of  cases  where  fraud  is  not  in
question — is  that  the  sitter  unconsciously  sets  going  and  stops  the  move-
ments so  as  to  shape  the  word  in  accordance  with  his  expectation.  Now
that  he  unconsciously  sets  going  and  stops  the  movements  is  part  of  my
own  present  contention,  but  that  the  word  is  thereby  shaped  in  accordance
with  his  expectation  is  often  far  indeed  from  being  the  case.  Several
of  the  examples  in  the  Appendices  to  this  chapter  illustrate  the  bizarre
capriciousness  of  these  replies — their  want  of  relation  to  anything  antici-
pated or  desired  by  the  persons  in  contact  with  the  table.  Similar
instances  might  be  indefinitely  multiplied ;  but  any  one  who  is  really
willing  to  take  the  requisite  trouble  can  satisfy  himself  on  this  point  by
experiment  with  a  sufficiently  varied  list  of  trustworthy  friends.  To  those
indeed  who  are  familiar  with  automatic  written  messages,  this  question  as
to  the  unexpectedness  of  the  tilted  messages  will  present  itself  in  a  new
light.  If  the  written  messages  originate  in  a  source  beyond  the  auto-
matist's  supraliminal  self,  so  too  may  the  tilted  messages ; — even  though
we  admit  that  the  tilts  are  caused  by  his  hand's  pressure  of  the  table
just  as  directly  as  the  script  by  his  hand's  manipulation  of  the  pen.

One  piece  of  evidence  which  I  have  cited  (in  830  A)  in  order  to
show  that  written  messages  were  not  always  the  mere  echo  of  expectation,
was  a  case  where  anagrams  were  automatically  written,  which  their  writer
was  not  at  once  able  to  decipher.  Following  this  hint,  I  have  occasionally
succeeded  in  getting  anagrams  tilted  out  for  myself  by  movements  of  a
small  table  which  I  alone  touched.  I  should  add  that  although,  as  I  have
elsewhere  mentioned,  I  have  never  succeeded  in  writing  automatically,  I
have  nevertheless,  after  some  hundreds  of  trials,  continued  over  many
years,  attained  the  power  of  eliciting  by  unconscious  pressure  tilted  re-
sponses which  do  not  emanate  from  my  own  conscious  self.  That  they  do,

1  La  Suggestion  Mentale  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  239  sqq.).


94  CHAPTER    VIII  [811

however,  emanate  from  some  stratum  of  my  being — from  that  fragmentary
and  incoherent  workshop  where  dreams  are  strung  together — seems  to  me,
as  already  indicated,  the  most  probable  hypothesis.

The  anagrams — or  rather  jumbles  of  letters  forming  a  short  word —
which  I  have  myself  obtained,  have  been  of  the  simplest  kind.  But  occa-
sionally I  have  not  at  once  recognised  the  word  thus  given,  but  have  been
aware  of  a  distinct  interval  before  the  word  which  my  own  unconscious
muscular  action  had  thus  confusedly  "tilted  out"  was  grasped  by  my
conscious  intelligence.  This  is  a  kind  of  experiment  which  might  with
advantage  be  oftener  repeated ;  for  the  extreme  incoherence  and  silliness
of  the  responses  thus  obtained  does  not  prevent  the  process  itself  from
being  in  a  high  degree  instructive.  Here,  again  (as  in  the  automatic
writing  of  the  "CleKa"  case,  830  A),  a  man  may  hold  colloquy  with  his
own  dream — may  note  in  actual  juxtaposition  two  separate  strata  of  his
own  intelligence.

I  shall  not  at  present  pursue  the  discussion  of  these  tilted  responses
beyond  this  their  very  lowest  and  most  rudimentary  stage.  They  almost
immediately  suggest  another  problem,  for  which  our  discussion  is  hardly
ripe,  the  participation,  namely,  of  several  minds  in  the  production  of  the
same  automatic  message.  There  is  something  of  this  difficulty,  even  in
the  explanation  of  messages  given  when  the  hands  of  two  persons  are
touching  a  planchette ;  but  when  the  instrument  of  response  is  large,  and
the  method  of  response  simple,  as  with  table-tilting,  we  find  this  question
of  the  influence  of  more  minds  than  one  imperatively  recurring.

811.  Our  immediate  object,  however,  is  rather  to  correlate  the  differ-
ent attainable  modes  of  automatic  response  in  some  intelligible  scheme
than  to  pursue  any  one  of  them  through  all  its  phases.  We  regarded  the
table-tilting  process  as  in  one  sense  the  simplest,  the  least-differentiated
form  of  motor  response.  It  is  a  kind  of  gesture  merely,  though  a  gesture
implying  knowledge  of  the  alphabet.  Let  us  see  in  what  directions  the
movement  of  response  becomes  more  specialised, — as  gesture  parts  into
pictorial  art  and  articulate  speech.  We  find,  in  fact,  that  a  just  similar
divergence  of  impulses  takes  place  in  automatic  response.  On  the  one
hand  the  motor  impulse  specialises  itself  into  drawing;  on  the  other  hand
it  specialises  itself  into  speech.  Of  automatic  drawing  I  have  already  said
something  (Chapter  III.  324).  Automatic  speech  will  receive  detailed
treatment  in  Chapter  IX.  At  present  I  shall  only  briefly  indicate  the
position  of  each  form  of  movement  among  cognate  automatisms.

Some  of  my  readers  may  have  seen  these  so-called  "  spirit-drawings,"
— designs,  sometimes  in  colour,  whose  author  asserts  that  he  drew  them
without  any  plan,  or  even  knowledge  of  what  his  hand  was  going  to  do.
This  assertion  may  be  quite  true,  and  the  person  making  it  may  be  per-
fectly sane.1  The  drawings  so  made  will  be  found  curiously  accordant

1  See  the  quotations  from  Mr.  Wilkinson's  book  in  811  A.  But,  of  course,  like
other  automatic  impulses,  this  impulse  to  decorative  or  symbolical  drawing  is  sometimes


812]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  95

with  what  the  view  which  I  am  explaining  would  lead  us  to  expect.  For
they  exhibit  a  fusion  of  arabesque  with  ideography ;  that  is  to  say,  they
partly  resemble  the  forms  of  ornamentation  into  which  the  artistic  hand
strays  when,  as  it  were,  dreaming  on  the  paper  without  definite  plan ;  and
partly  they  afford  a  parallel  to  the  early  attempts  at  symbolic  self-expres-
sion of  savages  who  have  not  yet  learnt  an  alphabet.  Like  savage  writing,
they  pass  by  insensible  transitions  from  direct  pictorial  symbolism  to  an
abbreviated  ideography,  mingled  in  its  turn  with  writing  of  a  fantastic  or
of  an  ordinary  kind.

812.  And  here,  before  we  enter  on  the  study  of  automatic  writing,
I  shall  somewhat  break  the  thread  of  discussion  in  order  to  refer  at  length
to  two  great  historic  cases  of  automatism,  which  may,  perhaps,  be  most
fitly  introduced  here  as  a  kind  of  prologue  to  what  is  to  follow.  One  case,
that  of  Socrates,  is  a  case  of  monitory  inhibition  ;  the  other,  that  of  Jeanne
d'Arc,  of  monitory  impulse.  Each  case,  moreover,  is  instructive  as  regards
the  substance  of  the  messages,  and  also  as  regards  the  character  and  capac-
ity of  the  percipient.  I  begin  with  that  great  historical  instance, — an
instance  well  observed  and  well  attested,  although  remote  in  date,  which
will  at  once  have  occurred  to  every  reader.

The  Founder  of  Science  himself, — the  permanent  type  of  sanity,
shrewdness,  physical  robustness,  and  moral  balance, — was  guided  in  all
the  affairs  of  life  by  a  monitory  Voice, — by  "  the  Daemon  of  Socrates."
This  is  a  case  which  can  never  lose  its  interest,  a  case  which  has  been
vouched  for  by  the  most  practical,  and  discussed  by  the  loftiest  intellect  of
Greece, — both  of  them  intimate  friends  of  the  illustrious  subject ; — a  case,
therefore,  which  one  who  endeavours  to  throw  new  light  on  hallucination
and  automatism  is  bound,  even  at  this  distance  of  time,  to  endeavour  to
explain.  And  this  is  the  more  needful,  since  a  treatise  was  actually
written,  a  generation  ago,  as  "a  specimen  of  the  application  of  the
science  of  psychology  to  the  science  of  history,"  arguing  from  the  records
of  the  8at/x,oVtoi/  in  Xenophon  and  Plato  that  Socrates  was  in  fact
insane.1

I  believe  that  it  is  now  possible  to  give  a  truer  explanation ;  to  place
these  old  records  in  juxtaposition  with  more  instructive  parallels;  and
to  show  that  the  messages  which  Socrates  received  were  only  advanced
examples  of  a  process  which,  if  supernormal,  is  not  abnormal,  and  which
characterises  that  form  of  intelligence  which  we  describe  as  genius.  For
genius  (as  we  have  seen),  is  best  defined — not  as  "an  unlimited  capacity

seen  at  its  maximum  in  insane  patients.  Some  drawings  of  an  insane  patient,  repro-
duced in  the  American  Journal  of  Psychology,  June  1888,  show  a  noticeable  analogy  (in
my  view  ^.predictable  analogy)  with  some  of  the  "  spirit-drawings  "  above  discussed.  See
also  the  Martian  landscapes  of  Helene  Smith,  in  Professor  Flournoy's  Des  Indes  cl  la
plantte  Mars,  referred  to  below,  sections  834  et  seq.

1  Du  Demon  de  Socrate,  &c.,  by  L.  F.   Lelut,   Membre    de   1'Institut.     Nouvelle
edition,  1856.


96  CHAPTER    VIII  [813

of  taking  pains" — but  rather  as  a  mental  constitution  which  allows  a
man  to  draw  readily  into  supraliminal  life  the  products  of  subliminal
thought.

813.  I  have  already  urged  that  beneath  the  superficially  conscious
stratum  of  our  being  there  is  not  only  a  stratum  of  dream  and  confusion,
but  a  still  subjacent  stratum  of  coherent  mentation  as  well.  This  thesis,  I
think,  is  strongly  supported  by  the  records  which  have  come  down  to  us
as  to  the  Daemon  of  Socrates.  We  shall  see  that  the  monitions  which
Socrates  thus  received  were  for  the  most  part  such  as  his  own  wiser  self
might  well  have  given,  and  that  where  the  limits  of  knowledge  attainable
by  his  own  inmost  reflection  may  possibly  have  been  transcended,  they
seem  to  have  been  transcended  in  such  direction  as  a  clairvoyant  develop-
ment of  his  own  faculties  might  allow,  rather  than  in  such  a  way  as  to
suggest  the  intervention  of  any  external  power.  Let  us  try  to  analyse  the
nature  of  the  "divine  interventions"  actually  recorded  by  Socrates'  con-
temporaries. The  voice,  it  should  be  remarked,  was  always  a  voice  of
restraint;  its  silence  implied  approval.  In  the  first  place  Xenophon's
testimony  completely  establishes  the  fact.  He  desires,  in  defending  his
friend  and  master  from  the  charge  of  impiety,  to  make  as  little  as
may  be  of  the  matter ;  but  what  he  says  is  quite  enough  to  prove — if  such
proof  were  needed — that  the  Saiftoviov  (monitory  voice)  is  no  metaphor,
but  is  to  be  taken  literally  as  a  notorious  and  repeated  incident  in  Soc-
rates' life.

"  First  then,"  he  says,1  "  as  to  his  not  worshipping  the  gods  whom  the
city  worships,  what  evidence  was  there  of  this  ?  He  sacrificed  constantly,
and  obviously  used  the  art  of  divination;  for  it  was  matter  of  .notoriety
that  Socrates  said  that  TO  Sai/xwioi/ — the  divine  Providence — gave  him
indications ;  and  this  indeed  was  the  principal  reason  for  accusing  him
of  introducing  new  gods."

The  instances  where  such  indication  was  given  may  be  divided  into
three  heads.

First  come  the  cases  where  the  warning  voice — or  its  equally  significant
absence — gives  proof  of  a  sagacity  at  least  equal  to  that  of  the  waking
Socrates,  and  decides  him  to  action,  or  to  abstention  from  action,  which
he  professes  always  to  have  recognised  as  right  and  wise.

Next  come  the  cases  where  the  monition  implies  some  sort  of  knowl-
edge not  dependent  on  any  external  source,  yet  not  attainable  by  ordinary
means ; — as  a  knowledge  of  potential  rapport  (to  use  the  term  of  the  elder
mesmerists),  or  special  relation  between  two  organisms.

And,  lastly,  come  one  or  two  doubtful  cases  where,  if  they  be  correctly
reported,  there  was  something  like  clairvoyance,  or  extension  of  the
ordinary  purview  of  sense.

The  first  of  these  classes  contains  the  great  majority  of  the  recorded
cases,  whether  small  or  great  matters  are  concerned.  And  it  is  noticeable
1  Xen.  Memorabilia,  i.  I.


813]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  97

that  the  monition  frequently  occurred  in  reference  to  mere  trifles,  and  had
been  a  habitual  phenomenon  for  Socrates  from  childhood  upwards,  both
of  which  points  are  eminently  in  analogy  with  what  we  know  of  other
automatisms.  Let  us  take  first  some  trivial  cases.

1.  In  the  Euthydemus  of  Plato,  Socrates  is  about  to  quit  the  palaestra ;
the   sign  detains   him;    young  men    enter,  and    profitable    conversation
ensues.

2.  In  the  Phadrus,  Socrates,  when  leaving  his  resting-place,  is  detained
by  the  sign,  which  thus  leads  him  to  a  discourse  which  he  had  not  intended
to  utter — 'Ei//.i  Sr)  /xai/rts  //,ev — "  I  am,  it  seems,  a  prophet,"  he  then  remarks,
"  but  only  just  enough  for  my  private  use  and  benefit."

3.  In  the  First  Alcibiades  the  sign  restrains   him  from  speaking  to
Alcibiades  until  the  latter  is  old  enough  to  understand  him  aright.

There  are  also  various  cases  where  Socrates  dissuades  his  friends  from
expeditions  which  ultimately  turn  to  their  harm.  None  of  these  are  in
our  sense  evidential ;  and  in  some  of  them  (as  in  the  case  of  the  Athenian
expedition  against  Syracuse)  ordinary  sagacity  might  have  given  the  same
warning.  The  case  of  Timarchus  (Plato,  Theages)  is  the  most  dramatic  of
these  warnings.

Timarchus  was  sitting  at  supper  with  Socrates,  and  rose  to  go  out
to  a  plot  of  assassination,  to  which  plot  only  one  other  man  was  privy.
" '  What  say  you,  Socrates  ? '  said  Timarchus,  '  do  you  continue  drinking  ?
I  must  go  out  somewhither ;  but  will  return  in  a  little,  if  so  I  may.'  And
the  voice  came  to  me ;  and  I  said  to  him,  <  By  no  means  rise  from  table ;
for  the  accustomed  divine  sign  has  come  to  me.'  And  he  stayed.  And
after  a  time  again  he  got  up  to  go,  and  said,  '  I  must  be  gone,  Socrates.'
And  the  sign  came  to  me  again ;  and  again  I  made  him  stay.  And  the
third  time,  determining  that  I  should  not  see,  he  rose  and  said  naught  to
me,  when  my  mind  was  turned  elsewhere ;  and  thus  he  went  forth,  and
was  gone,  and  did  that  which  was  to  be  his  doom."

We  cannot  now  tell  what  the  evidential  value  of  this  case  may  have
been.  There  may  have  been  that  in  the  countenance  of  one  of  them
who  sat  at  meat,  which  may  have  shown  to  Socrates  that  the  hand  of  an
assassin  was  with  him  on  the  table.

But,  among  these  monitions  of  Socrates,  a  certain  silence  of  the  warning
voice  on  one  last  occasion  was  held  by  Socrates  himself,  and  has  since
been  reputed,  as  the  most  noteworthy  of  all.  This  was  when  Socrates,
accused  on  a  capital  charge  of  impiety,  from  which  he  might  have  freed
himself  by  far  less  of  retractation  than  has  been  consented  to  by  many  a
martyr,  refused  altogether  to  retract,  to  excuse  himself,  to  explain  away ;
claiming  rather,  in  one  of  the  first  and  noblest  of  all  assertions  of  the  law
•  of  conscience  as  supreme,  that  he  deserved  to  be  supported  at  the  public
cost  in  the  Prytaneum,  as  a  man  devoted  to  the  mission  of  a  moral  teacher
of  men.  The  divine  sign,  as  has  been  said,  came  only  to  warn  or  to  re-
strain ;  when  it  was  absent,  all  was  well.  And  throughout  the  whole  series
VOL.  n.  G


98  CHAPTER    VIII  [814

of  events  which  led  to  Socrates'  death,  the  voice  intervened  once  only, —
to  check  him  from  preparing  any  speech  in  his  own  defence.  Thereafter,
by  an  emphatic  silence,  it  approved  the  various  steps  by  which  the  philo-
sopher brought  on  his  own  head  that  extreme  penalty  which,  save  for
his  own  inflexible  utterances,  the  Dikastery  would  not  have  ventured  to
inflict.

"There  has  happened  to  me,  O  my  judges,"  he  said  in  his  last  speech
after  sentence  passed,  "  a  wonderful  thing.  For  that  accustomed  divine
intimation  in  time  past  came  to  me  very  many  times,  and  met  me  on  slight
occasion,  if  I  were  about  to  act  in  some  way  not  aright ;  but  now  this  fate
which  ye  behold  has  come  upon  me, — this  which  a  man  might  deem,  and
which  is  considered,  the  very  worst  of  ills.  Yet  neither  when  I  left  my
home  this  morning  was  I  checked  by  that  accustomed  sign ;  nor  when  I
came  up  hither  to  the  judgment-hall,  nor  at  any  point  in  my  speech  as  I
spoke.  And  yet  in  other  speeches  of  mine  the  sign  has  often  stopped  me
in  the  midst.  But  now  it  has  not  hindered  me  in  any  deed  or  word  of
mine  connected  with  this  present  business.  What  then  do  I  suppose  to
be  the  reason  thereof  ?  I  will  tell  you.  I  think  it  is  that  what  has  hap-
pened to  me  has  been  a  good  thing ;  and  we  must  have  been  mistaken
when  we  supposed  that  death  was  an  evil.  Herein  is  a  strong  proof  to  me
of  this ;  for  that  accustomed  sign  would  assuredly  have  checked  me,  had
I  been  about  to  do  aught  that  was  evil."

I  dwell  upon  this  incident ;  for  in  the  history  of  inward  messages  no
such  scene  is  likely  to  recur.  We  shall  never  again  see  such  a  man  at  such
a  moment  drawing  strength  from  the  silence  of  the  monitory  utterance
which  came  to  him  as  from  without  himself,  though  it  were  from  the  depths
of  his  own  soul.

814.  The  next  class  of  the  Socratic  monitions  can  only  be  briefly
dealt  with  here.  They  touch  on  that  singular  phenomenon  of  so-called
rapport  which  is  to  us  at  present  and  has  long  been  in  the  eyes  of  Science
an  unexplained  and  a  very  disputable  thing ;  but  on  which  recent  hypnotic
experiments  are  slowly  bringing  us  to  look  as  in  some  sense  a  reality.  In
modern  terms  we  should  say  that  the  disciples  of  Socrates  were  influenced
not  so  much  by  his  instruction  as  by  his  suggestion  ;  and  that  some  inward
and  perhaps  telepathic  instinct — expressed  by  the  monitory  voice  whose
utterances  we  are  analysing — informed  him  without  conscious  considera-
tion whether  his  intending  disciples  were  receptive  to  his  suggestion  or  no.
It  is  in  the  Platonic  dialogue  Theages  that  this  aspect  of  the  divine  moni-
tion is  most  insisted  on.

"  I  never  learnt  from  you,"  says  a  certain  Aristeides  to  Socrates,  "  any-
thing at  all.  You  yourself  well  know  this.  But  I  always  made  progress
whenever  I  was  along  with  you,  even  if  I  were  in  the  same  house  but  not
in  the  same  room ;  yet  most  when  I  was  in  the  same  room ;  and  even  in
the  same  room  I  got  on  better  if  I  looked  at  you  when  you  were  speaking
than  if  I  looked  anywhere  else.  But  I  got  on  far  the  best  of  all  when  I


814]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  99

was  sitting  near  you  and  holding  or  touching  you.  But  now,  said  he,  all
my  then  character  has  dribbled  out  of  me."  Nw  Se,  rj  8'6's,  Trao-a  eKavrj
rj  e£ts  egeppvrjKtv.

I  would  not  insist  too  strongly  on  an  interpretation  which  may  seem
merely  fanciful.  But  nevertheless  we  should  be  puzzled  to  find  Greek
words  more  expressive  of  the  gradual  dissipation  and  disappearance  of  a
post-hypnotic  suggestion, — the  melting  away  of  some  imparted  energy  in
well-doing  as  the  subject  is  removed  from  the  operator's  influence.  And
that  the  possibility  of  some  rapport  of  this  kind  should  be  indicated,  not
by  conscious  thought  but  by  a  message  emanating  from  some  sub-conscious
phase  of  a  man's  being ; — this,  too,  is  a  phenomenon  to  which  modern  ex-
perience furnishes  not  unfrequent  analogies.

The  third  class  of  Socratic  monitions  which  I  have  mentioned  rests  on
very  slender  evidence.  We  cannot  be  sure  that  the  monitory  sign  ever
warned  him  of  anything  which  no  possible  sagacity  of  the  ordinary  kind
could  have  led  him  to  discover.  As  is  natural  in  the  beginning  of  such
inquiries,  the  cases  cited  to  illustrate  this  supposed  supernormal  knowledge
are  mainly  interesting  and  important  incidents ;  and  it  is  precisely  in  rela-
tion to  such  incidents  that  some  unconscious  guess  is  likely  to  have  been
made.  What  we  should  like  would  be  just  what  Plato  had  omitted ; —
specimens,  namely,  of  the  trivial  cases  where  the  divine  warning  saved  the
philosopher  from  some  momentary  mishap.  Of  this  sort  I  can  find  one
only ;  and  that  is  merely  a  tradition,  given  in  Plutarch's  essay  De  Genio
Socratis.  Socrates,  according  to  this  story  (which  Plutarch  puts  into  the
mouth  of  a  supposed  eye-witness),  is  walking  and  talking  with  Euthyphron,
but  stops  suddenly,  and  calls  his  friends  to  turn  back  by  another  street.
Most  of  them  follow  him,  but  others  keep  on  their  way,  and  presently  meet
a  great  herd  of  swine  who  knock  down  some  of  them  and  befoul  the  rest.
"Charillus"  (who  had  thus  braved  Socrates'  warning)  "returned  home
with  legs  and  clothes  all  full  of  mire, — so  that  we  all  remembered  Socrates'
familiar  spirit,  with  roars  of  laughter,  marvelling  how  the  Divinity  had  care
of  him  continually."

One  more  remark.  Among  the  most  singular  incidents  in  Socrates'  life
were  those  pauses  of  immobility,  frequently  lasting  for  hours,  and  once,  as
reported,  for  a  consecutive  day  and  night,  when  he  was  inaccessible  to  any
outward  stimulus,  and  remained  fixed  as  in  a  deep  contemplation.  Medical
readers  have  seen  that  there  must  have  been  more  than  mere  contempla-
tion here ;  and  Le"lut  has  treated  these  accesses  as  a  kind  of  stupor  attoni-
tus — of  bewildered  paralysis  of  all  intellectual  operation,  such  as  is  seen  in
minds  overbalanced  by  some  terrible  shock.  I  cannot  accept  the  parallel,
nor  believe  that  symptoms  so  grave  can  supervene  in  robust  health  and
disappear  without  leaving  a  trace  behind.  Nor,  again,  is  there  anything
which  suggests  epilepsy.  I  believe  the  accesses  to  have  been  accesses  of
ecstasy,  reached,  as  in  some  rare  cases,  without  any  previous  hysterical  dis-
turbance ;  and  indicating  (as  I  hold)  a  subliminal  self,  so  powerful  and


ioo  CHAPTER    VIII  [815

so  near  the  surface  that  some  slight  accident  sufficed  to  determine  its  tem-
porary predominance  over  the  whole  man.

But  I  must  now  leave  the  story  of  Socrates,  rich  in  unworked  psycho-
logical suggestion,  but  cited  here  only  as  an  example  of  wise  automatism  ;
of  the  possibility  that  the  messages  which  are  conveyed  to  the  supra-
liminal  mind  from  subliminal  strata  of  the  personality, — whether  as
sounds,  as  sights,  or  as  movements, — may  sometimes  come  from  far
beneath  the  realm  of  dream  and  confusion, — from  some  self  whose  moni-
tions convey  to  us  a  wisdom  profounder  than  we  know.

815.  The  case,  assuredly,  is  a  marked  one ;  but  it  may  be  thought
to  be  too  exceptional  for  the  purpose  of  my  argument.  Socrates,  it  may
be  said,  was  too  strangely  above  ordinary  men  to  allow  us  to  draw  wider
inferences  from  this  unique  example.  It  might  be  well  if  we  could  add  a
case  not  complicated  by  such  towering  genius ; — a  case  where  some  one
with  no  previously  manifested  gifts  of  nature,  with  no  incomprehensible
workings  of  the  soul,  had,  nevertheless,  by  monitory  voices  been  taught
wisdom  and  raised  to  honour, — and  who,  if  so  it  might  be,  had  testified
to  the  reality  of  the  inward  message  by  some  witness  which  the  world
could  not  gainsay.  And  such  a  case  there  is ;  there  is  a  figure  in  history
unique  and  marvellous,  but  marvellous  in  this  point  alone.  One  there
has  been  who  was  born  with  no  opportunities  of  education,  and  in  no
high  or  powerful  place,  but  to  whom  voices  came  from  childhood  onwards,
and  brought  at  length  a  strange  command ; — one  who  by  mere  obedience
to  that  monitory  call  rose  to  be  the  saviour  of  a  great  nation ; — one  to
whose  lot  it  fell  to  push  that  obedience  to  its  limit,  and  to  pledge  life  for
truth ;  to  perish  at  the  stake  rather  than  disown  those  voices  or  disobey
that  inward  law.

I  speak,  of  course,  of  Joan  of  Arc,  the  Maid  of  Orleans,  the  national
heroine  of  France ;  whose  name  crowns  the  poet's  list  of  those  famous
women  of  old  time  who  have  vanished  like  "  the  snows  of  yester-year."

"  La  royne  blanche  comme  ung  lys
Qui  chantoit  a  voix  de  sereine,
Berthe  au  grant  pied,  Bietris,  Allys,
Haremboures  qui  tint  le  Mayne,
Et  Jehanne  la  bonne  Lorraine
Qu'  Anglois  bruslerent  a  Rouen,
Oil  sont-ilz,  Vierge  souveraine  ?
Mais  ou  sont  les  neiges  d'antan  ?  "

I  must  be  excused  for  dwelling  on  this  signal  example ;  for  I  believe
that  only  now,  with  the  comprehension  which  we  are  gradually  gaining
of  the  possibility  of  an  impulse  from  the  mind's  deeper  strata  which  is
so  far  from  madness  that  it  is  wiser  than  our  sanity  itself, — only  now,  I
repeat,  can  we  understand  aright  that  familiar  story.  I  shall  not  repeat
its  incidents  in  detail ;  but  shall  draw  my  citations  from  the  most  trust-
worthy source,  namely,  Joan's  evidence,  given  in  1431,  before  Cauchon,


815]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  101

Bishop  of  Beauvais,  and  the  other  ecclesiastics  who  ultimately  condemned
her  to  be  burnt  alive.1  The  condemnation  was  based  on  her  own  admis-
sions ;  and  the  Latin  proces-verbal  still  exists,  and  was  published  from  the
MS.  by  M.  Quicherat,  1841-9,  for  the  French  Historical  Society.  Joan,
like  Socrates,  was  condemned  mainly  on  the  ground,  or  at  least  on  the
pretext,  of  her  monitory  voices  :  and  her  Apology  remarkably  resembles
his,  in  its  resolute  insistence  on  the  truth  of  the  very  phenomena  which
were  being  used  to  destroy  her.  Her  answers  are  clear  and  self-consistent,
and  seem  to  have  been  little,  if  at  all,  distorted  by  the  recorder.  Few
pieces  of  history  so  remote  as  this  can  be  so  accurately  known.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Proces  de  Rehabilitation,  held  some  twenty
years  after  Joan's  death,  when  memories  had  weakened  and  legend  had
begun  to  grow,  is  of  little  value  as  evidence.  Joan's  credit  must  rest
entirely  on  that  testimony  on  the  strength  of  which  she  was  condemned  to
death.

Fortunately  for  our  purpose,  her  inquisitors  asked  her  many  questions
as  to  her  voices  and  visions ;  and  her  answers  enable  us  to  give  a  pretty
full  analysis  of  the  phenomena  which  concern  us.

I.  The  voices  do  not  begin  with  the  summons  to  fight  for  France.
Joan  heard  them  first  at  thirteen  years  of  age, — as  with  Socrates  also  the
voice  began  in  childhood.     The  first  command  consisted  of  nothing  more
surprising  than  that  "she  was  to  be  a  good  girl,  and  go  often  to  church."
After  this  the  voice — as  in  the  case  of  Socrates — intervened  frequently,
and  on  trivial  occasions.

II.  The  voice  was  accompanied  at  first  by  a  light,  and  sometimes
afterwards  by  figures  of  saints,  who  appeared  to  speak,  and  whom  Joan
appears  to  have  both  seen  and  felt  as  clearly  as  though  they  had  been
living  persons.     But  here  there  is  some  obscurity ;  and  Michelet  thinks
that  on  one  occasion  the  Maid  was  tricked  by  the  courtiers  for  political
ends.     For  she  asserted  (apparently  without  contradiction)  that  several
persons,  including  the  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  as  well  as  herself,  had  seen
an  angel  bringing  to  the  King  a  material  crown.2

III.  The  voices  came  mainly  when  she  was  awake,  but  also  some-
times roused  her  from  sleep ;  a  phenomenon  often  observed  in  our  cases
of  "  veridical  hallucination."     "  Ipsa  dormiebat,  et  vox  excitabat  earn."
(Quicherat,  i.,  p.  62.)

IV.  The  voice  was  not  always  fully  intelligible  (especially  if  she  was
half  awake)  ; — in  this  respect  again  resembling  some  of  our  recorded  cases,
both  visual  and  auditory,  where,  on  the  view  taken  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  the  externalisation  has  been  incomplete.     "  Vox  dixit  aliqua,  sed
non  omnia  intellexit."     (Quicherat,  i.,  p.  62.)

V.  The  predictions  of  the  voice,  so  far  as  stated,  were  mainly  fulfilled  ;

1  For  other  authorities  see  Mr.  Andrew  Lang's  paper  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.
xi.  pp.  198-212,  from  which  I  quote  in  815  A.

2  On  this  point,  see  Mr.  Lang  in  815  A.


102  CHAPTER    VIII  [815

viz.,  that  the  siege  of  Orleans  would  be  raised ;  that  Charles  VII.  would
be  crowned  at  Rheims ;  that  she  herself  would  be  wounded ;  but  the  pre-
diction that  there  would  be  a  great  victory  over*the  English  within  seven
years  was  not  fulfilled  in  any  exact  way,  although  the  English  continued  to
lose  ground.  In  short,  about  so  much  was  fulfilled  as  an  ardent  self-
devoted  mind  might  have  anticipated;  much  indeed  that  might  have
seemed  irrational  to  ordinary  observers,  but  nothing  which  actually  needed
a  definite  prophetic  power.  Here,  again,  we  are  reminded  of  the  general
character  of  the  monitions  of  Socrates.  And  yet  in  Joan's  case,  more
probably  than  in  the  case  of  Socrates,  there  may  have  been  one  singular
exception  to  this  general  rule.  She  knew  by  monition  that  there  was  a
sword  "retro  altare  " — somewhere  behind  the  altar — in  the  Church  of
St.  Catherine  of  Fierbois.  "  Scivit  ipsum  ibi  esse  per  voces  "  : — she  sent
for  it,  nothing  doubting,  and  it  was  found  and  given  to  her.  This  was
an  unique  incident  in  her  career.  Her  judges  asked  whether  she  had  not
once  found  a  cup,  and  a  missing  priest,  by  help  of  similar  monitions,  but
this  she  denied ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  no  serious  attempt  was  made
either  to  show  that  she  had  claimed  this  clairvoyant  power  habitually,  or,
on  the  other  hand,  to  invalidate  the  one  instance  of  it  which  she  did  in
effect  claim.  It  would  be  absurd  to  cite  the  alleged  discovery  of  the
sword  as  in  itself  affording  a  proof  of  clairvoyance,  any  more  than  Socrates'
alleged  intimation  of  the  approaching  herd  of  swine.  But  when  we  are  con-
sidering monitions  given  in  more  recent  times  it  will  be  well  to  remember
that  it  is  in  this  direction  that  some  supernormal  extension  of  knowledge
seems  [possibly  traceable.

And,  lastly,  it  must  be  observed  that  among  all  the  messages  thus
given  to  Joan  of  Arc,  there  does  not  seem  to  have  been  one  which  fell
short  of  the  purest  heroism.  They  were  such  commands  as  were  best
suited  to  draw  forth  from  her  who  heard  them  the  extreme  of  force,  intel-
ligence, virtue,  of  which  she  had  the  potency  at  her  birth.  What  better
can  we  desire  as  the  guide  of  life  ?

We  need  not  assume  that  the  voices  which  she  heard  were  the  offspring
of  any  mind  but  her  own,  any  more  than  we  need  assume  that  the  figures
in  which  her  brave  and  pious  impulses  sometimes  took  external  form  were
veritable  saints, — the  crowned  St.  Margaret  and  the  crowned  St.  Catherine
and  Michael  in  the  armoury  of  Heaven.

Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  no  right  to  class  Joan's  monitions,
any  more  than  those  of  Socrates,  as  an  incipient  madness.  To  be  sane,
after  all,  is  to  be  adjusted  to  our  environment,  to  be  capable  of  coping
with  the  facts  around  us.  Tried  by  this  test,  it  is  Socrates  and  Joan  who
should  be  our  types  of  sanity ;  their  difference  from  ourselves  lying  rather
in  the  fact  that  they  were  better  able  to  employ  their  own  whole  being,
and  received  a  clearer  inspiration  from  the  monitory  soul  within.

I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  on  these  two  cases,  far  more  remote  in
date  than  those  to  which  it  is  our  custom  to  appeal.  But  this  has  been


817]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  103

because  I  held  it  essential  to  make  my  reader  understand  that  the  grotesque
and  trivial  messages  or  monitions,  with  which  in  this  inquiry  we  habitually
deal,  are  not  to  be  taken  as  covering  the  whole  field  of  automatic  action.
Before  we  proceed  to  consider  the  question  as  to  the  action  of  minds
external  to  the  automatist's  own,  we  ought  at  any  rate  to  recognise  that
words  given  in  these  strange  ways  may  in  themselves  be  worth  hearing, —
that  not  the  mechanism  only  but  the  content  of  automatic  messages  may
sometimes  deserve  our  close  and  serious  attention.

816.  The  cases  of  Socrates  and  of  Joan  of  Arc,  on  which  I  have  just
dwelt,  might  (as  I  have  said)  with  almost  equal  fitness  have  been  introduced
at  certain  other  points  of  my  discussion.  At  first  sight,  at  any  rate,  they
appear  rather  like  sensory  than  like  motor  automatisms, — like  hallucina-
tions of  hearing  rather  than  like  the  motor  impulses  which  we  are  now
about  to  study.  Each  case,  however,  approaches  motor  automatism  in  a
special  way.

In  the  case  of  Socrates  the  "  sign  "  seems  to  have  been  not  so  much
a  definite  voice  as  a  sense  of  inhibition.  In  the  case  of  Joan  of  Arc  the
voices  were  definite  enough,  but  they  were  accompanied — as  such  voices
sometimes  are,  but  sometimes  are  not — with  an  overmastering  impulse  to
act  in  obedience  to  them.  These  are,  I  may  say,  palmary  cases  of  in-
hibition and  of  impulse  :  and  inhibition  and  impulse  are  at  the  very  root
of  motor  phenomena.

If  to  this  quality  we  add  their  historical  priority  and  their  intrinsic
dignity,  ennobling  in  advance  the  series  of  petty  incidents  of  similar  type
with  which  we  must  soon  deal,  I  think  that  sufficient  reason  may  have
been  given  for  the  position  assigned  to  them.  Furthermore,  and  partly
by  reason  of  that  very  dignity,  they  show  at  once  the  furthest  extent  of
the  claim  that  can  be  made  for  the  agency  of  the  subliminal  self,  apart
from  any  external  influence, — apart  from  telepathy  from  the  living,  or
possession  by  the  departed.

Each  of  those  other  hypotheses  will  claim  its  own  group  of  cases ;  but
we  must  not  invoke  them  until  the  resources  of  subliminal  wisdom  are
manifestly  overtaxed.

817.  These  two  famous  cases,  then,  have  launched  us  on  our  sub-
ject in  the  stress  of  a  twofold  difficulty  in  logical  arrangement.  We
cannot  always  answer  these  primary  questions,  Is  the  subliminal  impulse
sensory  or  motor?  is  it  originated  in  the  automatist's  own  mind,  or  in
some  mind  external  to  him?

In  the  first  place,  we  must  reflect  that,  if  the  subliminal  self  really  pos-
sesses that  profound  power  over  the  organism  with  which  I  have  credited
it,  we  may  expect  that  its  "messages"  will  sometimes  express  themselves
in  the  form  of  deep  organic  modifications — of  changes  in  the  vaso-motor,
the  circulatory,  the  respiratory  systems.  Such  phenomena  are  likely  to  be
less  noted  or  remembered  as  coincidental,  from  their  very  indefiniteness,
as  compared,  for  instance,  with  a  phantasmal  appearance ;  but  we  have


104  CHAPTER    VIII  [818

'  records  of  various  telepathic  cases  of  deep  ccenesthetic  disturbance,  of  a
profound  malaise  which  must,  one  would  think,  have  involved  some  unusual
t  condition  of  the  viscera.  In  Gurney's  collection  of  "  emotional  and  motor
effects  "  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  chap,  vii.),  we  find  such  phrases
as  "a  cloud  of  calamity  which  was  almost  a  physical  feeling,"  "deep  de-
pression," "a  dreadful  feeling  of  illness  and  faintness,  and  I  felt  that  I  was
dying,"  "  dreadful  trembling'with  prostration,"  "  trembling,  with  no  apparent
cause  whatever,"  "conviction  that  I  should  die  that  night,"  and  so  forth.
And  we  have,  moreover,  the  definite  vaso-motor  phenomenon  of  sudden
weeping,  which  in  one  case  (op.  cit.,  p.  275)  is  described  as  "hysterics  "
by  a  lady  who  "  never  experienced  a  similar  feeling."  This  attack  cor-
responded exactly  with  the  sudden  death  of  a  father  at  a  distance.  We
must  hardly  press  her  phrase  as  implying  more  than  a  sudden,  uncon-
trollable unmotived  fit  of  weeping,  though  it  would,  of  course,  be  specially
interesting  if  we  could  find  definite  hysterical  symptoms  originated  by  a
telepathic  shock.  Another  informant  (p.  277)  speaks  of  an  "  extraordi-
nary state  of  depression  and  restlessness ;  .  .  .  a  violent  fit  of  weeping,  a
thing  absolutely  alien  to  my  character,"  as  coinciding  with  the  sudden
illness  and  delirium  of  a  distant  husband.

In  other  cases,  too,  where  the  telepathic  impression  has  ultimately
assumed  a  definite  sensory  form,  as  in  the  narratives  included  in  Chapters
VI.  and  VII.,  some  organic  or  emotional  phenomena  have  been  noted,
being  perhaps  the  first  effects  of  the  telepathic  impact,  whether  from  the
living  or  from  the  dead.  In  the  case  of  Dr.  N.,  for  instance,  which  I  give
in  817  A,  we  have  first  an  emotion,  then  a  sense  of  locality,  and  lastly,
an  identification  with  a  particular  person.

I  follow  this  case  with  Appendices  817  B  and  C  containing  two  cases
(Mrs.  Hadselle's)  where  the  motor  effect  produced  was  the  important  part
of  the  experience,  but  which  show  in  intimate  connection  general  malaise,
motor  impulse,  and  auditory  hallucination.  And  I  add,  in  817  D,  an
experience  of  Lady  de  Vesci's,  who  described  to  me  in  conversation  a
similar  malaise,  defining  itself  into  the  urgent  need  of  definite  action —
namely,  the  despatch  of  a  telegram  to  a  friend  who  was  in  fact  then  dying
at  the  other  side  of  the  world.  Such  an  impulse  had  one  only  parallel  in
her  experience,  which  also  was  telepathic  in  a  similar  way.

Similar  sensory  disturbances  are  sometimes  reported  in  connection
with  an  important  form  of  motor  automatism, — that  of  "dowsing"  or
discovering  water  by  means  of  the  movement  of  a  rod  held  in  the  hands
of  the  automatist, — already  treated  of  in  vol.  i.,  541  A  and  B.

818.     A  small   group   of  cases   may  naturally   be  mentioned   here.

From  two  different  points  of  view  they  stand  for  the  most  part  at  the

entrance  of  our  subject.     I  speak  of  motor  inhibitions,  prompted  at  first

*  by  subliminal  memory,  or  by  subliminal  hypersesthesia,  but  merging  into

^telaesthesia  or  telepathy.     Inhibitions — sudden  arrests  or  incapacities  of

action — (more  or  less  of  the  Socratic  type) — form  a  simple,  almost  rudi-


819]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  105

mentary,  type  of  motor  automatisms.  And  an  inhibition — a  sudden
check  on  action  of  this  kind — will  be  a  natural  way  in  which  a  strong  but
obscure  impression  will  work  itself  out.  Such  an  impression,  for  instance,
is  that  of  alarm,  suggested  by  some  vague  sound  or  odour  which  is  only
subliminally  perceived.  And  thus  in  this  series  of  motor  automatisms,
just  as  in  our  series  of  dreams,  or  in  our  series  of  sensory  automatisms,  we
shall  find  ourselves  beginning  with  cases  where  the  subliminal  self  merely
shows  some  slight  extension  of  memory  or  of  sensory  perception, — and
shall  thence  pass  insensibly  to  cases  where  no  "  cryptomnesia  "  will  explain
the  facts  known  in  the  past,  and  no  hyperaesthesia  will  explain  the  facts
discerned  in  the  present.

I  will  begin  with  a  form  of  inhibition  parallel  in  its  triviality  to  the  pin-
finding  or  muscle-reading  experiments  already  mentioned.  We  may  most
of  us  have  observed  that  if  we  perform  any  small  action  to  which  there  are
objections,  which  we  have  once  known  but  which  have  altogether  passed
from  our  minds,  we  are  apt  to  perform  it  in  a  hesitating,  inefficient  way.
The  observer  whose  account  I  subjoin  in  818  A — a  lady  specially
susceptible  to  subliminal  impressions,  and  specially  prompt  in  self-
analysis  (Mrs.  Verrall) — has  observed  that  the  existence  of  a  forgotten
memory  (so  to  term  it)  may  actually  neutralise  purposive  muscular
adjustments.

Parallel  to  this  trivial  case  of  inability  to  grasp  an  unneeded  envelope
is  a  case  of  sudden  check  from  throwing  into  the  fire  a  bundle  of  bank-
notes mistaken  for  useless  papers  (818  B).

819.  Trivial,  again,  yet  so  promptly  observed  that  its  very  triviality
has  significance,  is  the  following  experience  of  sudden  inhibition  mixed
with  corresponding  impulse — the  walk  unconsciously  arrested,  the  eyes
bent  on  the  ground  for  a  reason  not  at  first  comprehended  by  the  supra-
liminal  self.  (From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  415.)

LECKHAMPTON  HOUSE,  CAMBRIDGE,
September  14^,  1895.

Yesterday  morning  (September  I3th,  1895),  just  after  breakfast,  I  was
strolling  alone  along  one  of  the  garden  paths  of  Leckhampton  House,  repeating
aloud  to  myself  the  verses  of  a  poem.  I  became  temporarily  oblivious  to  my
garden  surroundings,  and  regained  my  consciousness  of  them  suddenly  to  find
myself  brought  to  a  stand,  in  a  stooping  position,  gazing  intently  at  a  five-
leaved  clover.  On  careful  examination  I  found  about  a  dozen  specimens  of
five-leaved  clover  as  well  as  several  specimens  of  four-leaved  clover,  all  of
which  probably  came  from  the  same  root.  Several  years  ago  I  was  interested
in  getting  extra-leaved  clovers,  but  I  have  not  for  years  made  any  active  search
for  them,  though  occasionally  my  conscious  attention,  as  I  walked  along,  has
been  given  to  appearances  of  four-leaved  clover  which  proved  on  examination
to  be  deceptive.  The  peculiarity  of  yesterday's  "  find  "  was  that  I  discovered
myself,  with  a  sort  of  shock,  standing  still  and  stooping  down,  and  afterwards
realised  that  a  five-leaved  clover  was  directly  under  my  eyes.  I  plucked  some
of  the  specimens,  and  showed  them  at  once  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Myers,  and


io6  CHAPTER    VIII  [820

explained  how  I  had  happened  to  find  them.  Clover  plants  were  thickly
clustered  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  I  failed  on  looking  to  find  any  other  speci-
mens. The  incident  naturally  suggests  the  arresting  of  my  subliminal  attention.

R.  HODGSON.

Compare  with  this  Dr.  Guebhard's  case  (see  819  A)  of  sudden  per-
ception of  a  bifid  fern,  where  the  careless  sweep  of  the  eye  seems  to  have
been  arrested  by  a  similar  subliminal  call.

820.  Similarly  there  are  cases  where  some  sudden  muscular  impulse
or  inhibition  has  probably  depended  on  a  subliminal  perception  or  inter-
pretation of  a  sound  which  had  not  reached  the  supraliminal  attention.  For
instance,  two  friends  walking  together  along  a  street  in  a  storm  just  evade
by  sudden  movements  a  falling  mass  of  masonry.  Each  thinks  that  he
has  received  some  monition  of  the  fall ;  each  asserting  that  he  heard  no
noise  whatever  to  warn  him.  Here  is  an  instance  where  subliminal  per-
ception may  have  been  slightly  quicker  and  more  delicate  than  supra-
liminal ;  and  may  have  warned  them  just  in  time.

In  the  next  case1  (quoted  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  416)
there  may  have  been  some  subliminal  hyperaesthesia  of  hearing  which  dimly
warned  Mr.  Wyman  of  the  approach  of  the  extra  train.

Mr.  Wm.  H.  Wyman  writes  to  the  Editor  of  the  Arena  as  follows  : —

DUNKIRK,  N.Y.,  June  26th,  1891.

Some  years  ago  my  brother  was  employed  and  had  charge  as  conductor
and  engineer  of  a  working  train  on  the  Lake  Shore  and  Michigan  Southern
Railway,  running  between  Buffalo  and  Erie,  which  passes  through  this  city
(Dunkirk,  N.Y.).  I  often  went  with  him  to  the  Grave  Bank,  where  he  had  his
headquarters,  and  returned  on  his  train  with  him.  On  one  occasion  I  was  with
him,  and  after  the  train  of  cars  was  loaded,  we  went  together  to  the  telegraph
office  to  see  if  there  were  any  orders,  and  to  find  out  if  the  trains  were  on  time,
as  he  had  to  keep  out  of  the  way  of  all  regular  trains.  After  looking  over  the
train  reports  and  finding  them  all  on  time,  we  started  for  Buffalo.  As  we
approached  near  Westfield  Station,  running  about  12  miles  per  hour,  and  when
within  about  one  mile  of  a  long  curve  in  the  line,  my  brother  all  of  a  sudden
shut  off  the  steam,  and  quickly  stepping  over  to  the  fireman's  side  of  the  engine,
he  looked  out  of  the  cab  window,  and  then  to  the  rear  of  his  train  to  see  if
there  was  anything  the  matter  with  either.  Not  discovering  anything  wrong,
he  stopped  and  put  on  steam,  but  almost  immediately  again  shut  it  off  and  gave
the  signal  for  breaks  and  stopped.  After  inspecting  the  engine  and  train
and  finding  nothing  wrong,  he  seemed  very  much  excited,  and  for  a  short
time  he  acted  as  if  he  did  not  know  where  he  was  or  what  to  do.  I  asked
what  was  the  matter.  He  replied  that  he  did  not  know,  when,  after  looking  at
his  watch  and  orders,  he  said  that  he  felt  that  there  was  some  trouble  on  the
line  of  the  road.  I  suggested  that  he  had  better  run  his  train  to  the  station
and  find  out.  He  then  ordered  his  flagman  with  his  flag  to  go  ahead  around
the  curve,  which  was  just  ahead  of  us,  and  he  would  follow  with  the  train.  The

1  For  a  somewhat  similar  case,  possibly  due  to  hyperaesthesia  of  hearing,  see
American  Journal  of  Psychology,  vol.  iii.  p.  435  (September  1890).


821]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  107

flagman  started  and  had  just  time  to  flag  an  extra  express  train,  with  the
General  Superintendent  and  others  on  board,  coming  full  forty  miles  per
hour.  The  Superintendent  inquired  what  he  was  doing  there,  and  if  he  did
not  receive  orders  to  keep  out  of  the  way  of  the  extra.  My  brother  told  him
that  he  had  not  received  orders  and  did  not  know  of  any  extra  train  coming  ;
that  we  had  both  examined  the  train  reports  before  leaving  the  station.  The
train  then  backed  to  the  station,  where  it  was  found  that  no  orders  had  been
given.  The  train  despatcher  was  at  once  discharged  from  the  road,  and  from
that  time  to  this  both  my  brother  and  myself  are  unable  to  account  for  his
stopping  the  train  as  he  did.  I  consider  it  quite  a  mystery,  and  cannot  give  or
find  any  intelligent  reason  for  it.  Can  you  suggest  any  ?
The  above  is  true  and  correct  in  every  particular.

In  subsequent  letters  to  Dr.  Hodgson  Mr.  Wyman  writes : —

My  brother  died  some  three  years  ago.

The  incident  occurred  about  the  year  1873.

I  was  not  connected  with  the  road  or  train  at  the  time  ;  I  was  employed  on
the  New  York,  Lake  Erie,  and  Western  R.  R.,  at  Dunkirk.  The  flagman  is
now,  or  was  a  short  time  ago,  living  in  Denver,  Colorado;  his  statement  can
be  obtained  if  desirable.

The  Superintendent  died  in  Germany  about  two  years  ago.

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Wyman  adds  :  "  I  traced  Mr.  James  Con-
way  [the  flagman]  to  Colorado,  and  learned  from  his  son  that  he  died
March  16,  1888.  [Letter  sent  herewith.]"

Mrs.  Wyman,  widow  of  the  percipient,  writes  : —

JERSEY  CITY,  September  16,  1893.

MR.  HODGSON, — SIR, — I  -received  your  letter  asking  me  for  statements
in  regard  to  Mr.  Wyman's  experience.  I  don't  think  I  could  tell  any  of  the
circumstances.  I  only  recollect  hearing  him  say  he  was  singularly  and  deeply
impressed  that  something  was  wrong,  and  he  obeyed  the  impulse  and  stopped
the  train  just  in  season  of  time  to  prevent  an  accident,  and  it  left  a  deep  im-
pression on  his  mind  ever  after,  as  he  often  spoke  of  it  and  wondered  why  and
what  it  was.  —  Yours  respectfully,  L.  A.  WYMAN.

821.  Here,  again,  is  an  averted  railway  accident,  where  smell  may
possibly  have  played  some  part.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  419.)  The  following  letter  was
received  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  confirmation  of  an  account  in  a  newspaper,
concordant  with  Mr.  Stewart's  account  given  later.

BALTIMORE  AND  OHIO  RAILROAD  COMPANY,

August  14,  1893,  GARRETT,  IND.

Yours  of  August  loth  received.  Must  say,  the  story  as  printed  in  many
of  the  newspapers  of  our  country,  regarding  the  train  being  saved  by  a  pre-
monition, or  warning,  given  me,  was  true  as  printed.  The  fireman  I  then  had,
since  became  an  engineer,  and  was  killed  in  an  accident  on  a  railroad  in  Iowa
two  years  since.  The  conductor  who  was  with  me  at  the  time  you  refer  to  is
running  passenger  train  on  the  Mackinaw  road.  I  do  not  know  his  address,


io8  CHAPTER    VIII  [822

but  his  father,  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  and  his  brother,  Dr.  Charles  Stewart,
are  residents  of  this  city.  A  letter  addressed  to  Mr.  Joseph  Stewart,  care  of
Dr.  Charles  Stewart,  Garrett,  Ind.,  would  reach  my  conductor.

Yes,  sir,  I  have  had  an  experience  of  similar  nature  since  the  occurrence
you  refer  to.  Had  a  warning  from  the  same  source,  and  by  obeying  it  I  saved
what  otherwise,  without  obeying  the  warning,  must  have  been  a  most  dreadful
accident,  and  must  have  resulted  in  the  entire  destruction  of  my  train,  with  the
lives  of  many,  if  not  all  the  persons  on  board.  I  am  not  a  Spiritualist,  do  not
believe  in  so-called  Spiritualism,  but  do  believe  that  the  living  are  often  visited,
often  warned  of  danger,  and  often  comforted  in  times  of  affliction,  by  the  spirits
of  departed  loved  ones.  ...  C.  W.  MOSES.

BATTLE  CREEK,  MICH.,  August  28,  1893.

RICHARD  HODGSON,  ESQ.,— DEAR  SIR,— Your  request  received,  and  will,
as  far  as  memory  serves,  give  a  correct  statement  as  to  the  incident  referred  to.

Train  No.  2,  of  the  B.  and  O.  R.  R.,  due  in  Chicago  at  6.20  A.M.,  Sunday,
in  the  month  of  August  1883  (have  forgotten  exact  date),  was  on  time,  running
at  about  thirty-five  miles  an  hour.  On  approaching  Salt  Creek  Trestle  Work,
about  forty  miles  east  of  Chicago,  the  engineer,  Mr.  C.  W.  Moses,  felt  that
something  that  he  could  not  define  compelled  him  to  stop  before  attempting
to  cross  over.  He  applied  the  air  and  came  to  a  full  stop  at  the  approach.  I
occupied  front  seat  in  smoker,  it  being  the  second  car  from  engine.  The  time
was  about  4.30  A.M.  I  immediately  went  forward  and  joined  the  engineer
where  we  found  thirty  feet  of  the  woodwork  burned,  the  rails  being  held  to
place  by  charred  stringers.  We  went  across,  by  climbing  down  and  up  the
bank  on  the  other  side,  and  woke  up  the  watchman  who  was  employed  to
look  after  the  bridge,  who,  on  seeing  us  and  the  condition  of  things  in  general,
took  to  his  heels  and  is  running  still,  as  far  as  I  know.  I  would  say  that  in
more  than  a  score  of  years  engaged  in  railroad  work,  that  was  the  most
narrow  escape  I  ever  experienced ;  for  undoubtedly,  with  a  fall  of  thirty  feet
and  the  length  of  over  a  hundred,  we  would  not  only  have  been  disabled,  but
burned.

Now  you  especially  ask  as  to  what  impelled  Mr.  Moses  in  his  action.
He  only  stated  to  me  at  the  time  that  something  especially  pressing  on  him
told  him  he  should  stop,  and  he  acted  on  the  impulse.  There  had  been  fires
all  along  the  side  of  track  at  other  points,  but  he  paid  no  attention  to
them.

In  conclusion,  I  see  some  newspaper  man  got  hold  of  the  incident  as  late
as  last  June,  and  attempted  to  make  Mr.  Moses  say  that  the  spirit  of  a  sainted
mother  took  hold  of  him.  Well,  Mr.  Moses  is  an  upright  and  truthful,  old,
reliable  engineer,  and  owing  to  his  great  advance  in  years  at  this  late  date
may  have  intimated  as  much,  but  nothing  was  said  about  the  old  lady  at  the
time ;  that  I  vouch  for.  .  .  .

I.  J.  STEWART,  Conductor  C.  J.  and  M.  R.  R.
[Formerly  of  the  B.  and  O.  R.  R.]

In  another  case  again  (given  in  821  A)  some  subliminal  sense  of
smell  may  be  conjectured.

822.  In  the  next  case  (it  comes  from  a  good  observer)  some  warning
may  have  been  received  from  the  closer  smell  of  slimy  water ; — or  perhaps


822]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  109

from  a  vague  difference  in  the  look  of  the  darkness,  or  even  in  the  resist-
ance of  the  air.      (From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  422.)

5144  MADISON  AVENUE,  HYDE  PARK,  CHICAGO,
October  30^,  1892.

DR.  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — I  send  you  an  account  of  an  incident  in
which,  I  think,  my  life  was  saved  by  my  obedience  to  an  impulse  arising  from
nothing  within  my  conscious  knowledge  or  perception.

Some  years  ago,  I  landed  in  Stillwater,  Minn.,  from  a  steamboat  on  which
I  had  come  down  the  St.  Croix  River.  The  boat  was  a  small,  local  affair,  and  no
conveyances  came  to  meet  it.  I  was,  I  believe,  the  only  passenger  on  board
when  we  reached  Stillwater,  and  there  I  was  left  to  make  my  way  alone  to  the
hotel.  We  landed  at  about  9  P.M.  of  a  starless  night,  and  in  the  shadow  of  a
warehouse  which  cut  off  the  lights  of  the  town  ;  the  hour,  the  clouded  sky,  and
the  shadow  of  the  warehouse,  uniting  to  make  the  dock  extremely  dark.

I  had  been  in  Stillwater  once  before,  and  had  a  general  idea  of  the  topo-
graphy of  the  town,  although  some  years  had  passed  since  my  previous  visit,
and  I  am  quite  certain  that  I  had  never  passed  over  this  particular  locality.

As  I  left  the  boat  I  saw  the  lights  of  the  bridge  at  some  distance  on  my
left,  and  knowing  the  bridge  to  be  at  the  foot  of  the  principal  street,  on  which
stood  the  hotel  where  I  intended  to  put  up,  I  naturally  commenced  to  walk  along
the  dock  in  that  direction.  I  had  gone  but  a  very  short  distance,  when  I  sud-
denly felt  so  strong  an  impulse  to  turn  and  go  the  other  way  that  I  instantly
obeyed.  I  saw  nothing,  heard  nothing;  I  did  not  even  have  an  impression  of
danger,  though  I  did  have  a  feeling  that  it  must  be  in  someway  better  to  turn.

I  distinctly  remember  that  my  reason  protested,  and  berated  me  for  a  fool
in  taking  a  roundabout  way  to  my  destination  when  the  straight  way  lay  before
me,  with  the  added  prospect  of  losing  myself  in  the  railway  yards,  with  perhaps
a  ten-feet  fence  to  climb.  I  laughed  aloud,  and  articulated,  or  at  least,  mentally
formed  the  words,  "  You  fool !  What  are  you  doing  this  for?"  However,  my
impulse  proved  stronger  than  my  reason.  I  persisted  in  "  going  round  Robin
Hood's  barn,"  reached  my  hotel,  and  there  the  matter  passed  from  my  mind.

The  next  day  I  casually  came  to  the  same  place,  and  discovered  that  I  had
turned  within  a  few  feet  of  a  spot  where  the  dock  was  cut  away  into  an  incline
for  hauling  freight  up  into  the  warehouse.  This  incline  was  so  steep  that  a  per-
son could  have  kept  his  footing  on  it  only  by  great  care.  If  I  had  unexpectedly
stepped  down  on  to  it  in  the  darkness,  I  should  certainly  have  lost  my  footing,
and  should  have  slipped  into  the  river  ;  and  as  I  am  but  a  feeble  swimmer  under
the  most  favourable  circumstances,  and  was  encumbered  with  a  fall  overcoat
and  a  rather  heavy  satchel,  I  should  just  as  certainly  have  been  drowned.

The  value  of  the  incident  lies  in  the  fact,  for  which  you  must  take  my  word,
that  I  am  not  an  impulsive  and  changeable  person,  but  rather  logical  and  per-
sistent. My  action  was  entirely  contrary  to  my  nature,  and  the  unavailing  pro-
test of  my  reason  against  what  appeared  to  me  an  inconsequent  and  absurd
proceeding  convinces  me  either  that  I  was  influenced  by  some  intelligence
entirely  without,  or  that  my  "  Subliminal  Self  "  perceived  and  acted  upon  what
my  "  Supraliminal  Self"  could  not  see.

I  have  never  had  any  other  supernormal  experiences.

MARSHALL  WAIT.


no  CHAPTER    VIII  [823

823.  Tactile  sensibility,  again,  must  be  carefully  allowed  for.  The
sense  of  varying  resistance  in  the  air,  to  which  I  just  now  alluded,  may
reach  in  some  seeing  persons,  as  well  as  in  the  blind,  a  high  degree  of
acuteness.  It  is  perhaps  possible  that  even  the  interposition  of  a  chair  in
a  narrow  passage  might  thus  make  itself  felt.  But  Mr.  W.  (a  good  witness
and  well  known  to  Dr.  Hodgson)  has  had  (as  we  shall  see  later  on  in
873)  other  experiences  where  supernormal  influences  seemed  plainly
indicated.  (From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  423.)

STATE  OF  NEW  YORK,  December  2&th,  1893.

DR.  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — In  compliance  with  your  request  to  write
out  an  account  of  my  chair  experience,  which  I  described  to  you  when  here,  I
submit  the  following  : —

My  office  consists  of  three  rooms,  and  the  library  in  the  back  one  is
reached  by  passing  through  the  full  length  of  the  other  two.  The  middle  room
is  rather  narrow,  and  well  filled  on  both  sides  with  furniture,  leaving  a  rather
narrow  passage  through  the  room  lengthwise,  particularly  at  a  point  about  the
middle  of  the  room,  where  the  passage  is  only  three  feet  wide.  This  passage
was  very  naturally  kept  free  from  obstructions,  but  on  the  occasion  of  which  I
am  about  to  speak,  some  one,  probably  the  janitor  when  he  came  in  to  see  to
the  fires  soon  after  the  office  was  closed  for  the  day,  had  placed  a  chair  in  this
narrow  passage,  so  that  any  one  who  should  attempt  to  pass  through  the  room
would  be  certain  to  fall  over  it,  if  dark.  I  think  it  was  about  the  last  days  of
December  1892.  I  recollect  the  days  were  very  short.  I  had  left  the  office  for
the  day  with  the  passage  free.  I  visit  the  office  occasionally  evenings,  but  not
often.  On  this  occasion  during  the  evening,  when  it  was  very  dark,  I  visited
the  office  alone.  I  unlocked  the  outside  door,  walked  through  the  first  room,
stopping  at  the  door  that  leads  to  the  second  or  middle  room,  to  get  a  match
from  the  safe  hanging  on  the  door  casing  with  which  to  light  a  lamp  in  the
library,  where  I  wished  to  get  something.  I  was  in  a  very  great  hurry,  and
walked  very  rapidly;  after  taking  the  match  from  the  safe,  I  started  at  a  very
rapid  pace  to  go  through  this  narrow  passage  and  into  the  library.  It  was  very
dark,  none  of  the  objects  in  the  room  were  visible,  but  as  I  was  very  familiar
with  the  place,  I  did  not  hesitate.  I  had  proceeded  six  or  eight  feet  in  this
rapid  manner,  when  suddenly  I  saw  a  bright,  yellow  light  lighting  up  very
plainly  the  back  of  the  chair  which  was  in  the  passage.  The  light  was  confined
to  the  chair,  and  at  the  same  time  I  stopped  short.  The  stopping  was  quite
involuntary  on  my  part.  The  light  lasted  for  but  a  second,  but  it  had  showed
me  the  chair  distinctly,  especially  the  carving  on  the  back  of  the  chair.

Immediately  it  occurred  to  me  to  discover  the  origin  of  the  light,  if
possible,  so,  before  proceeding  to  get  a  light  or  to  leave  the  room,  I  approached
the  chair  again  in  a  similar  manner,  but  no  light  appeared,  and  I  experienced
no  check.  I  also  looked  very  carefully  for  the  origin  of  the  light,  but  could
discover  none.  There  was  no  light  anywhere  near,  and  even  had  there  been,  I
am  at  a  loss  to  see  how  it  could  have  shone  into  the  centre  of  this  room,  and
the  difficulty  is  still  further  increased  by  the  fact  that  it  shone  only  in  one  place,
and  even  there  the  light  was  of  a  somewhat  different  colour  and  appearance
from  ordinary  artificial  light.

After  satisfying  myself  that  there  was  no  light  anywhere  that  could  have
produced  it,  I  went  into  the  library  and  got  a  lamp  and  made  an  examination..


824]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  in

The  chair  was  in  the  passage  in  the  most  dangerous  part ;  otherwise  the  room
was  in  its  usual  condition.  I  should  also  state  that  at  one  end  of  this  room
there  was  a. coal  stove,  with  a  fire  in  it  of  hard  coal.  It  was  burning  very  low,
and  was  ashed  over.  I  examined  it  before  I  got  a  lamp,  and  I  am  confident
that  no  light  of  any  kind  proceeded  from  it.

As  to  my  sudden  stop.  The  stop  and  the  light  were  simultaneous.  I
hardly  think  the  light  unaided  caused  me  to  stop;  it  undoubtedly  prevented
me  from  starting  after  I  had  stopped.  I  fully  believe  I  should  have  sustained
a  heavy  fall,  but  for  the  light  and  the  stop.  W.

p,S. — When  I  mention  that  the  colour  of  the  light  appeared  different,  I
mean  that  it  did  not  look  as  a  light  reflected  from  or  shining  from  a  distance
on  to  a  spot  would — //  was  more  like  looking  directly  at  a  light.

See  also  a  case  given  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  345,  where  a
lady  hurrying  up  to  the  door  of  a  lift,  is  stopped  by  seeing  the  figure  of  a
man  standing  in  front  of  it,  and  then  finds  that  the  door  is  open,  leaving
the  well  exposed,  so  that  she  would  probably  have  fallen  down  it,  if  she
had  not  been  checked  by  the  apparition.

824.  And  now  I  give  a  case  of  sudden  motor  inhibition  where  no
warning  can  well  have  been  received  from  hyperaesthetic  sensation.  We
have  come,  it  seems,  to  telaesthesia  or  to  spirit  guardianship.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  459.)

Four  years  ago,  I  made  arrangements  with  my  nephew,  John  W.  Parsons,
to  go  to  my  office  after  supper  to  investigate  a  case.  We  walked  along  to-
gether, both  fully  determined  to  go  up  into  the  office,  but  just  as  I  stepped
upon  the  door  sill  of  the  drug  store,  in  which  my  office  was  situated,  some
invisible  influence  stopped  me  instantly.  I  was  much  surprised,  felt  like  I  was
almost  dazed,  the  influence  was  so  strong,  almost  like  a  blow,  I  felt  like  I  could
not  make  another  step.  I  said  to  my  nephew,  "  John,  I  do  not  feel  like  going
into  the  office  now;  you  go  and  read  Flint  and  Aitken  on  the  subject."  He
went,  lighted  the  lamp,  took  off  his  hat,  and  just  as  he  was  reaching  for  a  book
the  report  of  a  large  pistol  was  heard.  The  ball  entered  the  window  near
where  he  was  standing,  passed  near  to  and  over  his  head,  struck  the  wall  and
fell  to  the  floor.  Had  I  been  standing  where  he  was,  I  would  have  been  killed,
as  I  am  much  taller  than  he.  The  pistol  was  fired  by  a  man  who  had  an  old
grudge  against  me,  and  had  secreted  himself  in  a  vacant  house  near  by  to
assassinate  me.

This  impression  was  unlike  any  that  I  ever  had  before.  All  my  former
impressions  were  slow  in  their  development,  grew  stronger  and  stronger,  until
the  maximum  was  reached.  I  did  not  feel  that  I  was  in  any  danger,  and  could
not  understand  what  the  strong  impression  meant.  The  fellow  was  drunk,  had
been  drinking  for  two  weeks.  If  my  system  had  been  in  a  different  condition —
I  had  just  eaten  supper — I  think  I  would  have  received  along  with  the  im-
pression some  knowledge  of  the  character  of  the  danger,  and  would  have  pre-
vented my  nephew  from  going  into  the  office.

I  am  fully  satisfied  that  the  invisible  and  unknown  intelligence  did  the
best  that  could  have  been  done,  under  the  circumstances,  to  save  us  from  harm.

D.  J.  PARSONS,  M.D.,  Sweet  Springs,  Mo.

(The  above  account  was  received  in  a  letter  from  Dr.  D.  J.  Parsons,  dated
December  \$th,  \ 891 . )


112  CHAPTER    VIII  [825

Statement  of  Dr.  J.  W.  PARSONS.

About  four  years  ago  my  uncle,  Dr.  D.  J.  Parsons,  and  I  were  going  to
supper,  when  a  man  halted  us  and  expressed  a  desire  for  medical  advice.  My
uncle  requested  him  to  call  the  next  morning,  and  as  we  walked  along  he  said
the  case  was  a  bad  one  and  that  we  would  come  back  after  supper  and  go  to
the  office  and  examine  the  authorities  on  the  subject.  After  supper  we  returned,
walked  along  together  on  our  way  to  the  office,  but  just  as  we  reached  the  door
of  the  drug  store  he  very  unexpectedly,  to  me,  stopped  suddenly,  which  caused
me  to  stop  too  ;  we  stood  there  together  a  few  seconds,  and  he  remarked  to  me
that  he  did  not  feel  like  going  into  the  office  then,  or  words  to  that  effect,  and
told  me  to  go  and  examine  Flint  and  Aitken.  I  went,  lit  the  lamp,  and  just  as
I  was  getting  a  book,  a  pistol  was  fired  into  the  office,  the  ball  passing  close  to
my  head,  struck  the  east  wall,  then  the  north,  and  fell  to  the  floor.

This  5th  day  of  July,  1891.

JOHN  W.  PARSONS  [Ladonia,  Texas].

825.  In  the  next  group  of  cases  which  I  shall  cite,  we  reach  a  class
of  massive  motor  impulses  which  are  almost  entirely  free  from  any  sensory
admixture.

In  the  first  of  these,  Mr.  Garrison  left  a  religious  meeting  in  the
evening,  and  walked  eighteen  miles  under  the  strong  impulse  to  see  his
mother,  and  found  her  dead.  The  account  is  taken  from  the  Journal
S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  125.

Mr.  Garrison  writes  : —

GARDNER  &  GARRISON,  Dealers  in  Fancy  and  Family  Groceries.

OZARK,  Mo.,/w/y  2gtky  1896.

MR.  RICHARD  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — Answering  your  letter  of  July
1 5th  in  regard  to  my  experience  connected  with  the  death  of  my  mother,  I  will
make  the  following  statement.  My  mother,  Nancy  J.  Garrison,  died  on  Friday
night,  October  4th,  1888,  at  her  home  three  miles  north-east  of  Ozark,  Chris-
tian County,  Missouri.  She  was  fifty-eight  years  old.  I  was  then  living  at
Fordland,  in  Webster  County,  Missouri,  about  eighteen  miles  north-east  of  my
mother's  home.  I  had  not  seen  my  mother  for  two  months  at  the  time  of  her
death,  but  had  heard  from  [her]  by  letter  from  week  to  week.

On  the  night  of  my  mother's  death  there  was  a  meeting  in  Fordland,  and
myself  and  wife  attended  the  preaching.  We  had  then  one  child,  a  baby  a
year  old.  The  meetings  had  been  going  on  a  week  or  more.  About  ten
o'clock,  just  before  the  meeting  closed,  while  the  congregation  was  singing,
I  felt  the  first  desire  to  see  my  mother.  The  thought  of  my  mother  was
suggested  by  the  sight  of  some  of  the  penitents  at  the  altar,  who  were  very
warm  and  sweating.  My  mother  was  subject  to  smothering  spells,  and  while
suffering  from  these  attacks  she  would  perspire  freely  and  we  had  to  fan  her.
In  the  faces  of  the  mourners  I  seemed  to  see  my  mother's  suffering.  And  then
the  impulse  to  go  to  her  became  so  strong  that  I  gave  the  baby  to  a  neighbour-
woman  and  left  the  church  without  telling  my  wife.  She  was  in  another  part
of  the  house.

The  train  going  west  which  would  have  taken  me  [to]  Rogersville,  seven
miles  of  the  distance  to  my  mother's  place,  was  due  at  10.30  P.M.,  but  before


825]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  113

I  got  home  and  changed  my  clothes  and  returned  to  the  depot,  the  cars  had
left  the  station.  I  still  felt  that  I  must  see  my  mother,  and  started  down  the
railroad  track  alone,  and  walked  to  Rogersville.  Here  I  left  the  railroad  and
walked  down  the  waggon  way  leading  from  Marshfield  to  Ozark,  Mo.  It  was
about  three  o'clock  A.M.  when  I  reached  my  mother's  house.  I  knocked  at  the
door  two  or  three  times  and  got  no  response.  Then  I  kicked  the  door,  but
still  made  no  one  hear  me.  At  last  I  opened  the  door  with  my  knife  and
walked  in  and  lighted  a  lamp.  Then  my  sister,  Mrs.  Billie  Gilley,  the  only
person  who  had  been  living  with  my  mother,  awoke,  and  I  asked  her  where
mother  was.  She  replied  that  she  was  in  bed,  and  I  said,  "  She  is  dead,"  for  by
that  time  I  felt  that  she  could  not  be  alive.  She  had  never  failed  to  wake  before
when  I  had  entered  the  room  at  night.

I  went  to  my  mother's  bed  and  put  my  hand  on  her  forehead.  It  was  cold.
She  had  been  dead  about  three  hours,  the  neighbours  thought,  from  the  con-
dition of  her  body.  She  had  gone  to  bed  about  ten  o'clock  at  night,  feeling  better
than  usual.  She  and  my  sister  had  talked  awhile  after  going  to  bed.  They
were  aiming  to  come  to  Ozark  the  next  morning,  and  intended  to  get  up  early.

The  above  facts  cover  my  experience  as  fully  as  I  can  tell  the  story.  I
have  no  explanation  for  the  matter.  It  is  as  much  a  mystery  to  me  now  as
ever.  I  could  not  believe  such  a  strange  affair  if  told  by  any  one  else,  and  yet
I  could  swear  to  every  fact  stated.  .  .  .  THOMAS  B.  GARRISON.

OZARK,  Mo.,  August  i^tk,  1896.

MR.  RICHARD  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — I  send  you  a  statement  made  by
my  wife  about  the  death  of  my  mother.  .  .  .

I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  get  my  sister's  statement.  She  lives  a  few  miles
out  of  town.  I  will  get  her  to  tell  about  the  death  of  mother  and  my  coming
home  that  night  when  I  see  her.

After  finding  that  mother  was  dead  I  went  to  three  neighbour  families  right
away  and  had  the  women  come  and  stay  with  us  till  morning.  Mrs.  Green,
Mrs.  Walker,  and  Mrs.  Gardner  were  the  women  who  first  heard  of  mother's
death  from  me.  They  still  live  in  that  neighbourhood,  and  would  confirm  my
story  so  far  as  it  relates  to  my  coming  to  my  mother's  that  night  and  finding
her  dead.

Would  you  like  a  statement  from  these  women  ?  I  shall  be  glad  to  give  you
all  the  facts  connected  with  the  strange  occurrence,  for  it  has  been  to  me  a
mystery  of  the  greatest  perplexity.  ...  T.  B.  GARRISON.

Corroborative  statements  are  as  follows  : —

OZARK,  Mo.,  Aiigust  \zth,  1896.

RICHARD  HODGSON,— DEAR  SIR,— We  received  your  letter  asking  for  a
statement  from  me  in  regard  to  the  death  of  my  husband's  mother.

I  remember  the  occurrence  just  as  my  husband  has  written  it.  I  was  very
much  surprised  to  find  him  gone  from  the  church,  and  more  so  when  I  got
home  to  hear  he  had  started  seventeen  miles  after  night  without  saying  a  word
to  me,  as  he  never  left  home  even  for  a  few  hours  without  telling  me  where  he
was  going.  My  mother  (Mrs.  Butcher)  was  at  the  house.  When  he  started  he
left  word  with  her  telling  me  he  had  gone  to  see  his  mother,  but  I  could  hardly
believe  it,  it  being  such  a  strange  time  to  start  such  a  distance.  He  did  not
say  anything  about  going  to  any  one  except  my  mother.  He  has  always  said
he  felt  as  if  he  must  go.  ...  MINNIE  GARRISON.

VOL.       II.  TT


n4  CHAPTER    VIII  [825

OZARK,  Mo.,  September  itfh,  1896.

MR.  R.  HODGSON, — Hearing  that  you  were  trying  to  find  out  the  particulars
about  the  remarkable  circumstance  of  Mr.  Garrison's  experience  about  the  time
of  his  mother's  death,  I  decided  to  write  to  you.  I  was  living  about  150  yards
from  Mrs.  Garrison  at  the  time,  and  Mr.  Garrison  came  to  our  house  between
three  and  four  that  morning  to  tell  us  of  his  mother's  death,  and  we  learned  the
matter  then  just  as  it  was  printed  in  the  newspaper.  .  .  .

MRS.  C.  C.  GREEN.

OZARK,  Mo.,  September  i6th,  1896.

...  I  was  living  with  my  son-in-law,  Thomas  B.  Garrison,  at  the  time  of
his  mother's  death  on  October  3rd,  1888.

Garrison  and  his  wife  went  to  church  in  Fordland,  Mo.,  and  I  remained  at
home.  About  ten  o'clock  that  night  T.  B.  Garrison  returned  home  and  said
"  Ma,  I  have  took  a  notion  to  go  home,  in  Christian  Co.,  and  see  mother."  I
was  surprised  at  his  starting  at  that  hour  of  the  night.  I  asked  him  where
Minnie  was.  He  said  she  was  at  church,  and  he  told  me  to  tell  his  wife  where
he  was  gone  when  she  returned.  The  above  is  true.  .  .  .

ELVIRA  BUTCHER.

In  another  case,  that  of  Major  Kobbe"  (given  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  vol.  i.  p.  288),  the  percipient  was  prompted  to  visit  a  distant
cemetery,  without  any  conscious  reason,  and  there  found  his  father,  who
had,  in  fact,  for  certain  unexpected  reasons,  sent  to  his  son,  Major  Kobbe",
a  request  (accidentally  not  received)  to  meet  him  at  that  place  and  hour.

In  a  third  case,  Mr.  Skirving  (see  825  A)  was  irresistibly  compelled  to
leave  his  work  and  go  home — why,  he  knew  not — at  the  moment  when  his
wife  was  in  fact  calling  for  him  in  the  distress  of  a  serious  accident.  See
also  a  case  given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  377,  where  a  brick-
layer has  a  sudden  impulse  to  run  home,  and  arrives  just  in  time  to  save
the  life  of  his  little  boy,  who  had  set  himself  on  fire.

This  special  sensibility  to  the  motor  element  in  an  impulse  recalls  to  us
the  special  susceptibilities  to  different  forms  of  hallucination  or  suggestion
shown  by  different  hypnotic  subjects.  Some  can  be  made  to  see,  some  to
hear,  some  to  act  out  the  conception  proposed  to  them.  Dr.  B£rillon J  has
even  shown  that  certain  subjects  who  seem  at  first  quite  refractory  to
hypnotisation  are  nevertheless  at  once  obedient,  even  in  the  waking  state,
to  a  motor  suggestion.  This  was  the  case  both  with  a  very  strong  man,
with  weak  men  and  women,  and  with  at  least  one  subject  actually  suffering
from  locomotor  ataxy.  Thus  the  loss  of  supraliminal  motor  control  over
certain  muscular  combinations  may  actually  lead  to  motor  suggestibility
as  regards  those  combinations  j  just  as  the  loss  of  supraliminal  sensation
in  some  anaesthetic  patch  may  lead  to  a  special  subliminal  sensitiveness  in
the  very  directions  where  the  superficial  sensibility  has  sunk  away.  On
the  other  hand,  a  specially  well-developed  motor  control  may  predispose
in  a  similar  way ;— as  for  instance,  the  subject  who  can  sing  already  is

1  Revue  de  r Hypnotisms,  March  1893,  p.  268.


825]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  115

more  easily  made  to  sing  by  suggestion.  We  must,  then,  await  further
observations  before  we  can  pretend  to  say  beforehand  with  which  auto-
matist  the  messages  will  take  a  sensory,  and  with  which  a  motor  form.

Still  less  can  we  explain  the  special  predisposition  of  each  experimenter
to  one  or  more  of  the  common  kinds  of  motor  automatism — as  automatic
speech,  automatic  writing,  table  movements,  raps,  and  so  forth.  These
forms  of  messages  may  themselves  be  variously  combined  j  and  the  con-
tents of  a  message  of  any  one  of  these  kinds  may  be  purely  dream-like  an(J
fantastic,  or  may  be  veridical  in  various  ways.

Let  us  enumerate  the  modes  of  subliminal  motor  message  as  nearly  as
we  can  in  order  of  their  increasing  specialisation.

1 .  We  may  place  first  the  massive  motor  impulses  (like  Mr.  Garrison's)
which    mark  a  kind  of  transition    between    coenesthetic    affections    and
motor  impulses  proper.     There  was  here  no  impulse  to  special  movement
of  any  limb ;  but  an  impulse  to  reach  a  certain  place  by  ordinary  methods.

2.  Next,  perhaps,  in  order  of  specialisation  come  the  simple  subliminal
muscular  impulses  which  give  rise  to  table-tilting  and  similar  phenomena.

3.  Musical  execution,  subliminally   initiated,   might   theoretically  be
placed  next ;  although  definite  evidence  of  this  is  hard  to  obtain,  since
the  threshold  of  consciousness  with  musical  performers  is  notoriously  apt
to  be  shifting  and  indefinite.     ("  When  in  doubt,  play  with  your  fingers,
and  not  with  your  head.")

4.  Next  we  may  place  automatic  drawing  and  painting.     This  curious
group  of  messages  has  but  seldom  a  telepathic  content,  and,  as  was  sug-
gested in  Chapter  III.  (324),  is  more  akin  to  genius  and  similar  non-
telepathic  forms  of  subliminal  faculty.1

5.  Next  comes  automatic  writing,  on  which  much  remains  to  be  said
in  this  chapter.

6.  Automatic  speech,  which  would  not  seem  to  be  per  se  a  more  de-
veloped form  of  motor  message  than  automatic  script,  is  often  accom-
panied by  profound  changes  of  memory  or  of  personality  which  raise  the
question  of  "inspiration"  or  "possession  "; — for  the  two  words,  however
different  their  theological  import,  mean  much  the  same  thing  from  the
standpoint  of  experimental  psychology.

7.  I  must  conclude  my  list  with  a  class  of  motor  phenomena  which  I
shall  here  merely  record  in  passing,  without  attempting  any  explanation.
I  allude  to  raps,  and  to  those  telekinetic  movements  of  objects  whose  real
existence  is  still  matter  of  controversy.

Comparing  this  list  of  motor  automatisms  with  the  sensory  automatisms
enumerated  in  Chapter  VI.,  we  shall  find  a  certain  general  tendency  running

1  When  the  automatic  drawings  have  any  telepathic  or  other  supernormal  content,
they  are  usually  associated  with  automatic  writing.  Compare  the  case  of  Mr.  Cameron
Grant,  736  B,  and  two  cases  in  the  experience  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  that  connected
with  "  Blanche  Abercromby  "  (see  949),  and  the  case  of  the  man  crushed  by  a  steam-
roller (see  948  A).


ii6  CHAPTER    VIII  [826

through  each  alike.  The  sensory  automatisms  began  with  vague  un-
specialised  sensations.  They  then  passed  through  a  phase  of  definition,
of  specialisation  on  the  lines  of  the  known  senses.  And  finally  they
reached  a  stage  beyond  these  habitual  forms  of  specialisation :  beyond
them,  as  of  wider  reach,  and  including  in  an  apparently  unanalysable  act
of  perception  a  completer  truth  than  any  of  our  specialised  forms  of  per-
ception could  by  itself  convey.  With  motor  messages,  too,  we  begin  with
something  of  similar  vagueness.  They,  too,  develop  from  modifications  of
«the  percipient's  general  organic  condition,  or  ccenesthesia ;  and  the  first
dim  telepathic  impulse  apparently  hesitates  between  several  channels  of
expression.  They  then  pass  through  various  definitely  specialised  forms ;
and  finally,  as  we  shall  see  when  automatic  script  is  considered,  they,  too,
merge  into  an  unanalysable  act  of  cognition  in  which  the  motor  element  of
the  message  has  disappeared.

But  these  motor  messages  point  also  in  two  other  even  more  perplex-
ing directions.  They  lead,  as  I  have  said  above,  towards  the  old  idea  of
possession  ; — using  the  word  no  longer  in  an  unfavourable  sense,  but  simply
as  an  expression  for  some  form  of  temporary  manifestation  of  some  veritably
distinct  and  alien  personality  through  the  physical  organism  of  some  living
man  or  woman.  And  they  appear  to  lead  also  to  another  class  of
phenomena  in  which  (just  as  in  "possession")  the  influence  at  work,
instead  of  becoming  more  and  more  identified  with  the  automatist's  con-
scious thought,  appears  to  become  more  and  more  markedly  distinguished
from  it.  1  allude  to  telekinesis,  or  hyperboulia,  or  whatever  name  we  may
decide  to  give  to  effects  apparently  exercised  in  the  automatist's  presence,
but  not  through  his  normal  agency,  upon  the  physical  world.

These  two  last-named  topics,  so-called  "  possession,"  and  so-called
"  telekinetic  phenomena,"  although  unavoidably  mentioned  here,  must  be
reserved  for  fuller  description  in  my  next  chapter.  It  will  be  enough
for  the  present  to  consider  motor  messages  as  running  parallel  to  sensory
messages; — as  covering  much  the  same  ground,  and  presenting  the  old
problems  as  to  their  source  and  initiation  in  an  instructively  different  light.

826.  The  subject  of  automatic  writing,  to  which  our  argument  next
leads  us,  is  a  creation  of  the  last  few  decades,  and  is  at  present  in  so
rapidly  developing  a  condition  that  it  is  not  easy  to  know  at  what  stage  of
proof  or  explanation  it  is  here 'best  to  begin.  In  calling  the  subject  novel
I  do  not  indeed  mean  to  deny  that  this  and  similar  practices  are  traceable
in  many  lands  and  in  remote  antiquity.  But  among  civilised  men,  in
Europe  and  America,  the  phenomenon  came  first  into  notice  as  an
element  in  so-called  "  modern  spiritualism,"  about  the  middle  of  the
nineteenth  century.  It  then  remained  for  another  generation  a  kind  of
plaything  or  drawing-room  amusement ; — planchette  being  called  upon  for
answers  to  such  questions  as  "What  young  lady  am  I  thinking  of?"
"What  horse  is  going  to  win  the  Derby?"

It  was  in  the  United  States  that  these  sporadic  messages  were  first


826]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  117

developed  and  systematised.  Through  the  unlettered  mind  of  Andrew  Jack-
son Davis  a  kind  of  system  of  philosophy  was  given.  Through  Judge
Edmonds  many  messages  of  serious  import  were  given,  although,  as  recorded,
they  contain  little  evidence  to  the  agency  of  an  external  intelligence.
The  Healing  of  the  Nations  was  another  work  of  the  same  general  type.
But  the  automatic  writings  of  W.  Stainton  Moses — about  1870-80 — were
perhaps  the  first  continuous  series  of  messages  given  in  England  which
lifted  the  subject  into  a  higher  plane.1

These  writings  marked  a  new  departure  of  most  serious  moment.  Mr.
Moses — a  man  whose  statements  could  not  be  lightly  set  aside — claimed
for  them  that  they  were  the  direct  utterances  of  departed  persons,  some
of  them  lately  dead,  some  dead  long  ago.  Such  a  claim  seemed  at  first
too  prodigious  for  belief;  and — as  will  be  seen  later — it  is  in  fact  still
under  discussion.  But  Mr.  Moses'  writings — however  to  be  explained —
strongly  impressed  Edmund  Gurney  and  myself,  and  added  to  our  desire
to  work  at  the  subject  in  as  many  ways  as  we  could.

It  was  plain  that  these  writings — which  might  be  of  almost  immeasur-
able importance — could  not  be  judged  aright  without  a  wide  analysis  of
similar  scripts, — without  an  experimental  inquiry  into  what  the  human  mind,
in  states  of  somnambulism  or  the  like,  could  furnish  of  written  messages,
apart  from  the  main  stream  of  consciousness.  By  his  experiments,  men-
tioned in  a  former  chapter,  on  writing  obtained  in  different  stages  of
hypnotic  trance,  Gurney  acted  as  the  pioneer  of  a  long  series  of  researches
which,  independently  set  on  foot  by  Professor  Pierre  Janet  in  France,
have  become  of  high  psychological,  and  even  medical,  importance.  What
is  here  of  prime  interest  is  the  indubitable  fact  that  fresh  personalities  can
be  artificially  and  temporarily  created,  which  will  write  down  matter  quite
alien  from  the  first  personality's  character,  and  even  matter  which  the
first  personality  never  knew.  That  matter  may  consist  merely  of  reminis-
cences of  previous  periods  when  the  second  personality  has  been  in
control.  But,  nevertheless,  if  these  writings  are  shown  to  the  primary
personality,  he  will  absolutely  repudiate  their  authorship — alleging  not
only  that  he  has  no  recollection  of  writing  them,  but  also  that  they
contain  allusions  to  facts  which  he  never  knew.  Some  of  these  mes-
sages, indeed,  although  their  source  is  so  perfectly  well  defined — although
we  know  the  very  moment  when  the  secondary  personality  which  wrote
them  was  called  into  existence — do  certainly  look  more  alien  from  the
automatist  in  his  normal  state  than  many  of  the  messages  which  claim
to  come  from  spirits  of  lofty  type.  It  is  noticeable,  moreover,  that  these
manufactured  personalities  sometimes  cling  obstinately  to  their  fictitious
'names,  and  refuse  to  admit  that  they  are  in  reality  only  aspects  or  portions

1  The  automatic  messages  collected  by  "  Allan  Kardec  "  in  the  Livre  des  Esprits
and  the  Livre  des  Mediums,  although  in  themselves  interesting,  were  not  evidential.
They  seem  to  have  been  arbitrarily  selected  from  writings  which  supplied  no  proof  of
supernormal  origin.


u8  CHAPTER    VIII  [827

of  the  automatist  himself.  This  must  be  remembered  when  the  persistent
claim  to  some  spiritual  identity — say  Napoleon — is  urged  as  an  argument
for  attributing  a  series  of  messages  to  that  special  source.  There  is  much
else  which  may  be  learnt  from  these  self-suggested  automatisms ;  and  the
discussions  in  my  earlier  chapters  refer  to  several  points  which  should  be
familiar  to  all  who  would  seriously  analyse  the  more  advanced,  more
difficult,  motor  phenomena.

827.  And  here  it  must  be  strongly  asserted  that,  however  important
it  may  be  to  work  to  the  full  that  preliminary  inquiry,  it  is  still  more  im-
portant to  collect  the  richest  possible  harvest  of  those  more  advanced
cases.     To  such  collection  Mr.  Moses'  writings  acted  as  a  powerful  stimu-
lant ;  and  ever  since  my  first  sight  of  his  MSS.  I  have  made  it  a  principal
object  to  get  hold  of  automatic  script  from  trustworthy  sources.

During  those  twenty-seven  years  I  have  personally  observed  at  least
fifty  cases  where  there  was  every  reason  to  suppose  that  the  writing  was
genuinely  automatic ;  albeit  in  most  of  the  cases  it  was  uninteresting  and
non-evidential.

This  number  is,  at  any  rate,  sufficient  to  enable  me  to  generalise  as  to
the  effects  of  this  practice  on  healthy  persons  rather  less  inadequately  than
writers  who  generalise  from  mere  hearsay,  or  from  observation  of  hospital
patients.

In  two  cases  I  think  that  the  habit  of  automatic  writing  (carried  on  in
spite  of  my  warning,  by  persons  over  whom  I  had  no  influence),  may  have
done  some  little  harm,  owing  to  the  obstinate  belief  of  the  writers  that  the
obvious  trash  which  they  wrote  was  necessarily  true  and  authoritative.  In
the  remaining  cases  no  apparent  harm  was  done ;  nor,  so  far  as  I  know,
was  there  any  ill-health  or  disturbance  in  connection  with  the  practice.
Several  of  the  writers  were  persons  both  physically  and  mentally  above  the
average  level.

My  own  conclusion  is  that  when  the  writing  is  presumptuous  or
nonsensical,  or  evades  test  questions,  it  should  be  stopped ;  since  in  that
case  it  is  presumably  the  mere  externalisation  of  a  kind  of  dream-state  of
the  automatist's ;  but  that  when  the  writing  is  coherent  and  straight-
forward, and  especially  when  some  facts  unknown  to  the  writer  are  given
as  tests  of  good  faith,  the  practice  of  automatic  writing  is  harmless,  and
may  lead  at  any  moment  to  important  truth.  The  persons,  in  short,  who
should  avoid  this  experiment  are  the  self-centred  and  conceited.  It  is
dangerous  only  to  those  who  are  secretly  ready — and  many  are  secretly
ready — to  regard  themselves  as  superior  to  the  rest  of  mankind.

828.  What  has  now  been  said  may  suffice  as  regards  the  varieties  of
mechanism — the  different  forms  of  motor  automatism — which  the  messages
employ.     I  shall  pass  on  to  consider  the  contents  of  the  messages,  and
shall  endeavour  to  classify  them  according  to  their  apparent  sources.

A.  In  the  first  place,  the  message  may  come  from  the  percipient's  own
mind;  its  contents  being  supplied  from  the  resources  of  his  ordinary


828]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  119

memory,  or  of  his  more  extensive  subliminal  memory ;  while  the  drama-
tisation of  the  message — its  assumption  of  some  other  mind  as  its
source — will  resemble  the  dramatisations  of  dream  or  of  hypnotic  trance.

Of  course  the  absence  of  facts  unknown  to  the  writer  is  not  in  itself
a  proof  that  the  message  does  not  come  from  some  other  mind.  We
cannot  be  sure  that  other  minds,  if  they  can  communicate,  will  always  be
at  the  pains  to  fill  their  messages  with  evidential  facts.  But,  equally  of
course,  a  message  devoid  of  such  facts  must  not,  on  the  strength  of  its
mere  assertions,  be  claimed  as  the  product  of  any  but  the  writer's  own
mind.

B.  Next  above  the  motor  messages  whose  content  the  automatist's  own
mental  resources  might  supply,  we  may  place  the  messages  whose  content
seems  to  be   derived  telepathically  from  the  mind  of  some  other  person
still  living  on  earth ;  that  person  being  either  conscious  or  unconscious  of
transmitting  the  suggestion.

C.  Next  comes   the   possibility  that  the  message  may  emanate  from
some  unembodied  intelligence  of  unknown  type — other,  at  any  rate,  than
the  intelligence  of  the  alleged  agent.     Under  this  heading  come  the  views
which  ascribe  the  messages  on  the  one  hand  to  "  elementaries,"  or  even
devils,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  "  guides  "  or  "  guardians  "  of  superhuman
goodness  and  wisdom.

I).  Finally  we  have  the  possibility  that  the  message  may  be  derived,
in  a  more  or  less  direct  manner,  from  the  mind  of  the  agent — the
departed  friend — from  whom  the  communication  does  actually  claim
to  come.

My  main  effort  has  naturally  been  thus  far  directed  to  the  proof  that
there  are  messages  which  do  not  fall  into  the  lowest  class,  A — in  which
class  most  psychologists  would  still  place  them  all.  And  I  myself —
while  reserving  a  certain  small  portion  of  the  messages  for  my  other
classes — do  not  only  admit  but  assert  that  the  great  majority  of  such
communications  represent  the  subliminal  workings  of  the  automatist's
mind  alone.  It  does  not,  however,  follow  that  such  messages  have  for  us
no  interest  or  novelty.  On  the  contrary,  they  form  an  instructive,  an
indispensable  transition  from  psychological  introspection  of  the  old-
fashioned  kind  to  the  bolder  methods  on  whose  validity  I  am  anxious  to
insist.  The  mind's  subliminal  action,  as  thus  revealed,  differs  from  the
supraliminal  in  ways  which  no  one  anticipated,  and  which  no  one  can
explain.  There  seem  to  be  subliminal  tendencies  setting  steadily  in
certain  obscure  directions,  and  bearing  as  little  relation  to  the  individual
characteristics  of  the  person  to  the  deeps  of  whose  being  we  have  some-
how penetrated  as  profound  ocean-currents  bear  to  waves  and  winds  on
the  surface  of  the  sea.1

1  See  Professor  James's  Psychology,  vol.  i.  p.  394  :  "  One  curious  thing  about  trance
utterances  is  their  generic  similarity  in  different  individuals.  ...  It  seems  exactly  as  if
one  author  composed  more  than  half  of  the  trance  messages,  no  matter  by  whom  they  are


120  CHAPTER    VIII  [829

Is  this  indeed  the  drift  of  the  Zeitgeist — as  Professor  James  suggests —
steady  beneath  the  tossings  and  tumblings  of  individual  man  ?  Or  is  it
something  independent  of  age  or  season?  Is  there  some  pattern  in  the
very  fabric  of  our  nature  which  begins  to  show  whenever  we  scratch  the
glaze  off  the  stuff?

All  this  may  be  better  considered  hereafter,  apart  from  the  evidential
discussions  with  which  this  chapter  must  be  mainly  concerned.

Another  point  also,  of  fundamental  importance,  connected  with  the
powers  of  the  subliminal  self,  will  be  better  deferred  until  a  later  chapter.
I  have  said  that  a  message  containing  only  facts  normally  known  to  the
automatist  must  not,  on  the  strength  of  its  mere  assertions,  be  regarded  as
proceeding  from  any  mind  but  his  own.  This  seems  evident ;  but  the
converse  proposition  is  not  equally  indisputable.  We  must  not  take  for
granted  that  a  message  which  does  contain  facts  not  normally  known  to
the  automatist  must  therefore  come  from  some  mind  other  than  his  own.
If  the  subliminal  self  can  acquire  supernormal  knowledge  at  all,  it  may
obtain  such  knowledge  by  means  other  than  telepathic  impressions  from
other  minds.  It  may  assimilate  its  supernormal  nutriment  also  by  a
directer  process — it  may  devour  it  not  only  cooked  but  raw.  Parallel
with  the  possibilities  of  reception  of  such  knowledge  from  the  influence
of  other  embodied  or  disembodied  minds  lies  the  possibility  of  its  own
clairvoyant  perception,  or  active  absorption  of  some  kind,  of  facts  lying
indefinitely  beyond  its  supraliminal  purview.

829.  Now,  as  I  have  said,  the  great  majority  of  the  nunciative
or  message-bearing  motor  automatisms  originate  in  the  automatist's  own
mind,  and  do  not  involve  the  exercise  of  telepathy  or  telsesthesia,  or  any
other  supernormal  faculty;  but  they  illustrate  in  various  ways  the  co-
existence of  the  subliminal  with  the  supraliminal  self,  its  wider  memory,
and  its  independent  intelligence.

I  need  not  here  multiply  instances  of  the  simpler  and  commoner
forms  of  this  type,  and  I  will  merely  quote  in  illustration  two  short  cases
recounted  by  Mr.  H.  Arthur  Smith  (author  of  The  Principles  of  Equity,
and  a  member  of  the  Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research)
who  has  had  the  patience  to  analyse  many  communications  through
"  Planchette."

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  p.  233.)  Mr.  Smith  and  his  nephew
placed  their  hands  on  the  Planchette,  and  a  purely  fantastic  name  was
given  as  that  of  the  communicating  agency.

uttered.  Whether  all  sub-conscious  selves  are  peculiarly  susceptible  to  a  certain  stratum
of  the  Zeitgeist,  and  get  their  inspiration  from  it,  I  know  not."  See  the  account  of  auto-
matic and  impressional  script,  by  Mr.  Sidney  Dean,  which  Professor  James  goes  on  to
quote,  and  which  is  closely  parallel  to  (for  instance)  Miss  A.'s  case,  to  be  given  below,
although  the  one  series  of  messages  comes  from  the  hand  of  a  late  member  of  Congress,
"  all  his  life  a  robust  and  active  journalist,  author,  and  man  of  affairs,"  and  the  other
from  a  young  lady  with  so  different  a  history  and  entourage.


829]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  121

Q.  "  Where  did  you  live  ?  "  A.  "  Wem."  This  name  was  quite  unknown
to  any  of  us.  I  am  sure  it  was  to  myself,  and  as  sure  of  the  word  of  the  others
as  of  that  of  any  one  I  know.

Q.  "  Is  it  decided  who  is  to  be  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  ?  "     A.  "  Yes."

Q.  "Who?"  A.  "  Durham."  As  none  of  us  remembered  his  name,  we
asked.

"  What  is  his  name  ?  "  A.  "  Lightfoot."  Of  course,  how  far  the  main
statement  is  correct,  I  don't  know.  The  curiosity  at  the  time  rested  in  the  fact
that  the  name  was  given  which  none  of  us  could  recall,  but  was  found  to  be
right.

Now,  this  is  just  one  of  the  cases  which  a  less  wary  observer  might
have  brought  forward  as  evidence  of  spirit  agency.  An  identity,  it  would
be  said,  manifested  itself,  and  gave  an  address  which  none  present  had
ever  heard.  But  I  venture  to  say  that  there  cannot  be  any  real  proof
that  an  educated  person  has  never  heard  of  Wem.  A  permanent  recorded
fact,  like  the  name  of  a  town  which  is  to  be  found  (for  instance)  in  Brad-
shaw's  Guide,  may  at  any  moment  have  been  presented  to  Mr.  Smith's
eye,  and  have  found  a  lodgment  in  his  subliminal  memory.

Similarly  in  the  answers  "  Durham  "  and  "  Lightfoot "  we  are  reminded
of  cases  where  in  a  dream  we  ask  a  question  with  vivid  curiosity,  and  are
astonished  at  the  reply;  which  nevertheless  proceeds  from  ourselves  as
undoubtedly  as  does  the  inquiry.  The  prediction  in  this  case  was
wrong.

In  the  next  case,  although  it  is  possible  that  the  lady's  mental  action
may  have  contributed,  as  Mr.  Smith  supposes,  to  the  very  result  which
she  so  little  desired,  the  word  written  may  have  emanated  from  the  sub-
liminal self  of  the  writer  alone.

April  2jtk,  1883.

Present— H.  A.  Smith  (A),  R.  A.  H.  Bickford-Smith  (B),  another  gentle-
man (C),  and  two  ladies  (D  and  E).

R.  A.  H.  B.-S.  having,  on  previous  occasions,  exhibited  considerable
aptitude  for  automatic  writing  with  a  Planchette,  it  was  designed  to  apply
this  instrument  as  a  means  of  testing  the  transference  of  thoughts.  No
exact  record  having  been  made  at  the  time  of  the  whole  of  the  results  ob-
tained, it  would  be  of  little  service  now  to  record  isolated  instances  of  success.
Sometimes  names  thought  of  were  correctly  reproduced,  sometimes  not;  but
the  proportion  of  successes  to  failures  cannot  now  be  accurately  stated.  The
following  incident,  however,  very  much  struck  us  at  the  time,  and  seems
worthy  of  record.

Our  method  of  procedure  at  the  time  was  as  follows: — C,  sitting  at  one
end  of  the  room,  wrote  down  a  name  of  an  author,  showing  it  to  no  one  in
the  room;  B  had  his  hands  on  the  Planchette,  no  one  else  being  in  contact
with  him  or  it.  C  fixed  his  attention  on  the  written  name,  and  our  design
was  to  see  whether  that  name  would  be  written  through  the  medium  of  the
Planchette.  The  ladies  were  meanwhile  sewing  in  silence,  and  taking  no  part
in  the  experiments.  It  happened  that  one  of  the  ladies  had  at  the  time,
owing  to  some  painful  family  circumstances,  the  name  of  a  gentleman  (not


122  CHAPTER    VIII  [830

present)  painfully  impressed  on  her  mind.  The  name  was  not  a  common  one,
and  though  all  present  knew  something  of  the  circumstances,  they  had  not
been  mentioned  during  the  evening,  and  no  one  had  mentioned  the  name  in
question,  which  we  will  call  "  Bolton."  C  then  wrote  "  Dickens  "  on  his
paper,  and  was  "  willing  "  B  with  all  his  might  to  write  this,  when,  to  the
surprise  of  every  one,  Planchette  rapidly  wrote  "  Bolton."  This  was  not  only
surprising  to  us,  but  painful;  and  no  comments  were  made  at  the  time,  the
subject  being  changed  as  rapidly  as  possible.  It  would  appear  from  this  that
the  effect  of  C's  volitional  concentration  was  overmatched  by  the  intensity  of
the  lady's  thought,  though  not  directed  to  the  same  object.

H.  ARTHUR  SMITH.

830.  I  quote  in  830  A  a  more  complex  case  ("Clelia")  furnished
by  a  gentleman  whom  I  there  call  Mr.  A.     It  is  a  very  good  instance  of
the  capricious  half-nonsense  which  has  often  been  referred  to  the  agency
of  spirits.     The  indisputable  evidence  for  complex  subliminal  mentation
which  this  case  seems  to  me  to  furnish  lies  in  the  fact  that  here  Mr.  A.'s
pen  wrote  not  only  unintelligible  abbreviations,  but  absolute   anagrams
of  sentences ;  anagrams,  indeed,  of  the  crudest  kind,  consisting-  of  mere
transpositions  of  letters,  but  still  puzzles  which  the  writer  had  to  set  him-
self to  decipher  ab  extra.     The  chances  against  drawing  a  group  of  letters
at  random  which  will  form  several  definite  words  and  leave  no  letters  over
are,  of  course,  very  great.

831.  I   add   another   case,   precisely   parallel   with   "  Clelia,"   with
which  the  late  Professor  Sidgwick  furnished  me,  from  his  own  experience
with  an  intimate  friend.     The  account  was  written  in  1885.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  25.)

The  experiences  which  I  mentioned  to  you  as  similar  to  those  described
in  your  paper — so  far  as  the  mere  effects  of  unconscious  cerebration  are  con-
cerned— occurred  about  twenty  years  ago.  An  intimate  friend  of  mine  who
had  interested  himself  somewhat  in  Spiritualism,  and  had  read  Kardec's  book,
discovered  almost  by  accident  that  his  hand  could  write,  without  any  conscious
volition  On  his  part,  words  conveying  an  intelligible  meaning — in  fact,  what
purported  to  be  communications  of  departed  spirits.  He  asked  me  to  come
and  stay  with  him,  in  order  to  investigate  the  phenomenon ;  he  had  been  rather
struck  by  some  things  in  Kardec's  book,  and  was  quite  disposed  to  entertain
the  hypothesis  that  the  writing  might  be  due  to  something  more  than  uncon-
scious cerebration,  if  it  should  turn  out  that  it  could  give  accurate  information
on  facts  unknown  to  him.  The  experiments,  however,  that  we  made  in  order
to  test  this  always  failed  to  show  anything  in  the  statements  written  down  that
might  not  have  been  due  to  the  working  of  his  own  brain ;  and  at  the  end  of
my  visit  we  were  both  agreed  that  there  was  no  ground  for  attributing  the
phenomenon  to  any  Other  cause  but  unconscious  cerebration.  At  the  same
time  we  were  continually  surprised  by  evidences  of  the  extent  to  which  his
unconscious  self  was  able  to  puzzle  his  conscious  mind.  As  a  rule,  he  knew
what  he  was  writing,  though  he  wrote  involuntarily;  but  from  time  to  time
he  used  to  form  words  or  conjunctions  of  letters  which  we  were  unable  to
make  out  at  first,  though  they  had  a  meaning  which  we  ultimately  discovered.


831]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  123

Thus  one  evening,  just  as  we  were  about  to  break  up,  the  capital  letters
KHAIRETE  were  written;  their  meaning  will  not  be  obscure  to  you,  but
it  so  happened  that  it  did  not  at  first  occur  to  us  that  K  H  represented  the
Greek  x,  so  that  we  had  no  idea  what  the  letters  meant,  and  tried  various
solutions  till  the  true  signification  ("  Farewell ")  suddenly  flashed  upon  my
mind.  On  another  occasion  I  asked  a  question  of  the  supposed  communicating
intelligence,  and  requested  that  the  answer  might  be  given  in  German,  a
language  which  my  friend  was  unable  to  read  or  write,  though  he  had  learnt  to
speak  one  or  two  words  while  travelling  in  the  country.  His  hand  proceeded
to  write  what  was  apparently  one  long  word,  which  seemed  to  him  absolutely
without  meaning;  but  when  I  came  to  read  it  I  could  see  that  it  was  composed
of  a  number  of  German  words,  though  put  together  without  proper  gramma-
tical terminations  ;  and  that  these  words  suggested—  though  they  could  hardly
be  said  to  convey — what  would  have  been  a  proper  and  significant  answer  to
my  question.  The  words  were  all  common  words,  such  as  he  might  have
heard  in  conversation ;  and  when  I  had  separated  them,  and  told  him  their
meaning,  he  seemed  faintly  to  recognise  some  of  them.

Sometimes,  again,  when  we  tried  to  get  correct  information  as  to  facts
unknown  to  either  of  us,  the  result  was  curious  as  showing  an  apparently
elaborate  attempt  on  the  part  of  my  friend's  unconscious  self  to  deceive  his
conscious  self.  I  remember  (e.g.)  that  one  night  we  got  written  down  what
purported  to  be  the  first  sentence  in  a  leading  article  of  the  Times  that  had
just  been  written  and  would  appear  next  morning.  The  sentence  was  in  the
familiar  style  of  Printing  House  Square ;  but  I  need  not  say  that  when  we
came  down  to  breakfast  next  morning  we  did  not  find  it  in  the  printed
columns.  My  friend  immediately  placed  his  hand  on  a  piece  of  paper ;  and
there  came,  involuntarily  written  in  the  usual  way,  a  long  rigmarole  of  explana-
tion to  the  effect  that  the  article  originally  written,  containing  the  sentence
that  we  had  got  the  night  before,  had  been  cancelled  at  the  last  moment  by
the  editor  in  consequence  of  some  unexpected  political  exigency,  and  another
article  hastily  substituted.  And  similarly  in  other  cases  when  statements
involuntarily  written  were  ascertained  to  be  false,  explanations  were  written
exhibiting  the  kind  of  ingenuity  which  a  fairly  inventive  hoaxer  might  show
when  driven  into  a  corner.

If  I  had  not  had  absolute  reliance  on  my  friend's  bona  fides,  I  might  have
supposed  that  he  was  mystifying  me  ;  but  I  could  not  doubt  that  his  curiosity
as  to  the  result  of  the  experiments  was  greater  than  mine,  and  that  he  had
no  conscious  desire  to  make  me  believe  that  the  phenomenon  was  anything
more  than  the  result  of  unconscious  cerebration.

I  am  sorry  that  the  notes  I  took  at  the  time  have  been  destroyed ;  but  I
have  no  doubt  that  what  I  have  just  written  is  accurately  remembered.

I  have  said  that  the  writer  usually  knew  what  he  was  writing.  This  was
not  the  case  in  his  first  trials,  when  the  writing  came  in  an  abrupt,  jerky,  and
irregular  way,  and  he  rarely  knew  what  he  had  written  till  he  looked  at  it.
But  after  the  first  few  trials,  the  flow  of  unconscious  action  became  even  and
steady,  like  that  of  ordinary  conscious  handwriting ;  and  then  he  generally —
though  not  always — knew  just  before  each  word  was  written  what  it  would  be  ;
so  that  when  the  statements  made  were  entirely  contrary  to  our  expectation —
as  was  often  the  case — his  surprise  used  to  come  just  before  the  word  was
actually  written.  H.  SIDGWICK.


124  CHAPTER    VIII  [832

832.  The  cases  of  automatic  writing  thus  far  given  have  shown  us
an  independent  activity  of  the  subliminal  self  holding  colloquies  with  the
supraliminal ;  but  they  have  shown  us  nothing  more.  Yet  we  shall
find,  if  we  go  on  accumulating  instances  of  the  same  general  type,  that
traces  of  telsesthesia  and  telepathy  begin  insensibly  to  show  themselves ;
not  at  first  with  a  distinctness  or  a  persistence  sufficient  for  actual  proof,
but  just  in  the  same  gradual  way  in  which  indications  of  supernormal
faculty  stole  in  amid  the  disintegration  of  split  personalities ;  or  in  which
indications  of  some  clairvoyant  outlook  stole  in  amid  the  incoherence  of
dream.  Many  of  these  faint  indications,  valueless,  as  I  have  said,  for  purely
evidential  purposes,  are  nevertheless  of  much  theoretical  interest,  as  showing
how  near  is  the  subliminal  self  to  that  region  of  supernormal  knowledge
which  for  the  supraliminal  is  so  definitely  closed.

Mr.  Schiller's  case,  given  in  832  A,  is  a  good  example  of  these
obscure  transitions  between  normal  and  supernormal,  and  introduces  us
to  several  phenomena  which  we  shall  afterwards  find  recurring  again  and
again  in  independent  quarters.  Dramatisation  of  fictitious  personalities,
for  instance,  which  forms  so  marked  a  feature  in  Professor  Flournoy's  cele-
brated case  (to  be  cited  later,  834-842)  begins  in  this  series  of  experi-
ments, conducted  throughout  with  a  purely  scientific  aim,  and  with  no
sort  of  belief  in  the  imaginary  "Irktomar"  and  the  rest.  It  seems  as
though  this  "objectivation  of  types"  were  part  of  a  romance  which  some  in-
scrutable but  childish  humorist  was  bent  on  making  up.  The  "  cryptomne-
sia"  shown  in  this  case  through  the  reproduction  of  scraps  of  old  French
with  which  the  automatist  had  no  conscious  acquaintance,  reached  a
point  at  which  (as  again  in  Professor  Flournoy's  case)  one  is  almost  driven
to  suspect  that  it  was  aided  by  some  slight  clairvoyance  on  the  part  of
the  subliminal  self.

I  subjoin  in  832  B  a  mediaeval  case  where  the  fictitious  per-
sonalities— though  rampant  as  alleged  devils,  in  that  rougher  age — have
no  more  reality  than  the  milder  "  Heliod  "  or  "  Irktomar."

833.  The  next  case  which  I  shall  quote  combines  various  motor
automatisms  in  a  very  unusual  way.  I  give  it  at  length  in  the  text,  partly
on  account  of  its  strangeness  and  partly  in  deference  to  the  high  scientific
authority  on  which  I  received  it.

The  account  is  taken  from  an  article  by  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  and  myself
(already  referred  to,  see  577)  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  182.

The  writer  of  the  following  narrative  is  a  physician  occupying  an  im-
portant scientific  post  on  the  Continent  of  Europe.  He  is  known  to  us
by  correspondence  and  through  a  common  friend — himself  a  savant  of
European  reputation — who  has  talked  the  case  over  with  Dr.  X.  and  his
wife,  and  has  read  the  statement  which  we  now  translate  and  abbreviate.
We  are  bound  to  conceal  Dr.  X.'s  identity,  and  even  his  country ;  nor  is
this  unreasonable,  since  the  bizarrerie  of  the  incidents  to  be  recorded
would  be  felt  as  greatly  out  of  place  in  his  actual  scientific  surroundings.


833]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  125

The  Dr.  Z.  who  here  appears  in  the  somewhat  dubious  character  of  a
mesmerising  spirit,  was  also,  as  it  happens,  a  savant  of  European  repute,
and  a  personal  friend  of  Dr.  X.'s.

Mme.  X.  is  a  lady  healthy  in  body  and  mind,  well-balanced,  of  sound
judgment,  strong  common  sense,  and  a  calm  and  firm  character ;  she  is
charitable  without  excess  ;  is  not  susceptible  to  flattery,  nor  given  to  enthusiasm  ;
she  detests  falsehood  and  duplicity  and  abhors  injustice.  She  has  never  had
any  one  of  those  serious  maladies,  such  as  meningitis,  typhoid  fever,  &c.,  which
are  apt  to  leave  traces  on  the  nervous  system.  Nor  has  she  suffered  from  any
nervous  complaint.  She  is  the  very  opposite  of  what  would  be  termed  a  nervous
or  hysterical  subject.  She  is  sensibly  affected  by  accounts  of  human  woes,
especially  among  children ;  but  such  sensibility  by  no  means  explains  the
accesses  of  violent  laughter  which  I  have  remarked  in  her  since  the  commence-
ment of  the  series  of  events  to  be  now  related.  These  accesses,  which  have
nothing  in  common  with  the  hysterical  crises  which  they  superficially  resemble,
are  always  caused  by  some  extraordinary  communication  emanating  from  an
occult  intelligence.

In  September  1890,  while  we  were  staying  in  the  country,  Mme.  X.
sprained  her  right  foot  on  a  very  dark  night.  A  fortnight  after  our  return  to

M the  foot  was  almost  well;  but  shortly  afterwards  I  fell  ill,  and  Mme.  X.

underwent  much  fatigue  in  nursing  me.  The  injured  foot  then  became  inflamed
and  painful;  and  the  left  foot  also  became  painful.  For  all  that  winter  Mme.
X.  was  obliged  to  lie  up,  the  foot  being  kept  from  all  movement  by  plaster  or
silicate  dressings.  This  treatment  was  ultimately  abandoned ;  the  foot  was
simply  bound  up  and  crutches  used.  There  was  inflammation  of  the  tissues  of
several  of  the  joints  of  the  right  foot,  and  we  were  seriously  alarmed.

At  this  point  certain  friends  talked  to  Mme.  X.  about  the  alleged  facts  of
Spiritism,  of  which  until  that  date  she  had  had  a  very  vague  notion.  They
praised  the  beneficent  intervention  of  spirits  in  disease  ;  but  had  much  diffi-
culty in  inducing  her  to  admit  the  mere  possibility  of  facts  of  this  nature.  I
can  affirm,  therefore,  that  it  was  only  with  great  difficulty  that  these  friends
succeeded  in  vanquishing  Mme.  X.'s  scepticism — which  was  moreover  sup-
ported by  my  own  objections  to  Spiritism — and  at  last  persuaded  her  to  submit
herself  to  the  action  of  the  invisibles.  The  spirit-guide  of  a  group  of  which  one
of  our  friends  was  a  member  advised  the  intervention  of  the  (spirit)-doctor  Z.
A  day  was  arranged  when  Dr.  Z.  was  to  visit  Mme.  X.,  and  she  was  informed  of
the  date.  Owing  to  other  preoccupations  we  completely  forgot  this  rendezvous.
On  the  day  named — it  was  in  April  1891 — Dr.  Z.  announced  himself  by  raps  in
the  table.  Only  then  did  we  recollect  the  rendezvous  agreed  upon.  I  asked
Dr.  Z.  his  opinion  on  the  nature  of  the  injury  to  Mme.  X.'s  foot.  By  tilts  of  the
table,  through  Mme.  X.'s  mediumship,  he  gave  the  word  "  tuberculosis."  He
meant  that  there  was  tuberculosis  of  the  joints,  and  of  this  there  had  been
some  indications.  Had  Mme.  X.  been  predisposed  to  tubercle  I  doubt  not  that
this  would  have  supervened.  Personally,  I  much  feared  this  complication,  and
Dr.  Z.'s  answer  (as  I  at  once  thought)  might  well  be  the  mere  reflection  of  my
fears.  It  left  me  no  more  anxious  than  before.  We  now  know  that  there  was
in  fact  no  tuberculosis.  In  any  case,  Dr.  Z.  ordered  a  merely  soothing  remedy,
sulphur  ointment.  Some  days  later,  at  our  request,  Dr.  Z.  reappeared  and
promised  to  undertake  the  cure  of  Mme.  X.'s  feet ;  warning  us,  however,  that


126  CHAPTER    VIII  [833

there  would  never  be  a  "  restitutio  ad  integrum,"  but  that  the  patient  would  be
unequal  to  long  walks,  and  would  suffer  more  or  less  from  her  feet  in  damp
weather — which  has  proved  to  be  the  case.

I  come  now  to  the  phenomena,  mainly  subjective,  which  Mme.  X.'s  case
began  to  present.  On  August  I7th,  1891,  the  patient  felt  for  the  first  time  a
•unique  sensation,  accompanied  by  formication  and  sense  of  weight  in  the  lower
limbs,  especially  in  the  feet.  This  sensation  gradually  spread  over  the  rest  of
the  body,  and  when  it  reached  the  arms,  the  hands  and  forearms  began  to
rotate.  These  phenomena  recurred  after  dinner  every  evening,  as  soon  as  the
patient  was  quiet  in  her  arm-chair.  At  this  point  the  X.  family  went  into  the

country  to  R ,  and  at  that  place  the  manifestations  took  place  twice  daily

for  some  15  or  20  minutes.  Usually  the  patient  placed  her  two  hands  on  a
table.  The  feeling  of  "magnetisation  "  then  began  in  the  feet,  which  began  to
rotate,  and  the  upper  parts  of  the  body  gradually  shared  in  the  same  move-
ment. At  a  certain  point,  the  hands  automatically  detached  themselves  from
the  table  by  small,  gradual  shocks,  and  at  the  same  time  the  arms  assumed
a  tetanic  rigidity  somewhat  resembling  catalepsy.  On  one  occasion  when  these
sensations  had  been  strongly  marked,  and  the  patient  had  felt  the  whole  of  the
upper  part  of  her  body  stiffened,  she  went  to  bed  and  saw  in  the  dark  an  intense
light  which  lasted  for  several  minutes  and  then  gradually  disappeared.

Three  weeks  after  the  family's  return  to  M the  phenomena  changed

in  character,  and  gained  in  interest.  The  patient  had  begun  to  be  able  to  walk
without  much  difficulty  ;  but  all  forced  and  voluntary  movement  of  the  foot
was  still  painful,  although  when  the  movement  was  initiated  by  the  occult
agency  no  pain  whatever  was  felt.  One  evening,  after  the  usual  stance,  the
patient  felt  her  head  move  against  her  will.  An  intelligent  intercourse  was
thus  set  up  between  the  patient  and  the  unseen  agent  or  agents.  The  head
nodded  once  for  "Yes,"  twice  for  "  No,"  three  times  for  a  strong  affirmation.
These  movements  were  sometimes  sudden  and  violent  enough  to  cause  some-
thing like  pain.  Words  and  phrases  could,  of  course,  be  spelt  out  in  this  way.
This  form  of  correspondence  has  never  wholly  ceased ;  although  the  intensity
of  the  phenomenon  has  now  much  diminished.  The  occult  agent  now  im-
presses one  or  other  of  Mme.  X.'s  hands  with  movements  which  trace  in  the
air  the  form  of  letters  of  the  alphabet ; — a  plan  which  works  well  and  quickly.

Mme.  X.  is  also  a  writing  medium;  and  this  power  first  showed  itself  in  a
strange  way  during  the  stay  in  the  country  of  which  I  have  already  spoken.
She  was  writing  a  letter  one  day,  with  no  thought  of  these  unseen  agencies,
when  suddenly  she  felt  her  hand  checked.  Warned  by  a  special  sensation,  she
still  held  the  pen.  Her  hand  placed  itself  on  a  sheet  of  paper  and  began
rapidly  to  write  alarming  predictions.  The  writings  retained  this  tone  only  for
a  few  hours ;  and  soon  the  communications  became  trivial  in  character,  and,
save  in  some  exceptional  instances,  have  since  remained  so.

Another  phenomenon  followed  shortly  afterwards.  One  day  Mme.  X.  felt
herself  lifted  with  force  from  her  arm-chair  and  compelled  to  stand  upright.
Her  feet  and  her  whole  body  then  executed  a  systematic  calisthenic  exercise,  in
which  all  the  movements  were  regulated  and  made  rhythmic  with  finished  art.
This  was  renewed  on  following  days,  and  towards  the  end  of  each  performance
— sometimes  of  an  hour's  or  two  hours'  duration — the  movements  acquired  ex-
treme energy.  Mme.  X.  has  never  had  the  smallest  notion  of  chamber-gym-
nastics, Swedish  or  otherwise,  and  these  movements  would  have  been  very
painful  and  fatiguing  had  she  attempted  them  of  her  own  will.  Yet  at  the  end


833]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  127

of  each  performance  she  was  neither  fatigued  nor  out  of  breath.  All  was  going
well,  and  Dr.  Z.  had  announced  that  henceforth  his  attentions  would  not  be
needed,  when  next  day  a  singular  accident  threw  everything  back.  Mme.  X.
had  mounted  with  great  precaution  upon  a  low  chair  with  four  legs  and  a  large
base  of  support  to  take  an  object  from  a  wardrobe.  Just  as  she  was  about  to
descend,  the  chair  was  violently  snatched  from  under  her  feet  and  pushed  to  a
distance.  Mme.  X.  fell  on  the  diseased  foot,  and  the  cure  had  to  begin  again.
[In  a  subsequent  letter  Dr.  X.  explains  that  by  Mme.  X.'s  account  this  move-
ment was  distinctly  due  to  an  invisible  force  j  no  natural  slipping  of  the  chair.]

Mme.  X.  was  accustomed  to  bandage  her  own  foot  every  morning.  One
day  she  was  astonished  to  feel  her  hands  seized  and  guided  by  an  occult  force.
From  that  day  onwards  the  bandaging  was  done  according  to  all  the  rules  of
the  art,  and  with  a  perfection  which  would  have  done  credit  to  the  most  skilful
surgeon  of  either  hemisphere.  Although  very  adroit  with  her  hands,  Mme.  X.
had  never  had  occasion  to  practise  nursing  or  to  study  minor  surgery,  yet  the
bandages  thus  automatically  applied  were  irreproachable,  and  were  admired  by
every  one.  When  Mme.  X.  wished  to  renew  the  bandages,  she  placed  the
strips  all  rolled  up  upon  a  table  within  reach  of  her  hand,  and  her  hand  then
automatically  took  the  bandage  which  best  suited  the  occult  operation.

Mme.  X.  is  accustomed  to  arrange  her  own  hair.  One  morning  she  said
laughingly,  "  I  wish  that  a  Court  hairdresser  would  do  my  hair  for  me ;  my
arms  are  tired."  At  once  she  felt  her  hands  acting  automatically,  and  with  no
fatigue  for  her  arms,  which  seemed  to  be  held  up ;  and  the  result  was  a  compli-
cated coiffure,  which  in  no  way  resembled  her  usual  simple  mode  of  arrangement.

The  oddest  of  all  these  automatic  phenomena  consisted  in  extremely  grace-
ful gestures  which  Mme.  X.  was  caused  to  execute  with  her  arms — gestures  as
though  of  evocation  or  adoration  of  some  imaginary  divinity,  or  gestures  of
benediction.  When  the  occult  agent  placed  her  before  the  portrait  of  her  son
whom  she  lost  five  years  ago  the  scene  became  really  affecting,  and  moved
Mme.  X.  herself  to  tears.  The  few  persons  who  witnessed  this  spectacle  are
agreed  that  it  was  worthy  of  the  powers  of  the  greatest  actress.  Of  such  a  gift
Mme.  X.  has  nothing ;  her  nature  is  simple  and  frank,  but  cold  rather  than
demonstrative.

At  the  Paris  Exhibition  of  1889  Mme.  X.  once  saw  the  "Javanese  dance,"
consisting  of  rhythmic  motions  of  the  body  with  contortions  of  the  arms.  The
occult  agents  caused  her  to  repeat  this  dance  several  times  with  perfect  exe-
cution.

[Disliking  these  phenomena,]  Mme.  X.  has  tried  very  hard  to  free  herself
from  this  control,  and  has  to  a  great  extent  succeeded,  by  the  use  of  cold  water,
by  strongly  resisting  all  communications,  and  by  "  passes  of  disengagement "
executed  by  a  hypnotiser.  [This  has  reduced  the  phenomena  almost  entirely  to
automatic  writing,  which,  though  vague  or  fantastic  when  dealing  with  ordinary
topics,  is  precise  and  intelligent  on  medical  questions.]

Thus  far  the  phenomena  recorded  have  been  purely  subjective  ;  in  those
which  follow  there  is  something  objective  also.  When  one  has  the  honour  to
be  treated  by  a  physician  of  Dr.  Z.'s  celebrity  (!)  ordinary  kindness  bids  one
sometimes  think  of  benefiting  one's  neighbour.  One  of  the  officials  of  my  de-
partment had  suffered  for  many  years  from  pleurodynia,  which  occasionally  laid
him  up  altogether,  and  also  from  frequent  attacks  of  sick  headache.  Dr.  Z.  was
consulted  and  prescribed  an  internal  treatment  which,  to  my  great  surprise,  con-
sisted mainly  of  "  dosimetric  granules  "  ;  [which  this  great  official  surgeon  had


128  CHAPTER    VIII  [833

not  in  his  lifetime  employed].  He  also  caused  Mme.  X.  to  perform  "  passes  of
disengagement "  for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  at  a  time.  It  was  noticeable  that
while  these  passes  were  made  with  extreme  violence,  Mme.  X.'s  hands  were
arrested  at  the  distance  of  a  millimetre  at  most  from  the  patient's  face,  without
ever  touching  him  in  the  least.  Mme.  X.  could  never  of  herself  have  given  to
her  movements  such  a  degree  of  precision.  For  two  years  now  the  patient  has
felt  no  more  of  his  pleurodynia,  and  his  migraine  is,  if  not  altogether  cured,  at
least  greatly  reduced.

One  day — I  suppose  by  way  of  a  joke — Dr.  Z.,  after  one  of  these  seances,
pursued  the  patient  with  his  influence  as  he  walked  home,  and  made  him  exe-
cute with  his  hands  various  gestures  and  contortions  which  drew  the  attention
of  passers-by.

Another  time  our  servant  A.,  whose  husband  was  ill  in  hospital,  came  cry-
ing to  Mme.  X.  and  told  her  that  she  had  lost  all  hope  of  ever  seeing  him  cured,
&c.  Mme.  X.  asked  Dr.  Z.  to  take  him  in  hand.  He  promised  to  do  so,  and
said  that  he  would  make  him  feel  his  presence.  Next  morning  A.  went  to  the
hospital  and  found  her  husband  in  despair.  "  Look  here,"  he  said,  "  besides  what
I  had  already,  I  am  falling  into  a  nervous  malady.  I  have  been  shaken  about
all  night — my  arms  and  legs  have  executed  movements  which  I  could  not  con-
trol." A.  began  to  laugh,  and  told  her  husband  that  Dr.  Z.  had  taken  him  in
hand,  and  that  he  would  soon  get  well.  The  patient  is  going  about  as  usual
to-day,  and  is  as  well  as  an  incurable  pulmonary  affection  allows  him  to  be.

Under  other  circumstances  I  have  myself  consulted  Dr.  Z.  as  to  patients
under  my  professional  care.  On  each  occasion  he  has  given  a  precise  diagnosis
and  has  indicated  a  treatment,  consisting  mainly  of  dosimetric  granules,  some-
times associated  with  other  treatment.  These  facts  have  been  repeated  many
times,  and  I  owe  great  gratitude  to  Dr.  Z.  for  the  advice  which  he  has  given  me.
His  prescriptions  were  always  rational ;  and  when  I  showed  fears  as  to  certain
doses  which  appeared  to  me  too  large,  he  took  pains  to  reassure  me,  but  stuck
to  his  prescriptions.  I  have  never  had  to  repent  having  followed  the  advice  of
my  eminent  colleague  in  the  other  world ;  and  I  am  bound  to  state  distinctly
that  every  time  that  a  medical  question  has  been  submitted  to  him  the  replies
and  advice  of  Dr.  Z.  have  been  of  an  astonishing  clearness  and  precision.  I
cannot  say  the  same  of  communications  obtained  on  other  subjects,  in  which
he  seemed  to  take  a  malicious  pleasure  in  leading  us  wrong.  He — or  some
one  else — has  often  announced  to  us,  with  minute  and  intimate  detail,  the
deaths  of  persons  known  to  us  ;  who  were  found  on  inquiry  to  be  alive  and
well.  Lastly,  I  give  a  detail  which  tends  to  prove  the  reality  of  this  occult
magnetisation.  Mme.  X.  has  often  seen  two  luminous  rays  projected  upon
her  feet  during  the  stances  of  which  I  have  spoken  above.  The  rays  were
invisible  in  full  light,  and  in  complete  darkness,  but  were  seen  in  partial
obscurity,  and  resembled  rays  of  the  sun  passing  through  small  openings  into
a  dark  room.  If  this  was  a  hallucination,  it  was  shared  on  two  occasions  by
the  hypnotiser  of  whom  I  have  already  spoken.  I  myself  never  saw  the  rays,
which  may  be  compared  with  those  said  to  have  been  seen  by  somnambulists
and  other  sensitives  as  emanating  under  certain  circumstances  from  the  human
frame.

In  reply  to  inquiries  Dr.  X.  adds  the  following  remarks : —

It  is  not  impossible  that  Mme.  X.  should  have  at  some  time  heard  myself
or  others  pronounce  the  names  of  the  medicaments  prescribed.  But  when  she


833]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  129

gave  me  an  exact  diagnosis,  and  formulated  in  detail  a  rational  treatment,  I  am
sure  that  this  did  not  come  from  her  own  mind.  She  has  never  studied  any
branch  of  medicine— neither  the  therapeutic  art  itself,  nor  the  minor  art  of  com-
posing formulae.  Nor  could  I  have  been  acting  suggestively,  since  my  own
ideas  were  often  quite  different  from  those  which  the  occult  agent  dictated ;
unless,  indeed,  my  unconscious  self  acted  upon  Mme.  X.'s  consciousness,  which
seems  to  me  a  somewhat  too  elaborate  view.

The  dosimetric  granules  are  a  convenient  mode  of  administering  alkaloids,
glycosides,  and  other  toxic  principles,  and  I  have  often  been  alarmed  at  the
doses  which  Dr.  Z.  prescribed.  I  confess  that  I  was  astonished  to  find  that
an  occult  agent  who  thus  claimed  to  be  a  bygone  Professor  should  have
selected  a  form  of  medication  on  which  the  Faculty  look  with  no  approv-
ing eye.

As  to  Mme.  X.'s  foot,  I  have  2ifirm  conviction  that  it  was  healed  by  the
rhythmical  movements  imposed,  and  by  the  "magnetisation"  of  the  occult
agent.

You  ask  me  whether  I  consider  these  agents  as  belonging  to  the  human
type.  Provisionally,  Yes;  unless  we  admit  that  there  exists,  superposed
upon  our  world,  another  world  of  beings  distinct  from  humanity,  but  knowing
it  and  studying  it  as  we  study  the  other  regions  of  nature,  and  assuming  for
the  sake  of  amusement  or  for  some  other  motive  the  rdle  of  our  departed
friends.

Dr.  X.  concludes  with  warnings  against  the  dangers  of  such  influence
or  possession ;  dangers  which  he  thinks  that  Mme.  X.  avoided  by  her
calmness  of  temperament  and  resolute  maintenance  of  self-control.

The  savant  already  mentioned  as  introducing  us  to  this  case  sends  us
(May,  1893)  the  following  corroborative  statement.  He  is,  it  may  be
observed,  himself  a  physician.

I  have  frequently  seen  Mme.  X.  For  the  last  year  or  two  she  has  had  no
more  phenomena ;  but  about  two  years  ago  she  presented  some  curious
symptoms.  In  the  first  place,  when  she  conversed  with  the  late  Dr.  Z.,  her
so-called  magnetiser,  his  replies  were  made  by  movements  of  her  head.  She
would  seat  herself  in  an  arm-chair,  and  according  as  Dr.  Z.  wished  to  say  yes
or  no,  there  were  either  two  or  three  backward  movements  of  her  head.  Her
head  threw  itself  backwards  with  force,  and  gave  a  vigorous  blow  to  the  chair-
back.  This  movement  was  sometimes  so  violent  that  the  shock  was  painful,

,  so  that  Mme.  X.  cried  out  at  the  sharpness  of  the  blows.  Long  sentences  could
thus  be  given,  for  when  the  alphabet  was  spelt  out  there  were  movements  and
blows  given  with  the  head,  just  as  in  ordinary  Spiritistic  conversations  there
are  tilts  of  the  table.  Often,  also,  while  one  was  talking  with  Mme.  X.,  there
were  movements  of  her  head,  indicating  that  the  so-called  Dr.  Z.  was  taking

-  part  in  the  discussion,  and  approving  or  disapproving  such  and  such  a  phrase.
More  rarely,  Mme.  X.  would  unconsciously  articulate  a  few  words  with  her  lips,
and  these  words  were  professedly  dictated  by  Dr.  Z.  As  to  the  other  pheno-

,  mena,  I  have  twice  been  present  at  the  ample,  semi-ecstatic  movements  of
salutation  and  prayer  which  Mme.  X.  made  against  her  will.  It  was  a  curious
scene  ;  for  Mme.  X.  preserved  her  consciousness  all  the  time  and  continued  to
talk  to  us  while  executing  this  strange  and  complicated  mimicry.  It  is  to  be
observed  that  Mme.  X.  is  a  person  of  calm  nature,  and  rather  apathetic  than
VOL.  n.  I


130  CHAPTER  VIII  [834

nervous.  She  has  strong  common-sense,  is  healthy,  and  reasonable  in  char-
acter. It  seems  that  she  never  had  any  previous  hallucination.  She  is  an
excellent  mother  of  a  family,  and  deservedly  enjoys  general  confidence  and
esteem.

Dr.  X.  sent  us  two  of  the  prescriptions  written  by  Mme.  X.'s  hand.
We  compared  them  with  British  Pharmacopoeal  prescriptions,  by  the
;aid  of  Burggraeve's  Guide  de  Medecine  Dosimetrique  (Paris,  1872).  Both
prescriptions  are  in  fair  accord  with  English  practice  ;  the  doses  of  arsenic
in  the  one  case,  of  strychnia  in  the  other,  being  rather  stronger  than
usually  given.  Each  prescription  contains  several  ingredients,  in  what
seems  reasonable  proportion.

Finally,  we  learn  that  Dr.  Z.  in  life  was  gay  and  fond  of  practical  jokes.

834.  These   last   cases   have   become   increasingly   complex.      One
wonders  to  what  extent  this  strange  manufacture  of  inward  romances  can  be
carried.     There  is,  I  may  say,  a  great  deal  more  of  it  in  the  world  than  is
commonly  suspected.     I    have   myself  received  so   many  cases  of  these
dramatised   utterances — as   though   a  number   of  different   spirits   were
writing  in  turn  through   some  automatist's  hand — that  I  have  come  to
recognise  the  operation  of  some  law  of  dreams,  so  to  call  it,  as  yet  but
obscurely  understood.     The  alleged  personalities  are  for  the  most  part
not  only  unidentified,  but  purposely  unidentifiable ;  they  give  themselves
romantic  or  ludicrous  names,  and  they  are  produced  and  disappear  as
lightly  as  puppets  on  a  mimic  stage.     The  main  curiosity  of  such  cases
lies  in  their  very  persistence  and  complexity ;  it  would  be  a  waste  of  space
to  quote  any  of  the  longer  ones  in  such  a  way  as  to  do  them  justice.
And,  fortunately,  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  give  any  of  my  own  cases ;
since  a  specially  good  case  has  been  specially  well  observed  and  reported
in  a  book  with  which  many  of  my  readers  are  probably  already  acquainted,
— Professor  Flournoy's  Des  Indes  a  la  planete  Mars :  Etude  sur  un  cas
de  Somnambulisme  avec  Glossolalie  (Paris  and  Geneva,  1900).     I  shall
here  make  some  comments  on  that  striking  record,  which  all  students
of  these  subjects  ought  to  study  in  detail.

835.  It  happens,  no  doubt,  to  any  group  which  pursues  for  many
years  a  somewhat  unfamiliar  line  of  inquiry  that  those  of  their  points
which  are  first  assailed  get  gradually  admitted,  so  that  as  they  become
interested  in  new  points  they  may  scarcely  observe  what  change  has  taken
place  in  the  reception  of  the  old.     The  reader  of  early  volumes  of  the
Proceedings   S.P.R.   will  often  observe  this  kind  of  progress  of  opinion.
And  now  Professor  Flournoy's  book  indicates  in  a  remarkable  way  how
things  have  moved  in  the  psychology  of  the  last  twenty  years.     The  book
— a  model  of  fairness  throughout — is  indeed,  for  the  most  part,  critically
destructive  in  its  treatment    of  the   quasi-supernormal    phenomena  with
which  it  deals.     But  what  a  mass  of  conceptions  a  competent  psychologist
now  takes  for  granted  in  this  realm,  which  the  official  science  of  twenty
years  ago  would  scarcely  stomach  our  hinting  at !


835]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  131

One  important  point  may  be  noticed  at  once  as  decisively  corroborating
a  contention  of  my  own  made  long  ago,  and  at  a  time  when  it  probably
seemed  fantastic  to  many  readers.  Arguing  for  the  potential  continuity  of
subliminal  mentation  (as  against  those  who  urged  that  there  were  only
occasional  flashes  of  submerged  thought,  like  scattered  dreams),  I  said
that  it  would  soon  be  found  needful  to  press  this  notion  of  a  continuous
subliminal  self  to  the  utmost,  if  we  were  not  prepared  to  admit  a  con-
tinuous spiritual  guidance  or  possession.  Now,  in  fact,  with  Professor
Flournoy's  subject  the  whole  discussion  turns  on  this  very  point.  There
is  unquestionably  a  continuous  and  complex  series  of  thoughts  and  feelings
going  on  beneath  the  threshold  of  consciousness  of  M1Ie  "  Helene  Smith."
Is  this  submerged  mentation  due  in  any  degree  or  in  any  manner  to  the
operation  of  spirits  other  than  Mlle  Smith's  own?  That  is  the  broad
question ;  but  it  is  complicated  here  by  a  subsidiary  question  :  whether,
namely,  any  previous  incarnations  of  MIle  Smith's — other  phases  of  her
own  spiritual  history,  now  involving  complex  relationship  with  the  past —
have  any  part  in  the  crowd  of  personalities  which  seem  struggling  to
express  themselves  through  her  quite  healthy  organism.

Mlle  Smith,  I  should  at  once  say,  is  not,1  and  never  has  been,  a  paid
medium.  At  the  date  of  M.  Flournoy's  book,  she  occupied  a  leading  post
on  the  staff  of  a  large  maison  de  commerce  at  Geneva,  and  gave  stances
to  her  friends  simply  because  she  enjoyed  the  exercise  of  her  mediumistic
faculties,  and  was  herself  interested  in  their  explanation.

Her  organism,  I  repeat,  is  regarded,  both  by  herself  and  by  others,  as
a  quite  healthy  one.  Mlle  Smith,  says  Professor  Flournoy,  declares  dis-
tinctly that  she  is  perfectly  sound  in  body  and  mind, — in  no  way  lacking  in
equilibrium, — and  indignantly  repudiates  the  idea  that  there  is  any  hurtful
anomaly  or  the  slightest  danger  in  mediumship  as  she  practises  it.

"  I  am  so  far  from  being  abnormal,"  she  writes,  "  that  I  have  never
been  so  clear-sighted,  so  lucid,  so  capable  of  judging  rapidly  on  all  points,
as  since  I  have  been  developed  as  a  medium."  No  one  appears  to  dispute
this  estimate,  which  the  facts  of  Mlle  Smith's  progress  in  her  line  of  business
distinctly  confirm.

"  It  is  in  fact  incontestable  "  (continues  Professor  Flournoy,  p.  41),  "  that
Helene  has  a  head  extremely  well  organised ;  and  that  from  a  business
point  of  view  she  manages  admirably  the  very  important  and  complicated
department  of  which  she  is  at  the  head  in  this  large  shop  where  she  is
employed ;  so  that  to  accuse  her  of  being  morbid  simply  because  she  is  a
medium  is  to  say  the  least  an  inadmissible  petitio  principii  so  long  as  the
very  nature  of  mediumship  remains  a  thing  so  obscure  and  open  to  discus-
sion as  is  still  the  case.  .  .  .

"  It  is  clear  that  there  exist  amid  the  ranks  of  the  learned  faculty
certain  spirits  narrow  and  limited,  strong  in  their  own  specialities,  but

1  For  Mlle  Smith's  later  history,  see  Professor  Flournoy's  Nouvelles  Observations  sur
tineas  de  Somnambulistne,  Geneva,  1902. — EDITORS.


132  CHAPTER    VIII  [835

ready  to  cast  their  anathemas  at  whatever  does  not  fit  in  with  their
preconceived  ideas,  and  to  treat  as  morbid,  pathological,  insane,  every-
thing which  differs  from  the  normal  type  of  human  nature,  such  as  they
have  conceived  it  on  the  model  of  their  own  small  personalities.  .  .  .

"  But  in  the  first  place  the  essential  criterion  in  judging  of  a  human
being's  value  is  not  the  question  whether  he  is  in  good  or  bad  health,  like
or  unlike  other  people,  but  whether  he  fulfils  adequately  his  special  task —
how  he  acquits  himself  of  the  functions  incumbent  on  him,  and  what  may
be  expected  or  hoped  from  him.  I  am  not  aware  that  Miss  Smith's
psychical  faculties  have  ever  interfered  with  her  accomplishment  of  any  of
her  duties ;  rather  they  have  helped  her  therein ;  for  her  normal  and  con-
scious activity  has  often  found  an  unexpected  assistance — which  non-
mediums  lack  ! — in  her  subliminal  inspirations  and  her  automatisms,  which
effect  a  useful  end.

"In  the  second  place,  it  is  far  from  being  demonstrated  that  medium-
ship  is  a  pathological  phenomenon.  It  is  abnormal,  no  doubt,  in  the  sense
of  being  rare,  exceptional ;  but  rarity  is  not  morbidity.  The  few  years
during  which  these  phenomena  have  been  seriously  and  scientifically
studied  have  not  been  enough  to  allow  us  to  pronounce  on  their  true
nature.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  countries  where  these  studies
have  been  pushed  the  furthest,  in  England  and  America,  the  dominant
view  among  the  savants  who  have  gone  deepest  into  the  matter  is  not  at
all  unfavourable  to  mediumship;  and  that,  far  from  regarding  it  as  a
special  case  of  hysteria,  they  see  in  it  a  faculty  superior,  advantageous,
healthy,  of  which  hysteria  is  a  form  of  degenerescence,  a  pathological
parody,  a  morbid  caricature."

The  phenomena  which  this  sensitive  presents  (Helene  Smith  is  Pro-
fessor Flournoy's  pseudonym  for  her)  cover  a  range  which  looks  at
first  very  wide,  although  a  clearer  analysis  shows  that  these  varieties  are
more  apparent  than  real,  and  that  self- suggestion  will  perhaps  account  for
all  of  them.

There  is,  to  begin  with,  every  kind  of  automatic  irruption  of  subliminal
into  supraliminal  life.  As  Professor  Flournoy  says  (p.  45)  :  "  Phenomena
of  hypermnesia,  divinations,  mysterious  findings  of  lost  objects,  happy
inspirations,  exact  presentiments,  just  intuitions,  teleological  (purposive  or
helpful)  automatisms,  in  short,  of  every  kind;  she  possesses  in  a  high
degree  this  small  change  of  genius — which  constitutes  a  more  than  suffi-
cient compensation  for  the  inconvenience  resulting  from  those  distractions
and  moments  of  absence  of  mind  which  accompany  her  visions;  and
which,  moreover,  generally  pass  unobserved."

At  stances — where  the  deeper  change  has  no  inconveniences —
Helene  undergoes  a  sort  of  self-hypnotisation  which  produces  various
lethargic  and  somnambulistic  states.  And  when  she  is  alone  and  safe
from  interruption  she  has  spontaneous  visions,  during  which  there  may
be  some  approach  to  ecstasy.  At  the  stances  she  experiences  positive


835]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  133

hallucinations,  and  also  negative  hallucinations,  or  systematised  anses-
thesiae,  so  that,  for  instance,  she  will  cease  to  see  some  person  present,
especially  one  who  is  to  be  the  recipient  of  messages  in  the  course  of  the
stance.  "It  seems  as  though  a  dream-like  incoherence  presided  over
this  preliminary  work  of  disaggregation,  in  which  the  normal  perceptions
are  arbitrarily  split  up  or  absorbed  by  the  subconscious  personality —
eager  for  materials  with  which  to  compose  the  hallucinations  which  it  is
preparing."  Then,  when  the  stance  begins,  the  main  actor  is  H£lene's
guide  Leopold  (a  pseudonym  for  Cagliostro)  who  speaks  and  writes  through
her,  and  is,  in- fact,  either  her  leading  spirit- control  or  (much  more  pro-
bably) her  most  developed  form  of  secondary  personality.

Hdene,  indeed,  has  sometimes  the  impression  of  becoming  Leopold
for  a  moment  (p.  117).  Professor  Flournoy  compares  this  sensation  with
the  experience  of  Mr.  Hill  Tout  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  309),  who
feels  himself  becoming  his  own  father,  who  is  manifesting  through  him.
It  should  be  added  that,  although  somewhat  pompous,  Leopold  always
appears  both  sensible  and  dignified.  "  Leopold,"  says  Professor  Flournoy
(p.  134)  "certainly  manifests  a  very  honourable  and  amiable  side  of  Mlle
Smith's  character,  and  in  taking  him  as  her  *  guide  '  she  has  followed
inspirations  which  are  doubtless  among  the  highest  in  her  nature."

The  high  moral  quality  of  these  automatic  communications,  on  which
Professor  Flournoy  thus  insists,  is  a  phenomenon  worth  consideration.  I
do  not  mean  that  it  is  specially  strange  in  the  case  of  MIle  Smith.  She
appears  to  be  (if  the  phrase  is  thought  permissible  in  describing  a  medium)
a  person  of  remarkably  well-regulated  mind.  One  is  not  surprised  that
her  subliminal  self  should  be  as  blameless  a?  her  supraliminal.  But  in
reality  the  remark  here  made  by  Professor  Flournoy  has  a  much  wider
application.  The  almost  universally  high  moral  tone  of  genuinely  auto-
matic utterances — whether  claimed  as  spirit  communications  or  pro-
ceeding obviously  from  the  automatist  himself — has  not,  I  think,  been
sufficiently  noticed,  or  adequately  explained.  I  will  mention  two  points
which  have  struck  me  as  specially  noticeable.  In  the  first  place  I  have
read  many  pulpit  and  other  attacks  on  "  spiritualism,"  under  which  name
all  automatic  utterance  is  commonly  included,  and  I  cannot  remember
any  instance  in  which  such  an  attack  has  been  made  effective  by  the
quotation  of  passages  of  immoral  tendency — base,  cruel,  or  impure.  The
attack,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  always  been  of  a  kind  which,  in  the  eye
of  the  philosopher,  is  rather  complimentary  to  the  writings  attacked.  For
it  seems  (and  this  is  the  second  point  to  which  I  wished  to  call  attention
here)  that  no  one  of  the  various  conflicting  Churches  has  been  able  to
claim  the  general  drift  of  automatic  messages  as  making  for  its  special
tenets.  The  various  controversialists,  where  they  have  been  candid,  have
admitted  moral  elevation,  but, — from  their  various  opposing  points  of
view, — have  agreed  in  deploring  theological  laxity.

I  must  indeed  confess  myself  unable  to  explain  why  it  is  that  beneath


134  CHAPTER    VIII  [836

the  frequent  incoherence,  frequent  commonplaceness,  frequent  pomposity
of  these  messages  there  should  almost  always  be  a  substratum  of  better
sense,  of  truer  catholicity,  than  is  usually  to  be  heard  except  from  the
leading  minds  of  the  generation.  It  is  possible  that  in  some  hidden  way
the  Zeit-Geist  affects  the  subliminal  strata  even  of  persons  superficially
narrow  and  bigoted  by  an  influence  urging  them  all  in  somewhat  the  same
direction ; — so  that  the  best  available  thought  of  the  age  is  inspiring  the
age  more  profoundly  than  we  know.  And  it  is  possible  also  that  these
utterances  may  bear  in  reality  some  obscure  relation  to  truths  profounder
than  we  have  as  yet  normally  acquired.  What  is  omitted,  indeed,  from
current  beliefs  is  as  significant  as  what  is  added  thereto,  and  the  general
product  looks  more  like  a  very  poor  account  of  something  which  in  itself
is  great  and  new,  but  dimly  apprehended,  than  like  a  compromise  between
conflicting  dogmas,  or  a  selection  from  familiar  hortatory  themes.

836.  Thus  much  I  think  it  was  fair  to  say ; — or  I  may  speak  more
strongly  and  maintain  that  thus  much  it  was  a  positive  duty  to  insist  upon.
It  is  only  right  that  this  mass  of  communications,  taken  as  a  whole,
should  be  defended  from  the  random  accusations  of  journalist  or
pulpiteer.

But,  in  view  of  what  is  to  follow,  I  may  here  define  the  limited  extent
to  which  my  support  of  the  content  of  automatic  messages  goes.

I  think,  then,  that  in  evidential  messages — where  there  is  real  reason
to  believe  that  an  identified  spirit  is  communicating — there  is  a  marked
and  independent  consensus  on  such  matters  as  these  spirits  profess  them-
selves able  to  discuss.  And,  again,  in  non-evidential  messages — in  com-
munications which  probably  proceed  from  the  automatist's  subliminal
self — I  hold  that  there  is  a  remarkable  and  undesigned  concordance  in
high  moral  tone,  and  also  in  avoidance  of  certain  prevalent  tenets,  which
many  of  the  automatists  do  supraliminally  hold  as  true.  But  I  also
insist  that  these  subliminal  messages,  even  when  not  incoherent,  are
generally  dream-like,  and  often  involve  tenets  which  (though  never  in  my
experience  base  or  immoral)  are  unsupported  by  evidence,  and  are  probably
to  be  referred  to  mere  self-suggestion.

Prominent  among  such  tenets  is  one  which  forms  a  large  part  of  Mlle
Smith's  communications;  namely,  the  doctrine  of  reincarnation,  or  of
successive  lives  spent  by  each  soul  upon  this  planet.

The  simple  fact  that  such  was  probably  the  opinion  both  of  Plato  and
of  Virgil  shows  that  there  is  nothing  here  which  is  alien  to  the  best  reason
or  to  the  highest  instincts  of  men.  Nor,  indeed,  is  it  easy  to  realise  any
theory  of  the  direct  creation  of  spirits  at  such  different  stages  of  advance-
ment as  those  which  enter  upon  the  earth  in  the  guise  of  mortal  man.
There  must,  one  feels,  be  some  kind  of  continuity — some  form  of  spiritual
Past.  Yet  for  reincarnation  there  is  at  present  no  valid  evidence ;  and
it  must  be  my  duty  to  show  how  its  assertion  in  any  given  instance—
Mllc  Smith's  included — constitutes  in  itself  a  strong  argument  in  favour


836]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  135

of  self-suggestion  rather  than  extraneous  inspiration  as  the  source  of  the
messages  in  which  it  appears.

Whenever  civilised  men  have  received  what  they  have  regarded  as  a
revelation  (which  has  generally  been  somewhat  fragmentary  in  its  first
delivery)  they  have  naturally  endeavoured  to  complete  and  systematise
it  as  well  as  they  could.  In  so  doing  they  have  mostly  aimed  at  three
objects  :  (i)  to  understand  as  much  as  possible  of  the  secrets  of  the  uni-
verse;  (2)  to  justify  as  far  as  possible  Heaven's  dealings  with  men;  and
(3)  to  appropriate  as  far  as  possible  the  favour  or  benefit  which  the  revela-
tion may  show  as  possibly  accruing  to  believers.  For  all  these  purposes
the  doctrine  of  reincarnation  has  proved  useful  in  many  countries  and
times.  But  in  no  case  could  it  seem  more  appropriate  than  in  this  last
revelation  (so  to  term  it)  through  automatic  messages  and  the  like.  And
as  a  matter  of  history,  a  certain  vigorous  preacher  of  the  new  faith,  known
under  the  name  of  Allan  Kardec,  took  up  reincarnationist  tenets,  enforced
them  (as  there  is  reason  to  believe)  by  strong  suggestion  upon  the  minds
of  various  automatic  writers,  and  set  them  forth  in  dogmatic  works  which
have  had  much  influence,  especially  among  Latin  nations,  from  their  clarity,
symmetry,  and  intrinsic  reasonableness.  Yet  the  data  thus  collected  were
absolutely  insufficient,  and  the  Livre  des  Esprits  must  simply  rank  as  the
premature  formulation  of  a  new  religion — the  premature  systematisation
of  a  nascent  science.

I  follow  Professor  Flournoy  in  believing  that  the  teaching  of  that  work
must  have  directly  or  indirectly  influenced  the  mind  of  Mlle  Smith,  and
is  therefore  responsible  for  her  claim  to  these  incarnations  previous  to  that
which  she  now  undergoes  or  enjoys.

On  the  general  scheme  here  followed,  each  incarnation,  if  the  last  has
been  used  aright,  ought  to  represent  some  advance  in  the  scale  of  being.
If  one  earth-life  has  been  misused,  the  next  earth-life  ought  to  afford
opportunity  for  expiation — or  for  further  practice  in  the  special  virtue
which  has  been  imperfectly  acquired.  Thus  M1Ie  Smith's  present  life  in  a
humble  position  may  be  thought  to  atone  for  her  overmuch  pride  in  her
last  incarnation — as  Marie  Antoinette.

But  the  mention  of  Marie  Antoinette  suggests  the  risk  which  this
theory  fosters — of  assuming  that  one  is  the  issue  of  a  distinguished  line
of  spiritual  progenitors ;  insomuch  that,  with  whatever  temporary  sets-
back,  one  is  sure  in  the  end  to  find  oneself  in  a  leading  position.

Pythagoras,  indeed,  was  content  with  the  secondary  hero  Euphorbus
as  his  bygone  self.  But  in  our  days  Dr.  Anna  Kingsford  and  Mr.  Edward
Maitland  must  needs  have  been  the  Virgin  Mary  and  St.  John  the  Divine.
And  Victor  Hugo,  who  was  naturally  well  to  the  front  in  these  self-multi-
plications, took  possession  of  most  of  the  leading  personages  of  antiquity
whom  he  could  manage  to  string  together  in  chronological  sequence.
It  is  obvious  that  any  number  of  re-born  souls  can  play  at  this  game ;  but
where  no  one  adduces  any  evidence  it  seems  hardly  worth  while  to  go  on.


136  CHAPTER    VIII  [837

Even  Pythagoras  does  not  appear  to  have  adduced  any  evidence  beyond
his  ipse  dixit  for  his  assertion  that  the  alleged  shield  of  Euphorbus  had  in
reality  been  borne  by  that  mythical  hero.  Meantime  the  question  as  to
reincarnation  has  actually  been  put  to  a  very  few  spirits  who  have  given
some  real  evidence  of  their  identity.  So  far  as  I  know,  no  one  of  these
has  claimed  to  know  anything  personally  of  such  an  incident ;  although
all  have  united  in  saying  that  their  knowledge  was  too  limited  to  allow  them
to  generalise  on  the  matter.

Helene's  controls  and  previous  incarnations — to  return  to  our  subject
— do  perhaps  suffer  from  the  general  fault  of  aiming  too  high.  She  has
to  her  credit  a  control  from  the  planet  Mars ;  one  pre-incarnation  as  an
Indian  Princess ;  and  a  second  (as  I  have  said)  as  Marie  Antoinette.

837.  In  each  case  there  are  certain  impressive  features  in  the  im-
personation ;  but  in  each  case  also  careful  analysis  negatives  the  idea  that
we  can  be  dealing  with  a  personality  really  revived  from  a  former  epoch,
or  from  a  distant  planet ; — and  leaves  us  inclined  to  explain  everything  by
"  cryptomnesia  "  (as  Professor  Flournoy  calls  submerged  memory),  and
that  subliminal  inventiveness  of  which  we  already  know  so  much.

The  Martian  control  was  naturally  the  most  striking  at  first
sight.  Its  reality  was  supported  by  a  Martian  language,  written  in  a
Martian  alphabet,  spoken  with  fluency,  and  sufficiently  interpreted  into
French  to  show  that  such  part  of  it,  at  any  rate,  as  could  be  committed  to
writing  was  actually  a  grammatical  and  coherent  form  of  speech.

And  here  I  reach  an  appropriate  point  at  which  to  remark  that  this
book  of  Professor  Flournoy's  is  not  the  first  account  which  has  been
published  of  MUe  H61ene.  Professor  Lemaitre,  of  Geneva,  printed  two
papers  about  her  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques :  first,  a  long
article  in  the  number  for  March-April,  1897 — then  a  reply  to  M.  Lefebure
in  the  number  for  May-June,  1897.  In  these  papers  he  distinctly  claims
supernormal  powers  for  MUe  Helene,  implying  a  belief  in  her  genuine
possession  by  spirits,  and  even  in  her  previous  incarnations,  and  in
the  extra-terrene  or  ostensibly  Martian  language.  I  read  these  papers
at  the  time,  but  put  them  aside  as  inconclusive,  mainly  because  that
very  language,  on  which  M.  Lemaitre  seemed  most  to  rely,  appeared  to
me  so  obviously  factitious  as  to  throw  doubt  on  all  the  evidence  pre-
sented by  an  observer  who  could  believe -that  denizens  of  another  planet
talked  to  each  other  in  a  language  corresponding  in  every  particular  with
simple  French  idioms,  and  including  such  words  as  quisa  for  quel,  quise  for
quelle,  veteche  for  voir,  veche  for  vu  ; — the  fantastic  locutions  of  the  nursery.
M.  Lemaitre  remarks,  as  a  proof  of  the  consistency  and  reality  of  the
extra-terrene  tongue,  "  L'un  des  premiers  mots  que  nous  ayons  eus,
metiche,  signifiant  monsieur,  se  retrouve  plus  tard  avec  le  sens  de  homme"
*That  is  to  say,  having  transmogrified  monsieur  into  m'etiche,  Helene  further
transmutes  les  messieurs  into  cee  metiche ; — in  naive  imitation  of  ordinary
French  usage.  And  this  tongue  is  supposed  to  have  sprung  up  indepen-


837]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  137

dently  of  all  the  influences  which  have  shaped  terrene  grammar  in  general
or  the  French  idiom  in  particular  !  And  even  after  Professor  Flournoy's
analysis  of  this  absurdity  I  see  newspapers  speaking  of  this  Martian
language  as  an  impressive  phenomenon  !  They  seem  willing  to  believe
that  the  evolution  of  another  planet,  if  it  has  culminated  in  conscious  life
at  all,  can  have  culminated  in  a  conscious  life  into  which  we  could  all  of
us  enter  affably,  with  a  suitable  Ollendorff's  phrase-book  under  our  arms ;
— "  eni  cee  metich'e  one  qude" — "  ici  les  hommes  (messieurs)  sont  bons," —
"  here  the  men  are  good ;  " — and  the  rest  of  it.

To  the  student  of  automatisms,  of  course,  all  this  irresistibly  suggests
the  automatist's  own  subliminal  handiwork.  It  is  a  case  of  "  glossolaly,"
or  "  speaking  with  tongues"  ;  and  we  have  no  modern  case — no  case  later
than  the  half-mythical  Miracles  of  the  Cevennes — where  such  utterance
has  proved  to  be  other  than  gibberish.  I  have  had  various  automatic
hieroglyphics  shown  to  me,  with  the  suggestion  that  they  may  be  cursive*
Japanese,  or  perhaps  an  old  dialect  of  Northern  China ;  but  I  confess
that  I  have  grown  tired  of  showing  these  fragments  to  the  irresponsive
expert,  who  suggests  that  they  may  also  be  vague  reminiscences  of  the
scrolls  in  an  Oriental  tea-tray.

It  seems  indeed  to  be  a  most  difficult  thing  to  get  telepathically  into
any  brain  even  fragments  of  a  language  which  it  has  not  learnt.  A  few
simple  Italian,  and  even  Hawaiian,  words  occur  in  Mrs.  Piper's  utterances,
coming  apparently  from  departed  spirits,  (see  960  A  and  961),  but  these,
with  some  Kaffir  and  Chinese  words  given  through  Miss  Browne  (871  A),
form,  I  think,  almost  the  only  instances  which  I  know.  And,  speaking
generally,  whatever  is  elaborate,  finished,  pretentious,  is  likely  to  be  of
subliminal  facture ;  while  only  things  scrappy,  perplexed,  and  tentative
have  floated  to  us  veritably  from  afar.

Analysis  of  the  so-called  Martian  language  proves  it  to  be  no  exception
to  this  rule.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  childish,  though  elaborate,  imitation  of
French ; — whose  true  parallel  lies  in  those  languages  of  the  nursery  which
little  brothers  and  sisters  sometimes  invent — as  a  tongue  not  understanded
of  their  elders.  The  outbursts  of  this  Martian  speech  are  noticeable  as  a
parallel  to  the  "  deific  verbiage,"  which  used  to  throng  through  the  lips  of
Mr.  le  Baron  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  p.  277),  and  for  a  long  time
impressed  itself  upon  him  as  having  some  reality  in  it  somewhere.

The  most  interesting  peculiarity,  indeed,  in  the  Martian  tongue  is  its
exclusively  French  formation ;  which  would  seem  to  argue  its  elaboration
in  a  mind  familiar  with  French  alone.  Now  Mlle  Smith — who,  by  the
way,  is  no  linguist  * — had  some  German  lessons  in  her  girlhood,  and  one
is  thus  led  to  the  curious  supposition  that  the  Martian  tongue  was
invented  by  some  element  in  her  personality  which  preceded  the  German
lessons.

1  Her  father,  however,  was  acquainted  with  some  half-dozen  European  languages
and  had  besides  some  knowledge  of  Latin  and  Greek.  (SeeDes  Indes,  p.  15.)


138  CHAPTER    VIII  [838

I  may  perhaps  recall  here,  a  trivial  experience  of  my  own  illustrative  of
this  ingenious  hypothesis  of  Professor  Flournoy's.  I  once  dreamt  that
I  saw  an  epitaph  in  Greek  hexameters  inscribed  on  a  wall,  of  which  on
waking  I  remembered  only  one  line —

Avrap  6  jotev  Kara  yfjv  6a\epbv  KVCTC  SctKi/o^ei/ov  irvp.

I  could  not  construe  this  line,  which  is,  in  fact,  nonsense; — till  I
remembered  in  a  sudden  flash  a  certain  sense  of  shame  felt  by  me  as  a
small  boy  at  having  thought  that  /cara  meant  under — as  though  /caret  yfjv
were  y^s  Karoo.

The  line,  then,  had  a  meaning :  "  But  he,  indeed,  beneath  the  earth,
embraced  the  strong  consuming  flame  ;  " — not  a  well-chosen  sentiment  for
an  epitaph,  perhaps,  but  yet  up  to  the  ordinary  level  of  one's  dreaming
self.  There  must,  then,  have  been  some  fragment  of  me  yet  surviving
from  innocent  boyhood,  and  blundering  subliminally  in  the  same  old  style.
838.  "This  fact  of  the  primitive  nature  of  Mlle  Smith's  various

-^hypnoidal  elucubrations,  and  the  different  ages  of  her  life  to  which  they
belong,  seems  to  me  (says  Professor  Flournoy,  p.  415)  to  constitute
one  of  the  most  interesting  psychological  points  in  her  mediumship.  It
tends  to  show  that  her  secondary  personalities  are  probably  in  their  origin,
as  has  sometimes  been  suggested,  phenomena  partly  of  reversion  to  the
ordinary  personality — survivals  or  momentary  returns  of  inferior  phases,
overpassed  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  and  which  should  normally  have
been  absorbed  in  the  development  of  the  individual  instead  of  appearing

v  externally  in  strange  proliferations.  Just  as  teratology  illustrates  embry-
ology, which  in  return  explains  teratology,  and  as  both  of  these  unite  in
throwing  light  on  anatomy, — similarly  one  may  hope  that  the  study  of  the
facts  of  mediumship  may  some  day  help  to  furnish  us  with  some  just  and
fruitful  view  of  normal  psychogenesis, — which  in  return  will  enable  us
better  to  comprehend  the  appearance  of  these  singular  phenomena ;
so  that  psychology  in  general  may  thence  acquire  a  better  and  exacter
conception  of  human  personality."

The  faculty  here  touched  upon — the  strong  reviviscence  of  long-past
emotional  states — seems  to  me  eminently  characteristic,  at  any  rate,  of
artistic  and  poetical  genius.

The  artist  must  needs  desire  to  have  his  whole  life  to  draw  upon.  He
must  often  wish  to  live  in  the  past  more  vividly  than  in  the  present,  and
to  feel  again  what  he  has  felt,  even  more  than  to  see  again  what  he  has
seen.  Visual  and  auditory  memories,  pushed  to  absolute  vividness,  become
hallucinations  of  vision  or  audition ;  and  this  point  of  absolute  hallucina-
tion few  artists  are  able  or  even  desire  to  reach.  But  emotional  or  affective
memory  may  for  some  gifted  natures  be  pushed  on  into  all  its  old  actual
vividness  with  pure  gain  to  art ;  nay,  if  the  man  himself  has  grown  more
capable  of  feeling,  then  the  revived  emotion  (like  certain  optical  memory-
images)  may  even  go  beyond  the  original.


839]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  139

Thus  Sully  Prudhomme  says,  in  speaking  of  a  hidden  insurgent
memory  of  this  type  :  "  C'est  meme  cette  reViviscence  qui  seule  me  per-
mettrait  de  retoucher  les  vers  que  cette  petite  aventure,  si  ancienne,  m'a
fait  commettre,  et  de  faire  be"ne"ficier  de  Pexpe"rience  que  j'ai  acquise  dans
mon  art  1'expression  de  mes  sentiments  d'autrefois."  And  he  asks  whether
every  memory  of  feeling  does  not  assume  a  certain  character  of  hallucina-
tion. Wordsworth  (as  Aubrey  de  Vere  has  told  us,  and  as  the  sonnet
"  surprised  by  joy,"  shows)  had  very  much  the  same  experience.  And
Littre  (Revue Positive,  1877,  p.  660)  describes  what  he  calls  the  "affective
automnesia  " — or  spontaneously  arising  flow  of  emotion — with  which  quite
suddenly,  and  late  in  life,  he  remembered  losing  a  young  sister  when  he
was  ten  years  old  :  "  Ce  meme  eVenement  s'est  reproduit  avec  une  peine
non  moindre,  certes,  que  celle  que  j'e"prouvais  au  moment  meme,  et  qui
alia  jusqu'a  mouiller  mes  yeux  de  larmes." *

This  train  of  reflections,  I  think,  well  illustrates  that  kinship  between
the  working  of  what  is  admitted  as  genius  and  the  dreamlike  subliminal
mentation  with  which  we  are  here  dealing,  of  which  I  have  often  spoken,
and  to  which  I  must  again  presently  recur.

Turning  now  to  the  Hindoo  pre-incarnation,  we  observe  that  it  offers  a
linguistic  problem  of  a  rather  different  kind.  Certain  Sanscrit  letters
are  written,  and  certain  Sanscrit  words  are  uttered — mixed,  it  is  true,
with  much  quasi- Sanscrit  gibberish,  and  not  exceeding  what  a  quick  eye
and  memory  might  pick  up  in  a  few  hours  from  a  Sanscrit  grammar.
Helene,  however — whose  complete  good  faith  is  vouched  for  on  all  sides
and  who  herself  undoubtedly  believes  with  her  whole  heart  in  the  spirit-
hypothesis — denies  that  she  ever  consulted  or  even  to  her  knowledge  saw,
a  Sanscrit  grammar.  Again,  M.  Flournoy's  careful  researches  have  shown
that  incidents  of  the  Indian  history,  or  pseudo-history,  on  which  the  narra-
tive of  this  incarnation  turns,  are  undoubtedly  derived  from  a  particular
passage  in  a  rare  and  antiquated  history  of  India  by  de  Maries — which
MUe  Smith  asserts  that  she  never  saw,  and  which  it  seems  very  improbable
that  she  should  have  seen.2  This  knowledge  is  worked  up  in  a  way  indicat-
ing considerable  familiarity  with  the  East,  and  quasi-Indian  tunes  and
gestures  are  employed  with  great  verisimilitude.

I  need  not  here  go  into  the  details  of  the  more  modern  and  accessible
characterisation  of  Marie  Antoinette.

839.     In   the  facts  which   I  have  already   given,  we   have   got   this

1  See  Ribot,  Psychologic  des  Sentiments,  p.  152.

2  See,  however,  Nouvelles  Observations  (pp.  212-213),  from  which  it  appears  that  a
gentleman  in  whose  house  Mlle  Smith  used  to  give  seances  possessed  a  Sanscrit  grammar,
and  kept  it  in  the  room  where  the  seances  were  held.     In  the  same  book  (pp.  206-216),
Professor  Flournoy  points  out  several  other  sources  besides  Maries'  history  (itself  to  be
found  in  the  two  principal  libraries  of  Geneva)  from  which  her  knowledge  of  India
might  have  been  derived ;  and  he  shows  (pp.  203-206)  that  the  Hindoo  romance  pre-
sented internal  contradictions  which  made  it  inconsistent  with  any  hypothesis  of  re-
incarnation.— EDITORS.


140  CHAPTER    VIII  [840

problem  reduced  to  its  narrowest  form ;  and  I  shall  set  forth,  as  barely
possible,  a  theory  which  Professor  Flournoy  has  not  invoked.  I  agree
with  him  that  the  notion  of  the  truth  of  the  Indian  romance  must  be  quite
dismissed.  But  I  do  not  therefore  think  it  certain  that  Mlle  Smith  must
have  unconsciously  seen  de  Maries'  history  and  a  Sanscrit  grammar,  since
it  seems  to  me  just  possible  that  the  knowledge  of  de  Maries  and  of
Sanscrit  may  have  been  clairvoyantly  acquired  by  her  subliminal  self.

Further,  it  has  sometimes  been  alleged  that  discarnate  spirits  may
be  concerned  in  the  composition  of  such  romances,  on  the  hypothesis
that  if  they  do  act  upon  human  minds,  they  probably  so  act  sometimes  to
amuse  themselves,  as  well  as  to  please  or  inform  us.  I  know  of  no  evidence,
indeed,  of  their  having  any  power  to  injure  us,  but  it  is  thought  by  some
that  there  is  a  good  deal  of  evidence  of  tricky,  playful  interference,  and
that  a  kind  of  literary  impulse  to  write  or  act  out  romances,  through  the
intermediacy  of  some  human  being,  may  be  one  form  of  this  mystifying
intervention.  There  is,  however,  no  need  to  postulate  the  existence  of
tricky  spirits  when  the  phenomena  can  be  adequately  accounted  for  by  the
known  tendencies  of  the  subliminal  self,  as  exemplified  in  such  cases  as
the  "Clelia"  and  Newnham  writings  (830  A  and  849  A),  and  Sally
Beauchamp  (234  A).

840.  I  pass  on  from  these  reincarnational  romances  to  certain
minor,  but  interesting  phenomena,  which  Professor  Flournoy  calls  teleolo-
gical  automatisms.  These  are  small  acts  of  helpfulness — beneficent  synergies,
as  we  might  term  them,  in  contrast  with  the  injurious  synergies,  or  com-
bined groups  of  hurtful  actions,  with  which  hysteria  has  made  us  familiar.
We  have  already  printed  several  incidents  of  this  type  in  our  Proceedings
and  Journal.  (See,  for  instance,  the  trivial  but  instructive  case  of  Mrs.
Verrall  and  the  envelopes,  given  in  818  A.)

"One  day,"  says  Professor  Flournoy  (p.  55),  "Miss  Smith,  when
desiring  to  lift  down  a  large  and  heavy  object  which  lay  on  a  high  shelf,
was  prevented  from  doing  so  because  her  raised  arm  remained  for  some
seconds  as  though  petrified  in  the  air  and  incapable  of  movement.  She
took  this  as  a  warning,  and  gave  up  the  attempt.  At  a  subsequent  seance
Leopold  stated  that  it  was  he  who  had  thus  fixed  Helene's  arm  to  prevent
her  from  grasping  this  object,  which  was  much  too  heavy  for  her,  and
would  have  caused  her  some  accident.

"  Another  time,  a  shopman,  who  had  been  looking  in  vain  for  a  certain
pattern,  asked  H£lene  if  by  chance  she  knew  what  had  become  of  it.
H£lene  answered  mechanically  and  without  reflection — '  Yes,  it  has  been
sent  to  Mr.  J.'  (a  client  of  the  house) .  At  the  same  time  she  saw  before
her  the  number  18  in  large  black  figures  a  few  feet  from  the  ground,  and
added  instinctively,  '  It  was  sent  eighteen  days  ago.'  [This  was  in  the
highest  degree  improbable,  but  was  found  to  be  absolutely  correct.]  Leo-
pold had  no  recollection  of  this,  and  does  not  seem  to  have  been  the
author  of  this  cryptomnesic  automatism."


841]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  141

A  similar  phenomenon  has  also  been  noted  (p.  87)  when  warning  is
conveyed  by  an  actual  phantasmal  figure.

MUe  Smith  has  seen  an  apparition  of  Leopold,  barring  a  particular
road,  under  circumstances  which  make  it  probable  that  Mlle  Smith  would
on  that  day  have  had  cause  to  regret  taking  that  route.  (Compare  the
case  of  an  apparition  seen  by  a  lady  near  an  open  lift,  referred  to  at  the
end  of  823 ;  and  the  warning  to  Socrates  to  change  his  route,  see  814.)

841.  The  next  question  is  as  to  whether  supernormal  faculty  of  any
kind  is  manifested  in  Helene's  phenomena.  There  does  appear  to  be
some  telepathy  (see  p.  363,  &c.),  and  of  telepathy  Professor  Flournoy
speaks  as  follows  : —

"  One  may  almost  say  that,  if  telepathy  did  not  exist,  it  would  be
necessary  to  invent  it.  I  mean  by  this  that  a  direct  action  between  living
beings,  independently  of  the  organs  of  sense,  is  a  thing  so  in  accord  with
all  that  we  know  of  nature  that  it  would  be  difficult  not  to  assume  its
existence  a  priori,  even  were  no  sign  of  it  perceptible.  How  could  one
believe,  indeed,  that  centres  of  chemical  phenomena  so  complex  as  the
nervous  centres  could  find  themselves  in  activity  without  transmitting
various  undulations — X,  Y,  or  Z  rays — passing  through  the  skull  as  the
sun  passes  through  glass,  and  going  on  to  act,  at  any  distance,  on  their
homologues  in  other  skulls  ?  It  is  a  mere  question  of  intensity.  .  .  .

"  If  telepathy  is  considered  strange,  mystic,  occult,  supernormal,  &c.,
it  is  because  this  character  has  been  gratuitously  conferred  on  it  by  making
of  this  imponderable  link  between  organisms  a  purely  spiritual  communica-
tion of  soul  to  soul,  independent  of  matter  and  of  space.  That  such  a
metaphysical  union  does  exist  I  am  ready  to  believe,  but  it  is  to  introduce
a  gratuitous  confusion  if  one  substitutes  this  problem  of  high  speculation
—which  abandons  the  strictly  scientific  ground  and  sets  aside  the  principle
of  psycho-physical  parallelism — for  the  empirical  problem  of  telepathy,
which  is  perfectly  concordant  with  that  parallelism  and  in  no  way  contra-
dicts established  science."

Now,  of  course,  it  has  been  obvious  from  the  outset  of  our  researches
that  it  would  be  very  desirable  if  we  could  trace  some  relation  between
telepathy  and  ether  vibrations.  There  are  doubtless  endless  vibrations
waiting  to  be  intelligibly  appropriated ; — and  telepathy  is  a  phenomenon
greatly  in  need  of  an  explanation.  The  more  complex  any  object  is,
moreover,  the  more  strangely  it  will  vibrate ;  and  the  more  sensitive  any
object  is,  the  more  strangely  will  it  receive  and  respond  to  vibrations.

Nevertheless,  when  we  have  said  this — as  Sir  W.  Crookes  has  said  it
with  great  impressiveness  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  pp.  348-352)  —
we  have  said  nearly  all  that  can  be  said  for  the  vibration-theory  of
telepathy.  In  Chapter  VI.  (pp.  245-246),  I  have  attempted  to  show  the
inadequacy  of  this  theory  to  cover  the  facts,  and  have  suggested  that
telepathic  observations  may  in  time  teach  us  something  of  the  relation  of
life  to  the  organism.


142  CHAPTER    VIII  [842

842.  Most  instructive  of  all  will  it  be  if  we  can  obtain  telepathy  from
discarnate  spirits,  and  especially  if  we  can  get  any  glimpse  of  a  rela-
tion between  their  mode  of  being  and  the  cosmic  ether.  On  this  point
Professor  Flournoy  writes  as  follows  (p.  394)  :

"  It  is  obvious  that  the  hypothesis  of  spirits  involves  no  a  priori  im-
possibility or  absurdity.  It  does  not  even  contradict,  as  is  sometimes
supposed,  that  fundamental  law  of  physiological  psychology — the  psycho-
physical  parallelism — which  insists  that  every  mental  phenomenon  must
have  a  physical  correlative.  For  in  spite  of  our  habit  of  considering  the
» molecular  or  atomic  phenomena  of  the  brain,  the  catabolism  of  the
•  neurones,  as  the  true  concomitant  of  the  conscious  processes,  it  is  quite
possible — it  is  even  probable  enough — that  these  molecular  movements  do
not  constitute  the  ultimate  physical  term  immediately  adjoining  the  mental
world  {cdtoyant  le  monde  mental),  but  that  the  true  physical  or  spatial  corre-
latives of  psychological  or  non-spatial  phenomena  ought  to  be  sought  in
the  vibrations  of  that  imponderable  matter,  the  ether,  in  which  ponderable
atoms  and  molecules  are  plunged  somewhat  after  the  fashion  of  grains  of
dust  in  the  atmosphere."

I  quote  these  words  because, — obvious  though  their  contention  must
seem  to  all  thinking  persons, — it  is  common  enough  to  see  phrases  used
as  though  our  notions  were  still  bounded  by  the  molecular ; — as  though  we
did  not  know,  as  certainly  as  we  know  anything,  that  the  great  mystery  of
existence  is  only  just  beginning,  in  that  inconceivable  world  of  ether,  pre-
cisely where  our  utmost  analysis  fails  us,  and  our  mathematics  are  reduced
to  a  jungle  of  infinities  and  of  contradictions.

And  now  as  to  the  question  of  possible  telepathy  from  the  dead  in
Helene's  case.  The  instance  with  most  in  its  favour  is  described  by
Professor  Flournoy  as  follows  (p.  406)  : —

In  a  sitting  at  ray  house  (February  I2th,  1899)  Mlle  Smith  has  a  vision  of
a  village  on  a  height  covered  with  vines ;  she  sees  a  small  old  man  coming
down  thence  by  a  stony  road.  He  looks  like  a  "  demi-monsieur  " ; — buckled
shoes,  large  soft  hat,  shirt-collar  unstarched,  with  points  rising  to  his  cheeks,
&c.  A  peasant  in  a  blouse  whom  he  meets  bows  to  him  as  to  a  personage  of
importance;  they  talk  a  patois  which  Helene  cannot  follow.  She  has  an
impression  that  she  knows  the  village ;  but  she  cannot  identify  it.  Soon  the
landscape  disappears,  and  the  old  man,  now  clothed  in  white  and  seen  in  a
luminous  space  [implying  that  he  is  in  the  next  world]  seems  to  come  nearer.
At  this  moment,  as  she  sits  with  her  right  arm  resting  on  the  table,  Leopold
dictates  with  the  forefinger,  Lower  her  arm.  I  obey ;  He'lene's  arm  at  first
resists  strongly  ;  then  yields  at  once.  She  seizes  a  pencil,  and  during  the
usual  struggle  as  to  the  way  to  hold  it  {i.e.,  whether  in  her  own  habitual
fashion — between  forefinger  and  middle  finger — or  in  the  ordinary  way],
"  You  are  squeezing  my  hand  too  hard  !  "  she  cries  to  the  imagined  little  old
man  who,  according  to  Leopold,  wishes  to  write  through  her  ; — "  You  hurt  me ;
don't  press  so  hard;  what  can  it  matter  to  you  whether  it  is  a  pencil  or  a
pen?"  Then  she  drops  the  pencil  and  takes  a  pen,  and  holding  it  between


842]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  143

thumb  and  forefinger  writes  slowly  in  an  unknown  handwriting,  Chaumontet
syndic.  Then  returns  the  vision  of  the  village  ; — we  wish  to  know  its  name;
and  she  ends  by  perceiving  a  guide-post  on  which  she  spells  out  Chessenaz —
a  name  unknown  to  us.  Finally  having,  at  my  desire,  asked  the  old  man
the  date  when  he  was  syndic,  she  hears  him  answer,  1839.  Nothing  more
can  be  learnt ;  the  vision  disappears  and  gives  place  to  a  possession  by
Leopold,  who  in  his  big  Italian  voice  talks  at  length  about  various  matters.  I
question  him  on  the  incident  of  the  unknown  village  and  syndic ;  his  answers,
interrupted  by  long  digressions,  are  to  this  effect :  "  I  am  looking— I  turn
my  thoughts  along  that  great  mountain  with  a  tunnel  in  it  whose  name  I  do
not  know  [Leopold — the  soi-disant  Cagliostro — who  returns  from  the  eighteenth
century,  is  naturally  not  well  up  in  modern  geographical  names;  but  this
is  the  hill  of  Fort  de  1'Ecluse] ;  I  see  the  name  of  Chessenaz — a  village  on  a
height — a  road  leading  up  to  it.  Look  in  that  village  ;  you  will  find  the
name  [Chaumontet]  :  try  to  verify  the  signature  ;  you  will  get  a  proof  that
the  signature  is  really  that  of  this  man."

I  ask  him  whether  he  sees  all  this  in  Hdlene's  memories — "AV; — or
whether  she  has  ever  been  at  Chessenaz  : — "  Ask  her ;  she  will  know ;  I  have
not  followed  her  in  all  her  excursions."

Helene,  when  awake,  could  give  no  information.  But  next  day  I  found
on  the  map  a  little  village  of  Chessenaz  in  the  department  of  Haute-Savoie,
at  twenty-six  kilometres  from  Geneva.  .  .  .

[A  fortnight  later  Helen  sees  the  vision  of  the  other  day  reappear — the
village,  the  little  old  man ; — but  accompanied  by  a  cure,  who  seems  intimate
with  him,  and  whom  he  calls  "  my  dear  friend  Bournier."  Leopold  promises
that  this  cure  will  write  his  name  for  Helen.]

At  the  next  sitting  in  my  house,  March  ipth,  I  remind  Leopold  of  this
promise.  .  .  .  The  cure  at  last  takes  her  hand  as  the  syndic  had  done
and  writes  very  slowly  the  words  Burnier  salut.  .  .  .

I  wrote  to  the  Mairie  at  Chessenaz,  and  the  Mayor,  M.  Saunier,  was  good
enough  to  answer  me  at  once.  "  During  the  years  1838  and  1839,"  he  said,  ;<  the
syndic  of  Chessenaz  was  Jean  Chaumontet,  whose  signature  I  find  in  various
documents  of  that  date.  We  had  also  for  cure  M.  Andrd  Burnier,  from
November  1824  to  February  1841,  during  which  period  all  the  actes  des
naissances,  &c.,  bear  his  signature.  But  I  have  found  in  our  archives  a
document  with  both  signatures,  which  I  send  you."

[Reproductions  are  given  (p.  409)  of  the  actual  signatures,  and  of  the  signa-
tures given  by  Mlle  Smith.  The  handwritings  were  markedly  similar.]

Professor  Flournoy's  first  idea  naturally  was  that  MIle  Smith  had  seen
at  some  time  or  other  some  acts  or  documents  signed  by  the  syndic  or  the
cure  of  Chessenaz,  and  that  these  visual  impressions  had  reappeared  in  her
somnambulic  state,  and  had  served  as  internal  models  for  the  signatures
which  she  traced  in  trance.  She  informed  him,  in  fact,  that  she  had
relations  in  the  neighbourhood,  with  whom  she  had  stayed  some  dozen
years  earlier,  but  she  had  no  recollection  of  having  ever  seen  or  heard  of
Chessenaz,  or  of  the  two  names  given  in  her  trance.  Both  names  are,
however,  not  uncommon  in  that  region,  and  it  seems  possible  that  during
her  visit  her  friends  may  have  shown  her  some  family  document  bearing


144  CHAPTER    VIII  [843

the    signatures,  which — we   must   assume — (for   her   probity   is   beyond
question)   had  faded  from  her  supraliminal  memory.1

843.  This  case  of  Professor  Flournoy's,  then — this  classical  case,  as
it  may  already  be  fairly  termed — may  serve  here  as  our  culminant  example
of  the  free  scope  and  dominant  activity  of  the  unassisted  subliminal  self.
The  telepathic  element  in  this  case,  if  it  exists,  is  relatively  small ;  what  we
are  watching  in  Mlle  Helene  Smith  resembles,  as  I  have  said,  a  kind  of
exaggeration  of  the  submerged  constructive  faculty, — a  hypertrophy  of
genius — without   the   innate    originality   of  mind  which  made  even  the
dreams  of  R.  L.  Stevenson  a  source  of  pleasure  to  thousands  of  readers.

In  reference  to  the  main  purpose  of  this  work,  such  cases  as  these,
however  curious,  can  be  only  introductory  to  automatisms  of  deeper
moment.  In  our  attempt  to  trace  an  evolutive  series  of  phenomena
indicating  ever  higher  human  faculty,  the  smallest  telepathic  incident,—
the  most  trivial  proof,  if  proof  it  be,  of  communication  received  without
sensory  intermediation  from  either  an  incarnate  or  a  discarnate  mind,
outweighs  in  importance  the  most  complex  ramifications  and  burgeonings
of  the  automatist's  own  submerged  intelligence.

I  pass  on,  then,  to  evidence  which  points,  through  motor  automatisms,
to  supernormal  faculty ;  and  I  shall  begin  by  citing  in  843  A  and  B  certain
experiments  (due  to  Professor  Richet  and  to  Mr.  G.  M.  Smith)  in  the
simplest  of  all  forms  of  motor  automatism,  viz.,  table-tilting,  with  results
which  only  telepathy  can  explain.  It  will  be  seen  that  these  experiments
are  closely  parallel  to  our  simplest  sensory  experiments  in  telepathy,  as
recorded  in  Chapter  VI.  And  it  may  be  remembered  that  the  trans-
ferences of  diagrams  there  described  sometimes  contained  a  motor  as
well  as  a  visual  element  j — the  percipient  not  only  discerning  a  "  mind's
eye  "  picture  of  the  diagram,  but  also  feeling  an  impulse  to  draw  it.

Experiments  like  these  should  be  repeated  as  often  as  possible.
Trivial  though  they  seem,  they  may  with  a  little  care  be  made  absolutely
conclusive.  Had  Professor  Richet' s  friends,  for  example,  been  willing  to
prolong  this  series,  we  might  have  had  a  standing  demonstration  of  tele-
pathy, reproducible  at  will.

844.  I  pass  on  to  some  experiments  with  Planchette,  in  which  an
element  of  telepathy  was  shown.     The  account  came  from  Mrs.  Alfred
Moberly,  Tynwald,  Hythe,  Kent,  and  was  corroborated,  with  some  addi-
tional examples,  by  two  other  ladies  present  at  the  time.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  p.  235.)

May  tyh,  1884.

The  operators  were  placed  out  of  sight  of  the  rest  of  the  company,  who
selected — in  silence — a  photograph,  one  of  an  albumful,  and  fixed  their
attention  on  it.  We — the  operators — were  requested  to  keep  our  minds  a
blank  as  far  as  possible  and  follow  the  first  involuntary  motion  of  the

1  Further  considerations  supporting  this  view  are  given  in  Nouvelles  Observations,
pp.  232-237. — EDITORS.


845]  MOTOR    ATUOMATISM  145

Planchette.  In  three  out  of  five  cases  it  wrote  the  name  or  initial  or  some
word  descriptive  of  the  selected  portrait.  We  also  obtained  the  signatures
to  letters  selected  in  the  same  manner.  We  both  knew  perfectly  well  that
ive  were  writing— not  the  spirits,  as  the  rest  of  the  company  persist  to  this
day  in  believing— but  had  only  the  slightest  idea  what  the  words  might
prove  to  be.

We  have  tried  it  since,  and  generally  with  some  curious  result.  A
crucial  test  was  offered  by  two  gentlemen  in  the  form  of  a  question  to
which  we  couldn't  possibly  guess  the  answer.  "  Where's  Toosey  ?  "  The
answer  came,  "  In  Vauxhall  Road."  "  Toosey,"  they  explained,  was  a  pet
terrier  who  had  disappeared;  suspicion  attaching  to  a  plumber  living  in  the
road  mentioned,  who  had  been  working  at  the  house  and  whose  departure
coincided  with  Toosey's.

Of  course,  in  the  case- of  the  inquiry  after  the  lost  dog,  we  may  sup-
pose that  the  answer  given  came  from  the  questioner's  own  mind.  Mrs.
Moberly  and  her  friends  seem  to  have  been  quite  aware  of  this ;  and
were  little  likely  to  fall  into  the  not  uncommon  error  of  asking  Planchette,
for  instance,  what  horse  will  win  the  Derby,  and  staking,  perhaps,  some
pecuniary  consideration  on  the  extremely  illusory  reply.

845.  In  the  next  case  there  is  an  apparent  element  of  prophecy  ;  and
I  quote  it  in  order  to  show  how  fallacious  this  appearance  is,  and  how  easily
an  ordinary  mental  anticipation  of  the  future,  if  it  in  any  way  becomes
externalised,  may  look  like  a  revelation.  Miss  Summerbell  is  well  known
to  me  as  a  careful  observer.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  2.)

I  have  used  Planchette  a  great  deal,  but  the  result  has  generally  been
nonsense ;  but  I  remembered  two  occasions  when  it  correctly  interpreted  the
thought  of  some  one  in  the  room,  whose  hands  were  not  upon  it.  About  a  year
ago,  we  were  amusing  ourselves  by  asking  it  what  Christmas  presents  we  should
have.  My  hands  were  upon  Planchette,  and  I  believe  Miss  Lay's,  but  in  any
case  it  is  quite  certain  that  neither  of  the  persons  who  were  touching  it  could
possibly  know  the  answer  to  the  question  I  asked.  I  said,  "  What  will  Miss  T.
have  at  Christmas  ?  "  Miss  T.  was  in  the  room,  but  not  near  the  table.  Plan-
chette immediately  wrote  down  a  rather  large  sum  of  money.  I  asked,  "  Who

•  is  to  give  it?  "  It  wrote  "B.  and  one  other."  Some  weeks  afterwards  I  met
Miss  T.,  who  asked  me  if  I  remembered  what  Planchette  had  written.  I  re-
membered it  perfectly.  She  said,  "  I  have  received  more  than  that  sum,  but  I

"knew  about  it  at  the  time,  though  not  the  exact  sum,  and  I  believe  that  must
have  been  thought-reading,  for  I  am  certain  that  nobody  in  the  room  knew  of

!it  but  myself."  The  money  was  given  by  a  relative  whose  surname  begins  with
B.,  and  another  person.

On  another  occasion,  we  asked  a  friend  to  dictate  a  question,  the  answer
to  which  we  did  not  know.  She  said,  "Who  is  coming  to  breakfast  to-

;morrow  ?  "  Miss  Lay  and  I  placed  our  hands  upon  Planchette  and  asked  the
question.  It  wrote  "  Lucas."  Our  friend  said  that  was  the  name  of  the  gentle-
man who  was  coming  to  breakfast.  Neither  Miss  Lay  nor  I  had  ever  heard
of  him  before.  Our  friend  said,  "Ask  his  Christian  name."  We  asked;  it
wrote  "William."  "Is  that  right?"  we  asked  our  friend.  "I  don't  know,"
VOL.  n.  K


146  CHAPTER    VIII  [846

she  answered;  "I  never  heard  his  Christian  name."  Then  somebody  else,
who  was  not  touching  Planchette,  remembered  that  there  was  a  song  by  him
somewhere  among  the  music.  We  looked,  and  at  length  found  the  song  by
*•  William  Lucas  " — of  whom  we  had  never  heard  before,  nor  have  we  heard  of
him  since.  L.  D.  SUMMERBELL.

I  can  thoroughly  endorse  these  statements,  and  could  multiply  instances
equally  curious. — J.  M.  LAY.

The  prophecy  of  the  Christmas  gift  was  doubtless  a  mere  reflection  of
Miss  T.'s  anticipation — transferred  telepathically  to  the  writer's  subliminal
self,  and  as  regards  the  Christian  name  "  William,"  we  may  assume  that
(as  in  the  case  of  the  word  Wem  in  a  previous  narrative)  the  name  printed
on  the  song,  although  no  one  consciously  remembered  it,  had  been  vaguely
noticed  by  Mr.  Lucas'  friend  at  some  previous  "time,  and  now  reappeared
from  the  stores  of  unconscious  memory.

846.  In  another  case,  Mr.  Allbright,  of  Mariemont,  Birmingham,
a  chemical  manufacturer  (whose  letter  to  me  I  abbreviate  here),  asked
a  young  lady,  of  whose  complete  ignorance  of  the  facts  of  his  business
he  felt  quite  sure,  for  the  name  of  a  waste  product  occurring  on  a  large
scale  in  his  manufactory.  He  meant  the  answer  to  be  "gypsum,"  but
"  chloride  of  calcium  "  was  written,  and  this  was  also  true ;  although,
had  he  thought  of  this  substance,  he  would  have  thought  of  it  by  its  trade
name  of  "  muriate  of  lime."  Again,  he  asked  what  was  his  firm's  port  of
importation.  He  meant  the  answer  to  be  "  Gloucester,"  but  "  Wales  "
was  written ;  and  this  again  was  true  at  the  time,  as  he  was  just  then
importing  through  Cardiff.  These  answers  startled  him  so  disagreeably
that  he  refused  to  make  further  experiments.  But  I  cite  the  case  here  for
the  express  purpose  of  pointing  out  that  no  insuperable  difficulty  is  pre-
sented by  the  fact  that  the  answers,  while  substantially  known  to  the
inquirer,  were  not  those  on  which  his  supraliminal  mind  was  fixed.

847.  In  my  next  case  an  answer  is  given  which  is  in  fact  true,
although  the  questioner  believed  it  at  the  time  to  be  false.  The  account,
which  I  quote  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  5,  came  from  Mr.  W.
Riddell  of  Dunster,  Somerset.

July  1884.

The  way  I  became  acquainted  with  "  Planchette  "  was  as  follows  : — A
friend  of  my  wife's  is  staying  with  us,  and  one  day  she  was  talking  about
"  Planchette,"  and  saying  that  she  had  one  at  her  home,  in  London,  and  had
seen  some  remarkable  answers  given  by  it  when  a  certain  young  lady  had
her  hands  on  it.  Both  my  wife  and  I  laughed  at  the  idea,  saying  nothing
would  make  us  believe  in  it.  Miss  B.  (my  wife's  friend),  to  prove  herself
right,  sent  for  her  "  Planchette."  In  the  course  of  a  day  or  two  it  arrived,  and
having  put  it  together  Miss  B.  and  I  tried  it,  but  without  any  result  beyond
a  few  lines  up  and  down  the  paper.  Then  my  wife  put  her  hands  on  it  with
Miss  B.,  and  in  a  very  short  time  it  began  to  move,  and  on  being  asked
answered  questions  very  freely,  some  rightly  and  some  quite  wrongly.
Amongst  those  answered  rightly  were  the  following.  (I  may  here  observe  that


849]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  147

not  only  did  my  wife  and  myself  not  believe  in  it,  but  we  were  antagonistic  to
it  in  feeling.)  Our  first  question  was  asked  by  myself,  my  wife  and  Miss  B.
having  their  hands  on  it.  I  said,  "  How  many  shillings  has  Miss  B.  in  her
purse?"  Ans. — "Four";  right.  I  then  asked  how  many  coins  I  had  in
mine.  Ans. — "  Five  " ;  right.  I  thought  I  had  many  more.  I  then  took
a  playing  card  from  a  pack  in  a  box,  looked  at  it,  put  it  face  down  on  a
table,  and  asked  for  its  colour.  Ans. — "  Red  "  ;  right.  Number—"  Seven  "  ;
right.  Name—"  Hearts  " ;  right.  This,  I  must  confess,  seemed  to  me  very
wonderful,  as  neither  my  wife  nor  Miss  B.  could  possibly  have  known  any-
thing about  the  card.  I  then  took  a  visiting  card  from  the  bottom  of  the
basket,  and  having  looked  at  it,  placed  it  face  downwards  on  the  table,  and
asked  "  Planchette  "  for  the  name  on  it.  This  it  seemed  quite  unable  to  give,
but  after  a  long  time  it  wrote  "  clergyman,"  which  was  a  wonderful  answer,  as

the  card  was  that  of  a  Rev. who  was  here  two  winters  ago,  helping  our

rector.     After  this  we  did  not  get  anything  more  satisfactory.

Now,  here,  as  no  complete  list  of  the  answers  has  been  preserved,  we
cannot  feel  sure  that  the  answer  "  five,"  as  to  the  number  of  coins  in
Mr.  Riddell's  pocket,  may  not  have  been  right  by  mere  accident.  But  my
point  is  that,  even  excluding  the  idea  of  mere  chance  coincidence,  there
is  still  nothing  in  the  answer  which  obliges  us  to  go  beyond  Mr.  Riddell's
own  mind.  His  subliminal  self  may  well  have  been  aware  of  the  number
of  coins  in  his  pocket,  although  his  supraliminal  self  was  not.

848.  These  few  cases  may  suffice  to  lead  us  up  to  the  palmary  case
of  the  late  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham,  Vicar  of  Maker,  Devonport,  who  was
personally  known  to  Edmund  Gurney  and  myself,  and  was  a  man  in  all
ways  worthy  of  high  respect.     The  long  series  of  communications  between
Mr.  Newnham  and  his  wife,  which  date  back  to  1871,  and  whose  con-
temporaneous written  record  is  preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  S.P.R.,
must,    I    think,    always    retain    their   primacy  as    early  and    trustworthy
examples  of  a  telepathic  transference  where  the  percipient's  automatic
script  answers  questions  penned  by  the  agent  in  such  a  position  that  the
percipient  could  not  in  any  normal  manner  discern  what  those  questions
were.     No  part  of  our  evidence   seems   to  me  more   worthy  of  study
than  this.     Mr.  Newnham  had  for  many  years  paid  careful  attention  to
psychical  phenomena,  and  especially  had  been  conscious  of  a  frequent
involuntary  transmission  of  thought  from  himself  to  Mrs.  Newnham.     An
instance  of  "psychical-invasion"  in  sleep  when  Mrs.  Newnham  discerned
his  presence  is  quoted  in          C.     This  occurred  before  their  marriage.

849.  Subsequently,  Mr.  Newnham  made  many  attempts  to  transmit
thought  voluntarily  to  his  wife,  but  succeeded  only  in  the  year  1871,
during  a  period  of  about  eight  months.

During  that  period  he  made  notes  from  day  to  day  in  a  private  diary,
which  diary  he  was  good  enough  to  place  in  my  hands  in  1884.  There
are  40  pages  of  MS.  notes,  containing  385  automatically-written  replies  to
questions.  Mr.  Newnham  made  the  experiments  purely  for  his  own
satisfaction,  and  without  any  idea  of  submitting  them  to  public  inspection,


I48  CHAPTER    VIII  [850

and  consequently  the  questions  include  many  references  to  his  domestic
affairs  at  the  time,  to  family  jokes,  and  to  other  matters  which,  while  illus-
trating the  intimate  and  spontaneous  character  of  the  diary,  are  not  suited
for  publication.  Mr.  Newnham,  however,  kindly  made  long  extracts  for
me,  some  of  which  I  print  in  849  A.  I  carefully  compared  the  extracts
with  the  original  diary,  and  consider  that  they  give  a  quite  fair  impression
of  it.  Mrs.  Newnham  independently  corroborated  her  husband's  account,1
and  I  also  talked  the  matter  over  with  both  of  them.

It  must  be  distinctly  understood  that  Mrs.  Newnham  did  not  see  or
hear  the  questions  which  Mr.  Newnham  wrote  down.  The  fact,  therefore,
that  her  answers  bore  any  relation  to  the  questions  shows  that  the  sense  of
the  questions  was  telepathically  conveyed  to  her.  This  is  the  leading  and
important  fact.  The  substance  of  the  replies  written  is  also  interesting,
and  Mr.  Newnham  has  some  good  comments  thereon.  But  even  had  the
replies  contained  no  facts  which  Mrs.  Newnham  could  not  have  known,
this  would  not  detract  from  the  main  value  of  the  evidence,  which  consists
in  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Newnham's  hand  wrote  replies  clearly  and  repeatedly
answering  questions  which  she  neither  heard  nor  saw.

850.  I  give  in  850  A  a  series  of  experiments  on  a  smaller  scale,
but  analogous  to  those  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newnham.

851.  In  the  Newnham  case  we  have  the  advantage  of  seeing  before
us  the  entire  series  of  questions  and  answers,  and  thus  of  satisfying  our-
selves that  the  misses  (which  in  that  case  are  very  few)  are  marked  as  well
as  the  hits,  and  consequently  that  the  coincidences  between  question  and
answer  are  at  any  rate  not  the  result  of  chance.     In  several  other  cases
which  I  have  known,  where  the  good  faith  of  the  informants  has  been
equally  above  question,  the  possibility  of  an  explanation  by  chance  alone
has  been  a  more  important  element  in  the  problem.     All  our  evidence

1  Mr.  Newnham  procured  for  me  two  autograph  letters  from  eye-witnesses  of
some  of  the  experiments,  who  do  not,  however,  wish  their  names  to  be  published,  on
account  of  prejudices  still  existing  in  certain  quarters  against  the  experiments  as  involv-
ing questionable  agency.  One  writer  says  :  "  You  wrote  the  question  on  a  slip  of
paper  and  put  it  under  one  of  the  ornaments  of  the  chimney-piece — no  one  seeing  what
you  had  written.  Mrs.  Newnham  sat  apart  at  a  small  table.  I  recollect  you  kept  a
book  of  the  questions  asked  and  answers  given,  as  you  thought  some  new  power  might
be  discovered,  and  you  read  me  from  it  some  of  the  results.  I  remember  particularly
questions  and  answers  relating  to  the  selection  of  a  curate  for  B.  My  wife  and  her  sister
saw  experiments  conducted  in  this  manner.  Mrs.  Newnham  and  you  were  sitting  at

different  tables."     Another  eye-witness  writes  :  "  I  and  my  sister  were  staying  at ,

and  were  present  at  many  of  the  Planchette  experiments  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newnham.
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newnham  sat  at  different  tables  some  distance  apart,  and  in  such  a  position
that  it  was  quite  impossible  Mrs.  Newnham  could  see  what  question  was  written  down.
The  subject  of  the  questions  was  never  mentioned  even  in  a  whisper.  Mr.  Newnham
wrote  them  down  in  pencil  and  sometimes  passed  them  to  me  and  my  sister  to  see,  but
not  often.  Mrs.  Newnham  immediately  answered  the  questions.  Though  not  always
correct,  they  (the  answers)  always  referred  to  the  questions.  Mr.  Newnham  copied  out
the  pencil  questions  and  answers  verbatim  each  day  into  a  diary."


852]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  149

has  tended  to  show  that  the  telepathic  power  itself  is  a  variable  thing ;
that  it  shows  itself  in  flashes,  for  the  most  part  spontaneously,  and  seldom
persists  through  a  series  of  deliberate  experiments.  And  if  an  automatist
possessing  power  of  this  uncertain  kind  has  exercised  it  at  irregular
moments  and  with  no  scientific  aim ; — and  has  kept,  moreover,  no  steady
record  of  success  and  failure ; — then  it  becomes  difficult  to  say  that  even
some  brilliant  coincidences  afford  cogent  proof  of  telepathic  action.  The
case  which  is  next  cited  (in  851  A)  presents  these  drawbacks;  but
it  presents  also  positive  points  of  interest  and  corroborations  of  memory
quite  sufficient,  I  think,  to  justify  me  in  laying  it  before  my  readers  as  an
example  of  telepathy  acting — not  just  in  the  way  in  which  we  should  like
it  to  act,  but  in  the  way  in  which  it  apparently  does  act ; — and  with  that
strange  intercurrence,  moreover,  which  we  so  often  find  of  something  like
clairvoyance  and  premonition  mingling  with  the  reflection  of  thoughts
which  pass  through  minds  in  rapport  with  the  automatist's.  But  I  quote
the  case  as  one  where  telepathy  from  the  living  seems  to  play  at  least  a
considerable  part  in  supplying  the  contents  of  the  messages.

852.  I  pass  on  to  a  case  where  an  actual  conversation  goes  on
between  the  distant  agent  and  the  automatist,  informing  the  automatist
of  matters  which  the  agent — supraliminally  or  subliminally — wishes  him  to
know.  Evidentially  it  is  not  strong,  for  it  depends  upon  a  single  memory,
corroborated  on  one  collateral  point  alone  (although  not  invalidated  upon
any  point)  ;  and  the  writer  was  not  personally  known  to  any  of  us.  The
date  is  also  very  remote.  On  the  other  hand,  the  reasons  for  the  absence
of  corroboration  seem  satisfactory  :  and  in  my  view  at  least  the  narrative
offers  internal  evidence  of  honesty  and  care,  while  the  incident  is  such  as
might  stamp  itself  permanently  on  the  mind.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  48.)

Mrs.  Kirby  wrote  to  me  from  Santa  Cruz,  California,  August  i3th,  1886,
as  follows  : —

In  1850  I  left  New  York  for  San  Francisco.  Spiritualism,  in  the  sense  in
which  that  word  is  now  used,  had  no  existence.  The  facts  and  philosophy  it
covers  were  unknown,  except  partially  to  the  very  few  readers  of  Swedenborg's
cumbrous  and  involved  theology.

Attention  had  been  called  to  some  rappings  which  had  made  themselves
heard  in  a  house  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  and  there  had  been  some  violent
demonstrations  (breaking  of  windows,  moving  of  furniture,  and  unlocking  of
locked  drawers  and  doors)  in  the  house  of  an  orthodox  clergyman  somewhere
in  Connecticut.

In  1853  I  was  living  on  a  ranche  three  miles  from  what  is  now  the  city
of  Santa  Cruz.  (It  was  but  a  village  then,  though  they  called  it  a  town.)  My
family  consisted  of  my  husband,  myself,  and,  in  a  certain  sense,  of  a  young
English  sailor,  a  healthy,  kind-hearted,  and  very  decent,  though  very  ignorant
fellow,  whom  my  husband  had  employed  to  work  on  the  ranche  during  the
previous  year.  His  name  was  Thomas  Travers,  and  he  had  just  made  his
mark  (x)  to  a  written  agreement  for  another  year's  service.  As  it  will  be  seen,


ISO  CHAPTER    VIII  [852

I  had  no  servant,  but  Tom  stood  ready  to  help  me  in  any  way  he  could.  For
instance,  when,  at  intervals  of  weeks,  visitors  would  make  their  appearance,  he
would  immediately  kill  and  clean  some  chickens  for  me.  (If  you  wanted
beef-steak  in  those  days  you  could  only  have  it  by  killing  an  ox.  The  nearest
neighbours  sometimes  combined  and  took  a  quarter  each.)

On  one  occasion  the  two  most  intelligent  men  in  town  came  out,  a  Dr.
McLean  and  the  Rev.  —  Dryden,  and  they  presently  asked  me  if  I  had  a  small
table  1  could  let  them  have  (while  I  was  busy,  and  my  husband  a  mile  off  at  his
tannery),  with  which  they  could  continue  some  strange  experiments  that  had
lately  been  made  among  our  mutual  friends  in  town.  Spirits  tipped  the  table,
and  they  said  sentences  were  spelled  by  the  use  of  the  alphabet.  That  A's  and
B's  had  in  this  way  heard  of  their  long  since  departed  children,  &c.,  &c.

I  listened  eagerly.  I  had  left  a  large  circle  of  friends  at  the  East,  and  here
was  not  one  of  the  old  kind :  Lucre tia  Mott,  Lucy  Stone,  Garrison,  Purvis.  A
view  of  the  entire  bay  of  Monterey  from  my  sitting-room  window  did  not  pre-
vent me  from  longing  continually  for  a  little  of  the  old  sympathy.  One  of  my
most  devoted  friends  had  a  few  years  since  passed  to  the  other  shore ;  my
young  brother  was  there  too.  If  I  could  establish  communication  with  them,
what  a  relief,  what  a  pleasure  it  would  be  to  me !

My  smallest  table  was  in  size  3^  ft.  by  i^  ft.  My  husband  was  willing  to
test  the  matter,  and  as  we  were  given  to  understand  that  three  or  four  persons
together  would  be  more  likely  to  succeed  than  two  (since  magnetism  or  elec-
tricity was  drawn  from  them  by  the  invisibles  to  help  in  accomplishing  their
object),  Mr.  K.  went  out  to  Tom's  shanty  and  asked  him  to  come  and  sit  at  the
table  with  us.

We  had  not  held  our  hands  one  moment  on  the  table  before  it  tipped  very
decidedly,  and  I  forthwith  proceeded  to  repeat  the  alphabet.  The  doing  so,
however,  struck  me  as  worse  than  ridiculous ;  it  was  very  unpleasant,  too,  and
I  observed  that  if  spirits  were  present  they  could  hear  me  say  the  letters  in  my
mind  as  well  as  if  they  were  uttered  from  my  tongue.

"  All  right.  Go  ahead  !  "  my  husband  replied,  "  we  will  sit  and  wait  for
results."

I  did  so,  and  the  table  tipped  promptly  to  the  letters,  spelling  out —

"  Mary  Howells."

As  /  knew  no  such  person,  I  asked  if  she  was  a  friend  of  Mr.  K.'s?
Answer:  "No."  Of  Tom's  ?  Answer:  "Yes."  A  relation  of  his ?  Answer:
"Sister."  Are  you  married ?  I  questioned.  Answer:  "No."

"Oh,  don't  let  us  waste  any  more  time  !"  I  exclaimed.  "It's  all  falsehood
and  nonsense.  Here  is  some  one  professing  to  be  Tom's  sister  who  says  her
name  is  Mary  Howells,  and  that  she  is  unmarried.  If  this  were  true,  of  course
her  name  would  be  Travers."

Tom  nodded  aside  to  me  and  said  in  a  low  tone —

"  Yes,  mum.     That's  her  name.     Mary  Howells."

He  looked  extremely  confused  and  astonished.

"  Why,  what  do  you  mean  ?  "  Mr.  K.  broke  in  ;  "  your  name  is  Travers,  how
can  hers  be  Howells  ?  "

"  No,  sir,"  Tom  replied,  looking  down,  "  my  name  is  Howells."

But  Mr.  K.  insisted  that  it  could  not  be.  Had  he  not  made  his  mark  after
the  Travers  only  the  other  day  ?  Five  minutes  were  taken  up  in  the  attempt  to
convince  Tom  that  he  did  not  know  his  own  name.


852]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  151

"  You  see,  sir,"  he  at  length  explained,  "  I  ran  away  from  a  whale  ship  in
San  Francisco,  and  sailors  is  so  scarce  there  I  was  afraid  they  would  hunt  me
up  and  take  me  back,  so  I  just  took  another  name."

Hardly  convinced  now,  Mr.  K.  advised  him  to  drop  the  alias  at  once,
assuring  him  that  no  one  would  molest  him.  This  he  did,  and  the  second  year
following  married,  and  he  is  now  the  father  of  twelve  girls  and  three  boys  who
bear  the  strangely  discovered  name.

But  to  return.  Finding  that  the  communication  had  been  so  far  correct,  I
proposed  that  we  should  compose  ourselves  while  I  repeated  the  alphabet  as
before,  still  hoping  to  receive  the  name  of  my  dear  friend.  But  Tom's  sister
had  not  accomplished  her  purpose,  and  she  proceeded  to  spell  the  following
words: —

"  I — have — a — child — a — girl. — She — is — seven — years — old — and — now —
is — in — a — house — of — ill — fame — in — Cat — Street. — I — want — my — brother —
to — bring — her — away — from — there."

This  was  a  difficult  and  painful  message  to  convey,  and  I  told  Tom  that  I
did  not  like  to  tell  him  what  was  spelt.

"  She  says  that  she  has  a  little  girl  seven  years  old,"  I  began.

Here  he  removed  his  hands  quickly  from  the  table,  and  counting  on  the
fingers  of  one  hand  by  those  of  the  other,  looked  up  and  observed : —

"  Yes,  mum,  that's  so.     She's  seven  now."

When  I  gave  him  the  rest  of  the  message  he  became  much  excited,  and
begged  me  to  assure  his  sister  that  he  would  send  home  50  dols.  the  next  month,
and  have  the  child  removed  to  a  better  place,  and  that  as  soon  as  the  crops
were  in  he  would  go  home  and  get  the  child.

I  assured  him  she  could  hear  all  he  was  saying.

"  But  is  it  true  that  there  is  a  street  called  Cat  Street  ?  "  I  asked.

"  Yes,  mum ;  and  it  is  the  worst  in  the  city,"  he  returned.

The  following  day  he  acknowledged  to  me  that  his  sister  was  a  woman  of
the  town.

I  now  asked  my  husband  to  procure  me  a  smaller  and  lighter  table  so  that
I  might  sit  at  it  by  myself,  and  in  that  way  be  more  likely  to  attract  my  own
friends.  This  he  did,  but  to  my  great  annoyance,  Mary  Howells  immediately
presented  herself.  This  time,  however,  she  came  to  say  that  her  child  was  ill.
When  she  left  the  movements  of  the  table  were  weak  and  uncertain.

The  following  evening,  she  came  to  say  that  the  child  was  much  worse,
and  she  thought  it  would  die.  A  day  or  two  later  she  reported  it  dead.  I
asked  if  the  child  were  now  with  her,  and  she  replied  by  very  decided  move-
ments, that  she  was  not.

After  this,  Mary  Howells  never  put  in  an  appearance,  and  every  day  I
prayed  that  some  one  I  loved  might  speak  a  word  to  me.  They  did  not.  I
know  now  that  they  could  not,  for  want  of  the  honest  sailor's  electrical  help,
which  I  rejected  in  my  ignorance.  Seafaring  persons  are  apt  to  possess  great
mediumistic  power.

After  hearing  that  the  child  was  dead  I  wrote  a  guarded  letter  to  Tom's
parents,  for  him,  asking  how  they  all  were,  including  the  little  girl.  In  due
time  I  received  a  reply,  or,  I  should  say,  Tom  did,  though  he  could  not  read
writing.  They  said  they  were  all  well  except  Mary's  little  girl,  who  had  died.
(They  did  not  say  exactly  when,  but  as  Tom  had  not  been  absent  from  England
much  over  a  year,  it  must  have  been  within  that  time,  and  we  had  every  reason


152  CHAPTER    VIII  [852

to  believe  the  mother's  statement  a  true  one.)  The  old  people  further  said  that
Mary  had  married  a  soldier.

I  understood  from  this  that  the  child's  mother  was  not  wholly  depraved,
that  she  was  concerned  about  the  welfare  of  her  little  one,  and  looking  about  for
help  in  her  destitute  circumstances  her  thoughts  had  turned  to  her  brother,
most  likely  persistently  turned  to  him,  and  this  resulted  in  her  leaving  her  body
temporarily  during  sleep  in  search  of  him.  We  had  assumed  that  she  was,  as
we  say,  "  dead."  She  had  not  asserted  the  fact.  »

I  submit  this  one  experience  and  will  write  out  another  as  soon  as  I  can. —
Very  truly  yours,  GEORGIANA  B.  KIRBY.

A  second  letter  from  Mrs.  Kirby,  dated  Santa  Cruz,  Cal.,  October
1 2th,  1886,  gave  further  particulars  as  follows  : —

DEAR  SIR, — Yours  of  September  Qth  arrived  in  due  season.  My  reply
has  been  delayed  by  my  ineffectual  efforts  to  ascertain  the  month  when  our  two
friends,  McLean  and  Dryden,  visited  us  on  the  ranche,  because  it  was  within  a
month  after  this  that  Mary  Ho  wells  told  me  her  child  was  ill,  and  later  that  she
was  dead,  and  I  thought  it  might  not  be  so  difficult  to  search  the  death  record
of  one  month  for  the  child  under  the  head  of  "  Howells."  As  it  is  the  gentlemen
have  proved  to  me  that  their  visit  occurred  in  1852,  and  not  in  1853  as  I  had
supposed,  but  they  could  not  remember  if  it  were  the  spring  or  fall  of  that  year.
This,  our  ignorance  of  the  date  of  the  death  and  of  the  child's  Christian  name,
is  £the  most  unsatisfactory  part  of  my  record.  Neither  were  mentioned  in  the
grandfather's  letter,  and  from  Tom  never  mentioning  the  name  I  fancied  he  did
not  know  it.  I  saw  him  recently,  but  I  could  not  venture  to  speak  to  him
of  his  sister's  illegitimate  child.  He  has  twelve  living  daughters  of  his  own,
and  he  would  be  justly  offended  if  I  should  remind  him  of  how  we  had
gained  a  knowledge  of  his  sister's  life.  He  told  us  that  his  father  was  still
alive  and  living  where  they  always  had  lived,  at  Saltash,  which  he  thought
by  this  time  must  be  a  part  of  Plymouth.

I  should  explain  that  neither  Dr.  McLean  nor  the  Rev.  —  Dryden  were
personally  cognisant  of  our  doings,  so  that  they  could  not  act  as  witnesses  in
the  case.

You  ask  if  I  can  point  you  to  any  contemporary  record.  Thirty-four  years
ago  no  Spiritualistic  paper  was  published  in  the  United  States,  and  such  a
narration  given  as  true  in  any  ordinary  journal  would  have  laid  us  open  to  the
charge  of  lunacy.  And  had  this  been  otherwise,  we  could  not  have  proclaimed
the  fact  that  the  sister  of  the  honest  fellow  who  was  working  for  us  was  a
disreputable  woman.

As  to  fraud  on  Tom's  part,  he  could  hardly  understand  why  we  wanted
him  to  sit  with  his  hands  on  the  table.  I  repeated  the  letters  in  my^  mind.
How  could  he  tip  the  table  at  the  right  instant  so  as  to  spell  words  which  dis-
closed his  sister's  disgrace  ?  Then  he  was  in  no  want  of  money.  He  had  been
earning  60  dols.  a  month  (and  had  spent  it  all,  mostly  at  Spanish  fandangos)  ;
and  the  agreement  with  my  husband,  to  which  he  had  lately  placed  his  X,
bound  him  to  work  for  Mr.  K.  for  one  year  for  the  sum  of  60  dols.  a  month  and
his  board  and  lodging.  You,  sir,  must  have  read  something  about  the  high
price  of  labour  in  California  in  those  early  years  of  its  settlement.

The  sittings  were  held  after  supper  (or  dinner,  you  would  call  it),  between
seven  and  nine  o'clock.


853]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  153

Cat  Street  was  in  Plymouth,  England.  If  it  has  given  place  to  another  the
fact  of  its  former  existence  could  be  verified.  GEORGIANA  B.  KIRBY.

The  actual  existence  of  the  "  Cat  Street  "  of  the  narrative  is  shown  by
the  following  letter  : —

POST  OFFICE,  PLYMOUTH,  January  2yd,  1888.

SIR,— In  reply  to  yours  of  the  2ist  instant,  I  beg  to  inform  you  that  a  few
years  ago  there  was  a  street  named  Catte  Street,  but  it  is  now  called  Stillman
Street. — I  am,  sir,  yours  obediently,

R.  A.  LEVERTON  (for  POSTMASTER).

The  regretted  death  of  Mrs.  Kirby  soon  after  the  date  of  her  last  letter
put  an  end  to  this  correspondence.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  communications  from  the  woman  at  Ply-
mouth were  received  at  an  hour  which,  in  England,  fell  in  the  middle  of
the  night.

With  Mrs.  Kirby's  case  we  may  compare  an  old,  but  carefully  evi-
denced, record  which  I  give  in  852  A.

In  that  case  a  warning  was  received  by  table- tilting  of  the  approaching
death  of  a  man  who  (although  the  experimenter  did  not  know  it)  was
lying  in  a  state  of  opium- stupor.  The  circumstances  of  his  last  illness  had
previously  been  predicted  by  a  crystal- vision.  It  is,  of  course,  conceivable
that,  if  indeed  it  was  the  sick  man's  own  spirit  which  gave  the  message
through  the  table,  his  own  spirit  also  may  have  inspired  the  crystal-vision.
Compare  with  this  case  the  incident  described  by  Mr.  Underwood
(865  A)  where  Mrs.  Underwood's  left  hand  wrote  in  "mirror-writing"
the  name  of  a  person  two  hundred  miles  off,  who  was.  as  was  subsequently
learnt,  "  in  an  unconscious  state  at  the  time,  and  very  near  death,  which
occurred  two  or  three  days  afterwards."  There  have  been  some  scattered
indications,  throughout  our  evidence  of  automatisms,  of  a  possible  pre-
monitory knowledge,  or  guardian  care,  possessed  and  exercised  by  a  man's
own  deeper  self,  without  external  spiritual  intervention.

I  add  in  852  B  the  case  of  Signor  Bonatti,  where,  again,  some  of  the
communications  through  automatic  writing  are  given  as  coming  from
living  persons,  though  the  usual  communicator  frankly  styles  itself
"  Secondo,"  as  being  no  more  than  the  automatist's  secondary  personality.

853.  I  pass  on  to  a  small  group  of  cases  which  form  a  curious
transition  from  these  communications  inter  vivos  to  communications
which  I  shall  class  as  coining  from  the  dead.  These  are  cases  where  the
message  professes  to  come  from  a  deceased  person,  but  shows  internal
evidence  of  having  come,  telepathically,  from  the  mind  of  some  one
present.  I  shall  begin  with  a  case  such  as  is  often  cited  as  proof
(insufficient  proof,  I  think)  that  a  deceased  person  is  communicating.

Our  informant,  Mr.  Lewis,  a  man  of  business  in  Cincinnati,  states  that
an  automatist  to  whom  his  (Mr.  Lewis's)  family  were  absolutely  unknown
wrote  a  message,  with  true  name,  purporting  to  come  from  an  infant  sister


154  CHAPTER    VIII  [854

long  deceased.  Mr.  Lewis,  naturally  enough,  accepts  this  message,  as
similar  messages  have  often  been  accepted,  as  an  indication  of  his  sister's
actual  presence.

The  account  is  quoted  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  64.

From  Mr.  S.  LEWIS,  347  Baymiller  Avenue,  Cincinnati.

April  gtk,  1888.

On  January  28th  last  I  called  at  the  house  of  some  friends ;  and  on  this
occasion  there  was  some  planchette  writing.  The  friends  I  called  on,  I  believe,
are  professed  Spiritualists.  Some  four  or  five  of  us  (I  also  did)  sat  around  a
table  in  a  full  and  well-lighted  room  (lighted  the  entire  evening).  The  operator
of  the  planchette  was  a  lady;  her  husband  was  at  the  table,  also  three  other
friends,  including  myself.  Different  communications  (so  called)  were  received
by  different  ones  at  the  table,  from  different  friends  (as  the  Spiritualists  say),
who  have  passed  into  the  spirit  world.  I  can't  give  all  communications  to-day,
but  one  I  wish  to  state.  But  first  let  me  say  that  many  years  since  in  my
father's  family  the  first  little  one  that  came  to  live — a  short  time — with  them
was  a  little  girl,  named  Angeline;  she  lived  only  about  two  years  and  died;
next  to  this  little  girl  was  a  brother,  named  Charles  (in  after  life  a  clergyman
in  the  Episcopal  Church) ;  and  next  to  Charles  was  another  little  sister  also
named  Angeline,  and  next  to  her  was  another  sister  named  B.  Ann;  then  next
to  B.  Ann  appeared,  well,  your  humble  servant,  myself,  to  behold  many  of  the
beauties  of  this  beautiful  world.  So  that  you  see  that  between  the  two  brief
years  of  my  first  little  sister,  Angeline  (ist),  and  my  own  coming  on  this  globe
there  was  born  one  brother  and  two  sisters ;  therefore,  my  first  little  sister,
Angeline  (ist),  I  never  saw;  and  only  heard  my  mother  (in  her  lifetime)  speak
of  Angeline  (ist),  and  I  have  also  seen  her  name  in  the  records,  &c.,  in  the
Bible  at  my  old  home.

The  operator  of  the  planchette,  on  the  evening  of  which  I  am  speaking,
knew  nothing  of  my  father's  family  (excepting,  of  course,  myself).  I  never
had  mentioned  one  word  to  the  operator  (of  planchette),  or  any  one  else  in
that  little  company,  anything  whatever  about  my  brothers  and  sisters  or  even
about  my  father's  family  in  any  way  or  manner ;  and  besides,  we  all  lived  and
grew  up  in  the  north  part  of  the  State,  not  far  distant  from  Lake  Erie,  while
the  operator  has  (I  think)  lived  in  the  south  part  of  this  State  not  far  distant
from  the  Ohio  River  ;  and  there  never  has  been  any  acquaintance  nor  any  com-
munication between  any  member  of  my  father's  family  (or  any  one  else  even)  to
give  any  history  or  information  of  any  kind  to  the  operator,  and  I  certainly
never  gave  the  operator  any  information  whatever  until  after  the  occurrence
and  the  writing  on  the  planchette,  which  wrote  this  evening,  January  28th  last,
the  following,  viz. :  "  Mr.  Lewis,  I  am  his  sister,  I  am  glad  you  came  here
to-night  j  come  again  (signed}  Angeline"

Now  I  want  to  ask,  how  could  originate  in  the  mind  of  operator  any
ideas  or  thoughts  about  this  little  sister  Angeline  (ist)  and  myself?  I  had  not
for  years  past  even  thought  of  her  until  the  name  was  written  on  the  evening
spoken  of.

The  operator  is  not,  never  has  been  a  paid  medium.  S.  LEWIS.

854.  Now  let  us  consider  a  similar  message,  which  might  have
produced  a  similar  belief  in  another  informant's  mind.  But  here  it  so


854]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  155

happened  that  he  tested  the  alleged  fact  of  death ;  and  found  that  the
supposed  spirit  was  still  alive  at  the  time  of  the  message.     The  correspon-
dent, Mr.  G.  E.  Long,  is  known  to  Dr.  Hodgson.
(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  65.)

JERSEY  CITY,  N.  J.,  October  22nd,  1888.

...  I  think  I  wrote  you  once  that  about  two  years  ago  I  had  received  what
was  said  to  be  a  most  convincing  test  of  spirit-return,  convincing  to  all  except
myself.  A  young  lady,  a  Spiritualist  and  medium,  though  not  a  professional,
nor  one  that  ever  received  one  cent  in  pay,  by  means  of  a  lettered  board  and
toy  chair,  she  holding  one  leg  of  the  chair  and  I  another,  while  a  third  leg  of
the  chair  served  as  a  pointer,  gave  the  following  by  means  of  the  chair : —

First  the  chair  spelt  out  my  name  and  showed  a  disposition  to  get  in  my
lap ;  then  it  spelled  out  "  GARY,"  and  when  I  asked  for  the  name  of  the
"  spirit "  it  spelt  out  "  George  (my  name),  you  ought  to  know  me  as  I  am  Jim."
But  I  didn't,  and  said  so.  Then,  without  my  looking  at  the  board,  it  spelt  out
"  Long  Island,  Jim  Rowe,"  and  "  Don't  you  remember  I  used  to  carry  you
when  you  were  a  little  fellow,"  or  words  to  that  effect.  I  had  to  acknowledge
the  truth  of  it  and  also  to  say  that  as  he  was  an  ignorant  man  he  possibly
intended  "  GARY  "  for  carry.  I  must  own  I  was  puzzled  for  the  moment.  To
make  sure  of  his  power  I  asked  that  he  count  the  pickets  in  the  fence  outside
of  the  house  and  I  would  go  out  and  confirm  his  statement.  Somehow  he
couldn't  agree  to  this,  and  even  the  medium  objected.  As  a  last  resort  I  asked
how  long  he  had  been  in  the  spirit  land  and  the  answer  came,  between  thirteen
and  fourteen  years.

Now  to  the  sequel.  First  it  occurred  to  me  a  day  or  two  after,  that  while
all  the  incidents  given  were  correct,  the  name  should  have  been  given  as  ROE
instead  of  ROWE.  Second,  I  was  upon  Long  Island  this  summer,  and  the
matter  coming  to  my  mind  I  inquired  how  long  Jim  Roe  had  been  dead,  and
was  informed  he  died  last  winter ;  so  when  I  received  this  test  so  convincing
to  the  believers  the  man  was  not  dead. — Yours  truly,

GEO.  E.  LONG.

On  October  26th,  1888,  Mr.  Long  adds  : —

I  do  not  think  that  the  medium  was  fraudulent.  Her  family  consists  of
Mr.  S.  and  three  daughters,  she  being  the  youngest.  I  have  found  all  to  be
hypnotic  subjects,  with  the  exception  of  the  eldest  daughter.  They  are  all
believers  in  Spiritualism,  the  youngest  having  been  the  medium.  They  do  not
sit  now,  as  it  is  claimed  that  the  sittings,  while  rich  in  spiritualistic  satisfaction,
were  productive  of  a  state  of  poor  health  in  the  medium.

As  I  myself  have  obtained  information  supposed  to  have  been  impossible
for  me  to  have  reached,  I  cannot  say  for  certainty  that  she  had  not  obtained
information  about  Jim,  but  I  don't  believe  she  had.  As  the  name  Rowe  was
being  spelled  I  sat  with  my  eyes  turned  from  the  board  and  had  in  mind  the
name  Scudder,  and  mentally  followed  the  taps  of  the  chair  to  S  C  U  D— when
the  medium  said,  "  The  name  Rowe  is  given,"  &c.  This  would  seem  to  leave
out  any  involuntary  muscular  action.  Why  Rowe  should  have  been  given
instead  of  Roe  is  still  another  phase.  I  wonder  whether,  if  any  question  of  the
Roe  family  had  arisen,  I  would  have  had  in  mind  the  name  of  Rowe?  If  so,
then  she  produced  that  which  I  had  long  while  before  been  conscious  of,  but
was  at  the  time  unconscious  of,  and  had  it  coupled  with  an  error  in  spell-


156  CHAPTER    VIII  [855

ing  that  I  might  have  been  guilty  of  had  I  myself  been  called  upon  at  that
moment  to  spell  it.  Had  she  been  fraudulent  the  probability  is  she  would
have  spelt  it  correctly.

It  seems  to  me  that  the  basis  of  Spiritualism  rests  mainly  upon  this  phe-
nomenon which  men  and  women  in  a  supernormal  condition  produce,  without
understanding  it,  and  credit  it  to  spiritual  agencies.

[A  general  corroboration  of  Mr.  Long's  memory  of  the  incident  is  added
from  a  lady  present  at  the  time,  who  does  not  now  recall  the  details.]

855.  The  next  case  was  sent  to  Professor  Barrett  by  a  convinced
Spiritualist,   as  a  proof  of  the  reality  of  intercourse  with  the  departed.
The  names  were   stated,   but  as  I  am  citing  the  narrative  in  a  sense
differing  from  that  which  its  writer  meant  it  to  bear,  I  will  not  now  give
them,  and  will  only  say  that  all  three  persons  concerned  are  of  very  good
position.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  p.  236.)

One  evening,  a  few  years  ago,  I  had  with  me  two  young  friends,

Mademoiselle  de  P.,  now  Lady  S.,  and  Mademoiselle  de  P n,  her  cousin,

who  is  Grande  Gouvernante  to  the  daughters  of  the  Crown  Prince  of  Germany,
both  complete  unbelievers  in  Spiritualism.  To  amuse  them,  however,  as  I
sometimes  write  under  occult  influence,  I  asked  Mademoiselle  de  P.  to  fix  her
thoughts  on  some  one  I  did  not  know,  to  see  whether  my  hand  would  write
something  true  concerning  him  or  her.  She  did  as  I  requested,  and  soon  my
hand  wrote,  "  His  life  has  been  overshadowed  by  the  act  of  another."  She
looked  astonished  and  said  that  the  person  she  was  thinking  of  had  had  a
brother  to  whom  he  was  much  attached,  who  had  committed  suicide.

She  then  asked  if  she  could  be  told  where  she  had  met  him  for  the  first
time.  My  hand  wrote,  "It  was  at  the  foot  of  a  marble  staircase  splendidly
illuminated  by  a  July  sun  ;  as  you  went  up  he  gazed  after  you  as  one  gazes  on
the  track  of  a  dazzling  meteor."  This  was  also  correct ;  she  had  met  him,  she
said,  for  the  first  time  at  the  foot  of  the  staircase  of  the  Ministere  de  la
Guerre,  in  Paris,  and  her  cousin  added  that  he  had  been  much  struck  with
her.  The  only  inaccuracies  were  that  the  staircase  was  not  a  marble  but  a
stone  one,  and  that  it  was  a  September  sun  that  shone.

When  I  write  in  this  way  the  ideas  do  not  come  (consciously  at  least)  from
my  mind,  and  my  hand  seems  to  be  gently  moved  by  some  external  influence.

Now  I  confess  that  this  description  of  the  staircase,  and  the  meteor,
and  so  forth,  suggests  to  me  as  its  source,  not  so  much  a  male  spirit
disembodied  as  a  female  spirit  still  in  the  flesh,  and  the  romantic  tone  of
the  communication  seems  to  reflect  the  mood  of  the  persons  present.

856.  In   the   next   case    the     explanation    suggested    by    Professor
Alexander  is  probably  the  correct  one.

(From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  112-115.)  The  following
account  of  some  experiments  in  table-tilting  was  sent  to  us  by  Professor
Alexander,  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  in  March  1892.  He  writes  : —

Rio  DE  JANEIRO,  March  2\st  [1892].

Dr.  Barcellos  is  a  gentleman  who  resides  at  Botafogo,  Rio  de  Janeiro,
where  he  not  only  has  a  considerable  practice,  but  is  also  generally  esteemed


856]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  157

as  an  honourable  and  sensible  man.  Having  studied  hypnotism,  he  was
desirous  of  witnessing  some  of  the  allied  facts  to  be  observed  in  psychical
research.  Towards  the  middle  of  last  year  we  agreed  to  hold  formal  sittings
at  his  house  with  the  purpose  of  eliciting,  if  it  were  possible,  physical
phenomena.  We  devoted  Monday  evenings  to  our  investigations,  the  circle
being  composed,  with  the  exception  of  myself,  of  members  of  the  doctor's
own  family.  Donna  Maria  de  Villas  Boas  Barcellos,  a  school  teacher,  who
acted  as  medium,  has,  if  table-tilting  be  no  proof  to  the  contrary,  arrived  at
years  of  mature  discretion.  She  is  Dr.  Barcellos'  sister-in-law,  and  the  mother
of  five  children.  The  few  sittings  held  began  on  the  3ist  of  August  1891,  and
were  discontinued  about  the  end  of  October  of  the  same  year.  They  were  sub-
ject to  much  interruption  by  children  and  visitors,  and  were  finally  stopped
when  Donna  Maria  was  appointed  to  a  school  at  a  distance.  With  the  excep-
tion of  some  slight  crepitations,  more  felt  than  heard,  the  seances,  so  far  as
physical  phenomena  go,  were  a  failure.  The  lady,  doubtless,  moved  the  table
herself,  although  she  did  not  seem  to  be  aware  of  it.  As  for  the  messages,
they  were  nearly  always  of  a  trivial  character,  and  occasionally  they  were  false.
There  seems,  however,  to  have  been  a  noticeable  percentage  of  verifiable  truth
in  what  came  through  Donna  Maria's  automatism.  Before  our  sittings  began,
this  lady  was  seated  at  the  meza  fallante  (speaking-table)  with  members  of
her  own  family  when  the  presence  of  her  father,  then  deceased,  was  announced.
He  was  asked  to  give  the  names  of  the  people  present.  This  he  did,  including
that  of  a  boy  who  was  not  in  the  room  at  the  time,  with  the  information  that  he
had  just  fallen  down  in  the  mud.  Immediately  afterwards  the  little  fellow  came
into  the  room  crying  and  confirmed  the  statement  made  through  the  table.
The  sitters,  who  were  only  seeking  for  amusement,  became  frightened  and
abandoned  all  further  experiments.  At  our  own  sittings,  among  much  that
was  wearisome  and  unprofitable,  a  few  encouraging  incidents  occurred.  On
one  occasion  (October  26th,  1891)  Dr.  Barcellos  asked  mentally  about  the  state
of  a  young  lady  patient  who  was  ill  of  smallpox.  The  table  replied  that  she
would  die  on  the  following  morning  at  eight  o'clock.  She  did  not  die,  but  at
the  hour  mentioned  she  became  much  worse.  On  another  occasion,  after  I  had
retired,  details  were  given  about  the  private  life  of  an  individual  who  lived  in
Vassouras,  up  country,  which  were  by  no  means  flattering  to  him.  A  Sefihor
Lozada,  the  doctor's  brother-in-law,  who  was  standing  away  from  the  table,
was  the  only  person  present  who  had  previously  known  of  these  particulars.
He  declared  that  the  information  thus  obtained  was  exact.

So  much  for  the  general  character  of  our  sittings,  of  which  I  give  an  idea,
so  that  the  incident  I  am  about  to  relate  may  not  have  more  than  its  due
importance.

On  the  2ist  September  1891,  I  was  seated  at  the  table  with  Dr.  Barcellos,
his  niece  Sylvia,  and  Donna  Maria  Barcellos,  when  the  words  came,  "  The  vase
is  broken."  We  asked  what  vase.  "  (The  vase)  at  your  house,  the  vase  of
phenic  acid."  I  demanded  the  hour,  and  the  reply  was,  "  At  eight  o'clock."  Of
this  an  immediate  note  was  taken  at  my  request  by  one  of  the  children  seated
at  another  table.  I  transferred  this  note  to  my  pocket-book  where  it  reads  as
follows  : —

"  21  st  of  September,  1891.— O  vaso  se  quebrou— De  sua  casa— O  vaso  de
acido  phenico — As  8  horas."

I  at  once  looked  at  my  watch.     It  wanted  some  four  or  five  minutes  to


158  CHAPTER  VIII  [856

eight.  I  knew,  however,  that  it  was  not  going  well  at  the  time,  and  I  forgot  to
compare  it  afterwards  with  the  right  time.  When  this  message  had  been  given
Sylvia  Barcellos  rose  from  her  place,  and  went  into  the  dining-room,  where  she
told  the  others  what  had  happened.  Some  visitors  who  were  there  spoke  of
retiring ;  but  they  were  urged  to  stay,  as  it  was  only  eight  o'clock — the  hour
then  marked  by  the  timepiece  on  the  wall.  Thus  a  lucky  chance  determined
the  time  of  the  message,  which  my  carelessness  in  neglecting  to  see  how  much
I  was  out  might  have  left  in  doubt.

I  did  not  at  first  suppose  that  the  above  words  had  any  more  importance
than  other  things  that  came  through  the  table.  It  was,  therefore,  an  agreeable
surprise  when  on  a  subsequent  occasion  Dr.  Barcellos  told  me  that  the  message
had  been  confirmed.  I  wrote  down  a  resume  of  his  statement,  which  I  now
copy  from  my  note-book  :  —

"  Donna  M.  on  arriving  home  was  being  told  of  fright,  when  she  interrupted
them,  telling  them  what  had  come  through  table.  They  had  just  remarked
time  (eight  o'clock)  and  went  to  give  food  to  sick  child — when  noise  of  break-
age. They  exclaimed,  '  O  vaso  de  acido  phenico  se  quebrou.'  In  truth,  the
jug  had  been  upset  by  the  dog,  and  had  fallen  against  the  vase  of  phenic  acid,
making  the  noise."

Neither  the  vase  in  question,  which  was  of  porcelain,  nor  the  water-jug  was
really  broken.  The  cause  of  the  accident  was  a  dog  that  had  got  into  the
room  where  the  sick  child  lay.  The  animal  had,  no  doubt,  endeavoured  to
drink  out  of  the  jug,  which  was  standing  on  the  floor  near  a  chair.

The  house  where  Donna  Maria  was  then  living  is  situated  about  a  kilometre's
distance  from  Dr.  Barcellos'  residence,  so  that  the  explanation  by  hyperaesthesia
of  the  hearing — in  a  person  who  could  hardly  be  said  to  be  out  of  her  normal
condition — seems  to  me  to  be  absurd.  Yet  the  lady  was  no  clairvoyant,  for  the
vase  was  not  really  broken.  Even  if  her  character  were  not  above  suspicion,
she  could  not  have  arranged  the  incident  beforehand,  for  a  dog  does  not  take
part  in  a  plot.  The  coincidence  in  time,  and  the  exact  mention  of  what  was
supposed  to  have  occurred,  renders  mere  chance  an  extremely  unlikely  element.
We  are  therefore  limited  to  one  hypothesis — the  emotional  impression  of  the
girls  who  exclaimed,  "  O  vaso  de  acido  phenico  se  quebrou,"  influenced  their
mother  telepathically,  and  the  table  was  the  means  of  bringing  to  the  surface
the  message  which  her  subconsciousness  had  received.

ALFRED  ALEXANDER.

The  evidence  of  the  other  witnesses  was  given  in  Portuguese,  of  which
we  print  English  translations,  kindly  furnished  by  Professor  Alexander.

It  was  a  little  past  eight  when  the  visitors  who  were  with  me  in  the  dining-
room  in  the  evening  of  the  2ist  of  September  1891  spoke  of  retiring.

LUIZA  BARCELLOS.

March  2.1st,  1892.

On  the  2ist  of  September  1891,  I  witnessed  a  curious  fact  in  telepathy.
At  that  date,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  various  persons  in  a  house  in  the
Rua  de  Donna  Marianna  heard  a  strange  noise  in  the  room  of  a  smallpox
patient,  and  ran  into  it,  crying  out  that  in  all  probability  the  vase  of  phenic
acid  had  been  broken.  Donna  Maria  Barcellos,  my  sister-in-law,  one  of  her
daughters,  Sylvia  Barcellos,  Senhor  Alfredo  Alexander,  and  I  were  at  that


858]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  159

hour  seated  at  a  small  round  table,  when  it  was  announced  that  in  the  above-
mentioned  house,  in  the  Rua  de  Donna  Marianna,  a  vase  of  phenic  acid  had
been  broken.  Donna  Maria  Barcellos  was  much  astonished  when  they  told
her  on  her  going  home  to  the  Rua  de  Donna  Marianna  that  they  had  had  a
great  fright  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening.  She  replied  that  she  was  already
aware  that  it  was  a  vase  of  phenic  acid  which  had  been  broken.  Then  they
explained  to  her  that  such  had  been  the  general  supposition  in  the  house,  that
when  they  ran  into  the  room  they  all  exclaimed,  "  The  vase  of  phenic  acid  has
broken,"  and  that  on  entering  they  discovered  that  a  jug  of  water  standing  near
a  chair  had  fallen  against  the  vase  of  phenic  acid.

These  facts  passed  in  the  presence  of  Professor  Alexander,  who  was  also
at  the  table  with  my  sister-in-law  and  Sylvia.

(Signed)  DR.  ALFREDO  BARCELLOS.

Rio  DE  JANEIRO,  September  22nd,  1891.

When  Mariquinhas  came  home  I  said  to  her,  u  You  cannot  imagine  what
a  fright  we  had  to-day,"  to  which  she  replied,  "You  need  not  tell  me;  I  know
all  about  it.  It  was  the  vase  of  phenic  acid  that  broke."  This  reply  caused  us
the  greatest  surprise,  when  she  added  that  nobody  had  told  her  of  it,  but
that  she  heard  of  it  through  the  intermedium  of  the  tilting  table.  Our  astonish-
ment was  still  greater  when  she  said  that  the  fact  occurred  at  eight  o'clock  in
the  evening.

Indeed,  at  that  hour,  when  we  were  in  the  back  part  of  the  house,  we  heard
a  loud  noise  like  that  of  the  fall  of  some  vessel  full  (of  liquid).  The  door  of  the
bedroom  where  the  child  sick  of  smallpox  lay  was  closed  ;  but  we  heard  her
crying  out,  and  ran  to  see  what  was  the  matter.  At  the  same  time  the  three
girls  exclaimed,  "  The  vase  of  phenic  acid  has  broken  !  "  It  was  not,  however,
this  vase  that  broke,  but  a  jug  of  water  which  had  fallen  down.
N.B. — This  fact  happened  yesterday,  September  2ist,  1891.

(Signed)  AMELIA  A.  CARDIM.

MARIA  CARDIM.

PAULINA  BARCELLOS.

MARIA  VILLAS  BOAS.

CARLOTA   CARDIM.

AMELIA  CARDIM.

857.  The  next  case  (857  A)   is  very  remote ;  and  I  should  not  use
it  to  aid  in  establishing  communication  with  the  dead.     But  as  indicating
a  possible  source  of  error,  it  seems  worth  quoting  in  an  Appendix,  as  it
is  vouched  for  by  two  informants   who,   although   here  anonymous,  are
distinguished  and  intelligent  men.

858.  My   next   case— given   in   858   A— comes   from   the  late  Dr.
Ermacora,  whose  untimely  death  has  been  a  serious  loss  to  our  studies.
Professor  W.  James  visited  Dr.  Ermacora  at  Padua  and  told  me  that  his
experiments   were    seriously   and    carefully   conducted.       Dr.    Ermacora
himself,   for   reasons    stated   in  his    narrative,  regarded  this  message   as
probably  coming  from  a  disembodied  intelligence.     But  it  seems  to  me
that  the  statement  as  to  the  date  of  the  letter's  arrival  may  have  ema-
nated   from    the    mind    of  the  Venetian  cousin    at  the  time   when    she


160  CHAPTER    VIII  [859

meant  to  post  her  letter  in  the  evening.  Dr.  Ermacora  also  sent  me
a  case  (not  for  publication)  where  a  message  written  by  the  same  auto-
matist  predicted  some  remarkable  points  with  regard  to  her  own  future
health.  Such  a  prediction,  however — like  the  frequently  recorded  pre-
dictions of  somnambulists  with  regard  to  their  own  epileptic  fits,  &c. —
seems  to  me  to  belong  to  the  province  of  the  subliminal  self,  which  I
conceive  as  more  intimately  acquainted  with  the  state  of  the  organism
than  the  supraliminal  self  can  be.

859.  Thus  much  for  the  present  with  regard  to  communications
from  the  living,  and  as  to  the  danger  that  a  message  purporting  to  come
from  a  deceased  person  may  in  reality  emanate  from  the  mind  of  one  of
the  living  persons  present,  or,  indeed,  from  some  living  person  at  a  dis-
tance. But  this,  although  a  real  risk,  is  by  no  means  the  only  risk  of
deception  which  such  messages  involve.  The  communication  may  con-
ceivably come  from  some  unembodied  spirit  indeed,  but  not  from  the
spirit  who  is  claimed  as  its  author.  Have  we  any  way  of  guarding  against
this  deception ; — any  hints  which  may  even  help  us  to  conceive  the  nature
of  a  danger  which  lies  so  entirely  outside  our  terrene  experience  ?

The  answer  to  this  question  cannot  be  brief,  and  must  for  the  present
be  delayed.     I  can  best,  perhaps,  introduce  the  reader  to  this  new  range
of  problems  by  quoting  at  this  point   (in  859  A)  some  extracts  from  a    |
record  of  the  varied  experiences  of  automatic  writing  which  have  been    i
intermingled  with   Miss   A.'s    crystal-visions,    &c.,   already   narrated    in    !
Chapter  VI.  (625  C).     Such  account  as  can  here  be  produced  is,  from
various  causes,  very  incomplete.     It  contains,  however,  specimens  of  several
of  the  problems  of  which  mention  has  already  been  made.     I  may  remind    i
the  reader  that  this  is   a  case  with  which  I  am  intimately  acquainted,
having  carefully  watched  the  progress  of  the  phenomena  for  some  years.    !
The  statements  refer  largely  to  facts  within  my  own  knowledge,  and  these    j
are  given  without  exaggeration.

I  should  add  that  the  phenomena  have  continued,  whenever  invited,
up  to  the  present  date  (December,  1900),  and  that  they  have  developed    |
in  the  direction  of  recognised  identities.     I  have  myself  lately  had  through
Miss   A.  what  appear  to  me    convincing   messages,  given   by   raps,  on
private   matters  from  departed  friends.     That  this  element  exists  amid
these  confused  communications,  I  feel  sure ;  but  the  recognised  spirits  are
seldom  able  to  explain  much  beyond  their  own  actual  message,  nor  to
throw  light  on  the  strange  anonymity  in  which  most  of  the  writings  are
shrouded.     There  is  now  no  case  that  I  have  watched  longer  than  Miss    .
A.'SJ — none  where  I  have   more  absolute  assurance   of  the  scrupulous
probity  of  the  principal  sensitive  herself  and  of  the  group  who  share  the
experiments ; — but  none  also  which  leaves  me  more  often  baffled  as  to  the
unseen  source  of  the  information  given.     There  is  a  knowledge  both  of
the   past   and   of  the  future,  which   seems   capriciously  limited,  and  is    !
mingled  with  mistakes,  yet  on  the  other  hand  is  of  a  nature  which  it  is


860]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  161

difficult  to  refer  to  any  individual  human  mind,  incarnate  or  discarnate.
We  meet  here  some  of  the  first  indications  of  a  possibility  of  which  more
must  be  said  in  a  later  chapter  (IX.),  that  discarnate  spirits  communi-
cating with  us  have  occasional  access  to  certain  sources  of  knowledge
which  even  to  themselves  are  inscrutably  remote  and  obscure.

The  command  to  bring  "  C.  D." — a  command  which,  as  will  be  seen,
I  myself  obeyed — was  especially  remarkable  in  its  apparent  futility,  yet
it  ultimately  resulted  in  developing  the  phenomena.  C.  D.,  indeed,  was  a
person  in  whom  the  soi-disant  Chancellor  Hardwicke  might  be  expected
to  take  some  interest ; — but  one  is  at  a  loss  to  imagine  what  kind  of
perception  could  pick  him  out  as  the  one  man  whose  own  faculty  would
best  contribute  to  Miss  A.'s,  and  would  be  best  developed  by  hers  in
return.

The  written  diagnoses  and  prognoses  given  by  the  so-called  "  Semirus,"
often  without  Miss  A.'s  even  seeing  the  patient  or  hearing  the  nature  of
his  malady,  have  become  more  and  more  remarkable.1  Miss  A.  and  her
friends  do  not  wish  these  private  matters  to  be  printed,  and  I  cannot
therefore  insist  upon  the  phenomena  here.  Yet  in  view  of  the  amount  of
telaesthesia  which  Miss  A.'s  various  automatisms  reveal,  it  should  first  be
noted  that  human  organisms  seem  especially  pervious  to  such  vue  a
distance.  "Semirus,"  "  Gelalius,"  &c.,  are  obvious  pseudonyms;  and
neither  Semirus'  prescriptions  nor  Gelalius'  cosmogony  contain  enough  of
indication  to  enable  us  to  grasp  their  origin.

860.  I  pass  on  to  a  series  of  messages  which  afford  an  interesting
field  for  the  discussion  of  the  rival  hypotheses  of  "  cryptomnesia  "  and
spirit-control.  The  automatist,  who  must  here  be  called  Mrs.  R.,  is  a
lady  well  known  to  me  for  some  years,  and  to  whom  I  was  first  introduced
by  the  late  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood  (the  cousin  and  brother-in-law  of
Charles  Darwin,  and  himself  a  well-known  savant},  who  reported  certain
messages  obtained  in  his  presence,  and  partly  through  his  co-operation.
Mrs.  R.,  and  her  sister  Mrs.  V.,  now  deceased,  were  for  many  years
among  Mr.  Wedgwood's  most  valued  friends.  There  can  be  no  more
question  in  my  mind  as  to  Mrs.  R.'s  scrupulous  good  faith  than  as  to  that
of  Mr.  Wedgwood  himself  in  endeavouring  to  recall  the  utmost  that  they
had  ever  known  of  the  personages  who  professed  to  be  writing  through
the  help  of  the  two  human  hands.  The  question  is  one  of  subliminal
memory;  and  as  to  this  it  may  be  remarked  that  Mr.  Wedgwood's
reading  was  wide, — but  that  he  never,  so  far  as  I  know,  showed  any
automatic  gift,  nor  obtained  writing  except  with  one  of  these  two  ladies.
On  the  other  hand,  Mrs.  R.'s  reading  has  not  been  wide  in  range ;  and
both  Mrs.  R.  and  Mrs.  V.  had  many  psychical  experiences, — most  of  them
of  a  private  nature,2 — in  which  Mr.  Wedgwood  was  not  concerned.  The

1  See  a  recent  case  furnished  by  Sir  Lawrence  Jones,  which  I  print  at  the  end  of  the
Appendix.

2  See,  however,y<?«r«<2/  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  293,  for  two  experiences  of  Mrs.  V.'s.
VOL.   II.  L


1 62  CHAPTER    VIII  [861

automatic  impulse  seems  to  have  come  from  them;  but  it  may  be  that
Mr.  Wedgwood's  presence  modified  the  character  of  the  messages
obtained.  I  give  first  a  general  account  by  Mr.  Wedgwood  of  the  mode
of  experiment.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  92.)

My  experience  in  planchette-writing  has  been  mainly  acquired  in  sitting
with  two  sisters,  whom  I  will  call  Mrs.  R.  and  Mrs.  V.,  of  whom  the  younger,
Mrs.  V.,  has  far  the  stronger  influence  in  producing  the  writing.  With  her  the
board  in  general  begins  to  move  much  sooner  and  in  a  more  vivacious  way
than  with  her  elder  sister.  When  the  two  sit  together  the  board  moves  rapidly
along,  like  a  person  writing  as  fast  as  he  can  drive,  while  with  me  and  one  of
the  sisters  the  action  is  often  feeble  and  labouring.  But  neither  of  the  sisters
can  obtain  anything  whatever  when  they  sit  by  themselves.  The  board  re-
mains absolutely  motionless  under  the  hands  of  the  solitary  operator.

When  trying  for  writing  we  sit  opposite  each  other  at  a  small  table,  I  with
my  right  hand,  my  partner  with  her  left  on  the  planchette,  while  the  writing
produced  is  upright  to  me,  and  upside  down  to  my  partner,  from  whom,  how-
ever, the  effective  influence  seems  to  proceed.  The  precise  nature  of  that
influence  is  not  very  easy  to  understand,  and  is,  I  think,  very  commonly  mis-
apprehended. Writing  by  planchette  is  often  called  "  automatic,"  and  the
pencil  is  conceived  as  being  worked  by  the  muscular  action  of  the  sitters,  under
the  guidance  of  a  blind  impulse,  as  little  understood  by  them  as  the  finished
result  is  foreseen  by  a  pair  of  birds  instinctively  engaged  in  the  construction  of
their  first  nest.  But  this  is  directly  opposed  to  the  experience  of  myself  and
my  partners.  When  I  am  sitting  at  planchette  with  one  of  them,  I  know  that
I  am  merely  following  the  movement  of  the  board  with  my  hand,  and  not  in
any  way  guiding  it,  my  only  difficulty  being  to  avoid  interfering  with  it.  It
seems  to  me  exactly  as  if  my  partner,  in  whom  I  have  perfect  confidence,  was
purposely  moving  the  board  and  I  allowing  my  hand  to  follow  her  action,
interfering  with  it  as  little  as  possible.  And  she  gives  to  me  an  exactly
corresponding  account  of  her  own  share  in  the  operation.  Thus  we  give  to
the  outside  world  our  united  testimony  of  a  fact  which,  as  far  as  each  of  us
is  concerned,  lies  within  our  own  direct  knowledge,  viz.,  that  the  writing  traced
out  by  the  pencil  is  not  produced  by  the  muscular  exertion  of  either  of  us.

We  have,  then,  in  planchette-writing,  if  our  account  is  to  be  believed,  the
manifestation  of  an  agency  invisible  to  us,  yet  capable  of  moving  the  bodily
pencil  either  in  mere  scribbling  or  in  such  a  way  as  to  fix  an  intelligent  message
on  the  paper.

861.  The  first  case  which  I  shall  give  is  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Wedg-
wood, in  the /"<?#;-#  0/S.  P.  R.  for  December,  1889  (vol.  iv.  p.  174).

Whenever  I  have  an  opportunity,  perhaps  once  or  twice  a  year,  I  sit  at
planchette-writing  with  my  friend,  whom  I  will  call  Mrs.  R.,  a  most  observant
witness  in  whom  I  have  entire  confidence.  We  sit  opposite  each  other  at  a
small  table,  each  resting  the  fingers  of  one  hand  lightly  upon  the  board,  and
when  the  board  begins  to  move,  allow  our  hand  to  follow  the  movement  freely
without  interfering  with  it  in  any  way.

The  following  account  of  our  last  sitting,  on  June  26th,  is  from  the  journal
of  Mrs.  R.,  written  the  same  evening,  transcribing  the  part  of  planchette  from


861]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  163

the  actual  writing,  and  filling  in  our  share  of  the  investigation  from  immediate
memory.

Extract  from  journal  of  Wednesday,  June  "2.6th,  1889,  and  copy  of planchette-
writing  with  Mr.  Wedgwood : —

"  A  spirit  is  here  to-day  who  we  think  will  be  able  to  write  through  the
medium.  Hold  very  steady,  and  he  will  try  first  to  draw."

We  turned  the  page  and  a  sketch  was  made,  rudely  enough  of  course,  but
with  much  apparent  care.

"  Very  sorry  can't  do  better.  Was  meant  for  test.  Must  write  for  you
instead.— J.  G."

We  do  not  fully  understand  the  first  drawing,  taking  it  for  two  arms  and
hands  clasped,  one  coming  down  from  above.  Mr.  Wedgwood  asked  the  spirit
of  J.  G.  to  try  again,  which  he  did.

Below  the  drawing  he  wrote  :  "  Now  look."  We  did,  and  this  time  com-
prehended the  arm  and  sword.

"  Now  I  will  write  for  you  if  you  like."

Mr.  W. :  "  What  did  the  drawing  represent?  "

"  Something  that  was  given  me."

I  said  :  "  Are  you  a  man  or  a  woman  ?  "

"  Man.     John  G."

Mr.  W. :  "  How  was  it  given  to  you  ?  "

"  On  paper  and  other  things.  .  .  .  My  head  is  bad  from  the  old  wound  I
got  there  when  I  try  to  write  through  mediums."

Mr.  W.  :  "We  don't  know  J.  G.     Have  you  anything  to  do  with  us  ?  "

"  No  connection."

Mr.  W.  said  he  knew  a  J.  Giffard,  and  wondered  if  that  was  the  name.

"  Not  Giffard.     Gurwood."

Mr.  W.  suggested  that  he  had  been  killed  in  storming  some  fort.

"  I  killed  myself  on  Christmas  Day,  years  ago.    I  wish  I  had  died  fighting."

"  Were  you  a  soldier  ?  "

"  I  was  in  the  army."

" Can  you  say  what  rank?  "

"  No.  ...  It  was  the  pen  did  for  me,  and  not  the  sword."

The  vfordflen  was  imperfectly  written,  and  I  thought  it  was  meant  ior  fall.
I  asked  if  this  was  right  ?

"No."

Mr.  W.:  "Is  the  word penf"

"Yes;  pen  did  for  me."

We  suggested  that  he  was  an  author  who  had  failed,  or  had  been
maligned.

"  I  did  not  fail.  I  was  not  slandered.  Too  much  for  me  after  .  .  .  pen
was  too  much  for  me  after  the  wound."

"  Where  were  you  wounded,  and  when  did  you  die  ?  "

"  Peninsula  to  first  question."

We  were  not  sure  about  the  word  Peninsula,  and  asked  him  to  repeat.

"  I  was  wounded  in  the  head  in  Peninsula.  It  will  be  forty-four  years
next  Christmas  Day  since  I  killed  myself.  Oh,  my  head.  ...  I  killed  myself.
John  Gurwood."

"  Where  did  you  die  ?  "

"I  had  my  wound  in  1810.  I  cannot  tell  you  more  about  myself.  The
drawing  was  a  test."


164  CHAPTER    VIII  [861

We  asked  if  the  device  was  intended  for  his  crest.

"  I  had  it  seal."

"  Had  it  anything  to  do  with  your  wound  ?  "  (I  cannot  remember  the  exact
form  of  this  question.)

"  It  came  from  that  and  was  given  me.  Power  fails  to  explain.  Remember
my  name.  Stop  now."  '

The  only  person  besides  ourselves  present  at  the  sitting  was  Miss  H.,  an
aunt  of  Mrs.  R.'s,  and  none  of  us  knew  anything  of  Colonel  Gurwood  beyond
the  fact  of  his  having  edited  the  despatches  .of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  not
even  that  his  name  was  John.  It  is  possible  that  I  might  have  heard  of  his
suicide  at  the  time  that  it  occurred,  without  its  making  any  impression  on  me,
but  I  am  sure  I  did  not  read  such  an  obituary  notice  as  would  be  published  in  the
Times,  and  when  my  attention  was  directed  to  his  editorial  work  eighteen  or
twenty  years  afterwards  I  did  not  know  whether  he  was  alive  or  dead,  and  was
entirely  ignorant  of  his  military  career.  I  never  read  any  history  of  the  Penin-
sular War,  and  am  perfectly  certain  that  I  never  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing
Gurwood's  crest,  or  knowing  anything  about  it. — H.  W.

The  following  is  the  account  Mr.  Wedgwood  wrote  of  the  first  stance
at  the  time  : —

June  26th,  1889.

Had  a  sitting  at  planchette  with  Mrs.  R.  this  morning.  Planchette  said
there  was  a  spirit  there  who  thought  he  could  draw  if  we  wished  it.  We  said
we  should  be  glad  if  he  would  try.  Accordingly  P.  made  a  rude  attempt  at  a
hand  and  arm  proceeding  from  an  embattled  wall  and  holding  a  sword.  A
second  attempt  made  the  subject  clearer.  P.  said  it  was  meant  for  a  test.  The
spirit  signed  it  "  J.  G.,"  no  connection  of  any  of  ours,  he  said.  We  gradually
elicited  that  his  name  was  John  Gurwood,  who  was  wounded  in  the  Peninsula,
in  1810,  and  killed  himself  on  Christmas  Day,  1845.  I*  was  not  the  wound,  but
the  pen  that  did  it.


Something  like  that.

July  $fh,  1889.

I  made  the  foregoing  memorandum  the  same  day,  having  very  little  expec-  ;
tation  that  there  would  be  any  verification.  H.  WEDGWOOD.

FURTHER  EXTRACTS  FROM  MRS.  R.'s  JOURNAL.

Friday ',  September  2"jth.

Mr.  Wedgwood  came,  and  we  had  two  sittings  in  the  afternoon  and  even-
ing.    I  think  the  same  spirit  wrote  throughout,  beginning  without  signature  ;  :
but  when  'we  asked  the  name,  writing  (after  some  struggle  and  illegibility)
"  John  Gurwood."


861]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  165

The  effort  was  at  first  incoherent,  but  developed  into  the  following  sen-
tences : —

"  Sword — when  I  broke  in,  on  the  table  with  plan  of  fortress — belonged  to
my  prisoner ;  I  will  tell  you  his  name  to-night.  It  was  on  the  table  when  I
broke  in.  He  did  net  expect  me;  I  took  him  unawares.  He  was  in  his  room,
looking  at  a  plan,  and  the  sword  was  on  the  table.  Will  try  and  let  you  know
how  I  took  the  sword  to-night."

In  the  evening  after  dinner  : —

"  I  fought  my  way  in.  His  name  was  Banier  "  (three  times  repeated).  "  The
sword  was  lying  on  the  table  by  a  written  scheme  of  defence.  Oh,  my  head.
Banier  had  a  plan  written  out  for  the  defence  of  the  fortress.  It  was  lying  on
the  table,  and  his  sword  was  by  it."

To  a  question  : —

"Yes;  surprised  him."

Mr.  Wedgwood  thinks  the  name  of  the  Governor  of  the  fortress  of  Ciudad
Rodrigo  was  Banier ;  but  he  says  this  would  not  be  a  test,  as  he  knew  it.  He
is  going  to  see  if  he  can  find  anything  in  Napier's  Peninsular  War  corrobora-
tive of  what  is  said  about  the  sword.

"  Look.     1  have  tried  to  tell  you  what  you  can  verify."

Mr.  Wedgwood  reports  his  verification  as  follows  : —

When  I  came  to  verify  the  message  of  planchette  I  speedily  found  that
Colonel  Gurwood,  the  editor  of  the  Duke's  despatches,  led  the  forlorn  hope  at
the  storming  of  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  in  1812  [note  error  in  date],  "and  received  a
wound  in  the  skull  from  a  musket  ball  which  affected  him  for  the  remainder  of
his  life." — Annual  Register,  1845.  In  recognition  of  the  bravery  shown  on  that
occasion  he  received  a  grant  of  arms  in  1812,  registered  in  the  College  of  Arms
as  having  been  passed  "  upon  the  narrative  that  he  (Captain  G.)  had  led  the
forlorn  hope  at  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  and  that,  after  the  storming  of  the  fortress,  the
Earl  of  Wellington  presented  him  with  the  sword  of  the  Governor,  who  had
been  taken  prisoner  by  Captain  Gurwood."1

The  services  thus  specified  were  symbolised  in  the  crest,  "  Out  of  a  mural
coronet,  a  castle  ruined  in  the  centre,  and  therefrom  an  arm  in  armour  embowed,
holding  a  scimitar."  2

It  is  plainly  this  crest  that  is  aimed  at  by  planchette  in  his  very  rude  de-
sign, which  represents  the  arm  and  sword  as  issuing  from  the  mural  coronet
alone,  omitting  the  ruined  castle  as  too  complex  a  subject  for  the  powers  of  the
designer.  The  drawing  was  given  merely  as  a  test,  and  if  it  pointed  unmis-
takably to  the  Gurwood  crest  it  would  fulfil  its  purpose.

In  accordance  with  the  assertion  of  planchette,  Colonel  Gurwood  killed
himself  on  Christmas  Day,  1845,  and  the  Annual  Register  of  that  year,  after
narrating  the  suicide,  continues  :  "  It  is  thought  that  this  laborious  undertaking
(the  editing  the  despatches)  produced  a  relaxation  of  the  nervous  system  and
consequent  depression  of  spirits.  In  a  fit  of  despondency  the  unfortunate  gentle-
man terminated  his  life."  Compare  planchette  :  " Pen  was  too  much  for

me  after  the  wound."

I  continue  the  quotation  from  Mrs.  R.'s  journal : —

Mr.  W. :  "  Can  you  tell  me  where  else  to  look?"

"  I  have  no  power  to  direct  you.     We  have  exhausted,  but  I  wished  to  tell

1  Information  received  from  the  College  of  Arms,  July  I5th,  1889.
2  The  Book  of  Family  Crests,  Washbourne,  1856.


1 66  CHAPTER    VIII  [861

you  about  poor  Quentain  ...  to  tell  you  a  secret  of  poor  Quintain's,  which  is
on  my  mind.  It  might  once  have  made  a  difference  ;  but  not  now."

We  had  a  difficulty  in  reading  the  name.  Mr.  W.  thought  it  Quinlon,  and
asked  if  this  was  right  ?

"  Not  quite :  a  t.  .  .  .  Quentain.  Not  quite  [right],  but  nearer :  try
again  to-morrow."

Mr.  W. :  "  Is  power  exhausted  now,  and  shall  we  stop  ? "

"Yes."  «

Saturday,  September  2%tA.

Mr.  Wedgwood  and  I  sat  again  this  morning.  First  came  some  preliminary
scribbling  and  circling,  and  then  the  right  spelling  of  the  name  at  which  John
Gurwood  was  trying  last  night.

"  Quentin.  I  knew  him,  and  a  secret  of  his  that  might  have  made  a  differ-
ence, but  I  was  pledged."

Mr.  W.  :  "  Tell  us  what  the  secret  was  ?  "

"  I  should  like  to  try."

Mr.  W. :  "  What  difference  would  it  have  made  to  you  ?  "

"  Might  have  done  to  him :  on  my  mind."

Then  followed  a  word  here  and  there  among  much  that  was  illegible.  I

copy  what  we  succeeded  in  reading.  " in  the  army scrape the

sake  of  another very  foolish,  but  nothing wrong for  verdict

was  unfortunately what  there  was  let  me  go  on,  I  am  trying say  that,

but  quite  mistaken case  in  all  its his  commission of  second

(company  ?)  private  soldier  going  out  gave  to  his  Colonel  very  strong  feeling
about  it  all."

The  above  filled  four  pages.  We  pondered  over  it,  but  could  not  make  out
any  more.  When  planchette  was  put  back,  the  following  was  volunteered  : —

"  Tell  James  I  remember  him  quite  well.  He  will  recollect  about  Quentin's
trial."

Mr.  Wedgwood's  friend,  Captain  James,  of  course,  was  meant.  Mr.  W.
said  he  would  write  and  ask  him  ;  but  did  the  writer  mean  that  Captain  James
knew  the  secret  ?

"  No  one  knew  it."  (Two  lines  illegible.)  "James  will  tell  you,  I  have  not
power.  He  was  tried  by  court-martial."

Mr.  W. :  "  This  Quentin  was  in  the  army  then  ?  "

"  Yes. rest  of  them  would  have but I  cannot  write  plainly  in

answer,  though  I  try.  I  wanted  to  tell  you  about  poor  Quentin,  but  have  not
power  without  further  practice.  I  knew  a  secret  of  his  at  the  time  of  his  scrape
conduct offices .  The court-martial 1  did  not."

Mr.  Wedgwood  here  suggested  we  should  stop  for  a  time,  to  see  if  rest
would  increase  the  power.  We  sat  again  for  a  few  minutes  before  lunch,
directly  after  which  he  left  by  train  ;  but  the  control  was  then  different,  and  the
few  words  written  did  not  appear  to  have  any  special  interest  or  meaning.

Mr.  Wedgwood  writes  on  October  3ist,  1889  : —

I  find  that  there  was  a  famous  court-martial  on  Colonel  Quentin  in  October
1814,  in  consequence  of  a  round  robin  signed  by  twenty-four  of  his  officers.  I  had
a  vague  recollection  of  the  name  of  Colonel  Q.  as  a  friend  of  George  IV.,  and
something  must  have  turned  up  about  the  court-martial  in  the  early  twenties,
when  the  loth  Hussars  became  notorious,  as  I  found  I  had  heard  of  the  round


863]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  167

robin.  The  accusation,  too,  was  of  a  want  of  proper  directions  to  his  subor-
dinates in  action,  so  no  reticence  of  anybody  could  have  made  any  difference,
and  he  was  himself  the  Colonel  of  the  regiment.

With  respect  to  the  capture  of  Banier,  the  only  chance  of  verification  would
be  from  the  family,  and  Miss  Gurwood  has  not  answered  my  letter.

Captain  James  writes  to  me  from  10  Hereford  Road,  London,  June
29th,  1891  : —

About  the  year  1830  my  regiment  was  quartered  at  Portsmouth,  and
Colonel  Gurwood  was  then  on  the  staff  of  the  garrison  there.  The  Colonel  was
an  honorary  member  of  our  mess,  and  dined  with  us  nearly  every  day.  I
remember  I  used  to  be  very  fond  of  sitting  next  to  him,  and  conversing  with
him  about  the  various  events  that  occurred  during  the  Peninsular  War.  Of
course  the  Quentin  trial  must  have  taken  place  when  I  was  a  mere  child,  as  I
was  born  in  1804.

862.  Mr.    Wedgwood    gave    us    also    another  case   of  a   somewhat
similar  character,  which  I  cite  in  862  A.

Finally,  a  few  months  before  his  death,  I  received  from  him  a  third
retrocognitive  case,  which  is  printed  in  full  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.
pp.  99-104.  It  relates  to  the  execution  of  Alice  Grimbold — a  maid-
servant at  an  inn  at  Leicester — who  was  condemned  to  be  burnt  alive  for
complicity  in  the  murder  of  her  mistress  in  1605.  A  number  of  names
and  details  were  given,  all  of  which  were  afterwards  verified  in  a  History
of  Leicester.  The  automatists  were  confident  that  they  had  never  heard
of  any  of  the  facts  before.

863.  I  have   given   these  cases  in  succession,   so   that   the    reader
may  see  the  kind  of  growing  difficulty  which  the  theory  of  forgotten  memo-
ries here  involves.     It  will  be  seen  that  with  each  automatist  of  good
faith  the  question  may  with   patience  be  capable    of  definite  solution.
Were  Mrs.  R.  willing  and   able — which  at  present    she   is   not — to   find
some  other  partner  with  whom  she  can  write,  now  that  Mr.  Wedgwood
and  her  sister  have  been  removed  by  death,  and  to  record  a  long  series
of  communications,   we   might  gradually  obtain    a   conviction    that    the
matters  therein  narrated  either  could  or  could  not  all  of  them  have  been
previously  seen  and  forgotten.     Similar  records  kept  by  many  other  auto-
matists  might  help  to  some   general   conclusion   as  to  the   source  from
which  these  retrocognitive  facts  come,  if  in  any  cases  forgotten  memory
fails    to    explain    them.     One    of  the   most    important  data  for   such    a
decision  consists  in  the  account — absolutely  trustworthy,  as  I  believe —
given  by  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  in  "  Spirit  Identity,"  of  a  series  of  messages
from  musical  composers,  giving  the  principal   dates   of  their  respective
lives,    as    they    may    be    found    in    any    Biographical    Dictionary,    with
hardly  anything   more.      Now    were    such    messages    offered    to    us    as
coming    through  an   alleged   automatist  not   of  known    probity  or  who
could  bring  no  proof  of  other   messages  not  capable   of  being   got  up
beforehand,  we  should  naturally  set  them  aside.     But  with  Mr.  Moses,  as


1 68  CHAPTER    VIII  [864

with  Mrs.  R.  above — and  in  a  still  higher  degree — there  was  so  con-
siderable an  independent  history  of  provably  supernormal  phenomena
that  we  are  bound  to  consider  these  musical  biographies  in  their  place
as  a  part  of  that  series.  Their  peculiar  nature  excited  the  surprise  of
Mr.  Moses  and  his  friends,  who  were  informed  by  the  "  guides  "  that
these  were  in  fact  messages  from  the  spirits  in  question,  but  that  these
spirits  had  refreshed  their  memory  of  their  earth-lives  by  consulting
printed  sources  of  information.  It  is  obvious  that  this  is  to  drop  the
supposed  proof  of  identity  altogether.  If  any  given  spirit  can  consult
his  own  printed  life,  so  also  presumably  can  other  spirits ;  and  so  per-
haps can  the  still  incarnated  spirit  of  the  automatist  himself.  This  was
of  course  felt  by  Mr.  Moses,  who  told  me  that  subjectively  also  the  feeling
which  accompanied  these  biographical  writings  was  very  different  from
that  which  came  when,  as  he  held,  some  spirit  was  entering  with  him  into
real  and  direct  communication.

864.  From  these  remote  historical  narratives    I    go  on  to   certain
messages  avowedly  coming  from  persons   more  recently  departed,  and
into  which  something  more  of  definite  personality  seems  to  enter.     One
element  of  this  kind  is  handwriting;  and  in  the  next  case  it  will  be  seen
that  resemblance  of  handwriting  is  one  of  the  evidential  points  alleged.
Now  proof  of  identity  from  resemblance  of  handwriting  may  conceivably
be  very  strong.     But  in  estimating  it  we  must  bear  two  points  in  mind.
The  first  is  that  (like  the  resemblances  of  so-called  "  spirit-photographs  "  to
deceased  friends)  it  is  often  very  loosely  asserted.     One  needs,  if  not  an
expert's  opinion,  at  least  a  careful  personal  scrutiny  of  the  three  scripts —
the  automatist's  voluntary  and  his  automatic    script,   and  the  deceased
person's  script — before  one  can  feel  sure  that  the  resemblance  is  in  more
than  some  general    scrawliness.      This    refers   to    the  cases   where    the
automatist  has  provably  never  seen  the  deceased  person's  handwriting.
Where  he  has  seen  that  handwriting,  we  have  to  remember  (in  the  second
place)  that  a  hypnotised  subject  can  frequently  imitate  any  known  hand-
writing far  more  closely  than  in  his  waking  state ;  and  that  consequently
we  are  bound  to  credit  the  subliminal  self  with  a  mimetic  faculty  which
may  come  out  of  these  messages  without  any  supraliminal  guidance  what-
ever on  the  automatist's  part.     I  give  in  864  A  an  abridged  account  of  a
series  of  experiments  by  Professor  Rossi- Pagnoni  at  Pesaro,  into  which  the
question  of  handwriting  enters.     The  full  account  illustrates  automatic
utterance  as  well  as  other  forms  of  motor  automatism,  and  possibly  also
telekinetic  phenomena.     The  critical  discussion  of  the  evidence  by  Mr.
H.  Babington  Smith,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the  account,  shows
with  what  complex  considerations  we  have  to  deal  in  the  questions  now
before  us.

865.  The  case  of  Mrs.  Underwood  next  to  be  quoted  (in  865  A)
contains  several   points  of  interest  besides  the  alleged  resemblance   of
handwriting.     It  shows  once  more,   for  instance,  the  great  similarity  of


866]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  169

ways  in  which  this  writing  takes  its  rise  with  automatists  all  over
the  world,  and  the  recurrence  of  the  same  puzzles  with  observers  of  many
different  types,  and  may  thus  serve  as  an  introduction  to  the  groups  of
cases  which  follow.

866.  I  now  cite  a  few  cases  where  the  point  of  central  interest  is
the  announcement  of  a  death  unknown  to  the  sitters.

The  first  is  a  case  which  we  received  from  Dr.  Lie"beault,  of  Nancy,
and  which  was  first  published  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (vol.  i.  p.  293),
where  it  was  regarded  as  an  example  of  a  spontaneous  telepathic
impulse  proceeding  directly  from  a  dying  person.  I  now  regard  it  as
more  probably  due  to  the  action  of  the  spirit  after  bodily  death.  The
translation  of  Dr.  Liebeault's  narrative  is  as  follows  : —

NA.NCY,  September  tfk,  1885.

I  hasten  to  write  to  you  as  to  that  case  of  thought-transference  of  which  I
spoke  to  you  when  you  were  present  at  my  hypnotic  stances  at  Nancy.  The
incident  occurred  in  a  French  family  from  New  Orleans,  who  had  come  to  stay
for  some  time  at  Nancy  for  business  reasons.  I  had  become  acquainted  with
this  family  from  the  fact  that  M.  G.,  its  head,  had  brought  to  me  his  niece,
MUe  B.,  to  be  treated  by  hypnotism.  She  suffered  from  slight  anaemia  and
from  a  nervous  cough,  contracted  at  Coblentz,  in  a  High  School  where  she  was
a  teacher.  I  easily  induced  somnambulism,  and  she  was  cured  in  two  sittings.
The  production  of  this  hypnotic  state  suggested  to  the  G.  family  (Mrs.  G.  was
a  spirit  medium)  and  to  M1!e  B.  herself  that  she  might  easily  become  a  medium.
She  set  herself  to  the  evocation  of  spirits  (in  which  she  firmly  believed)  by  the
aid  of  her  pen,  and  at  the  end  of  two  months  she  had  become  a  remarkable
writing  medium.  I  have  myself  seen  her  rapidly  writing  page  after  page  of
what  she  called  "  messages," — all  in  well-chosen  language  and  with  no  erasures,
— while  at  the  same  time  she  maintained  conversation  with  the  people  near
her.  An  odd  thing  was  that  she  had  no  knowledge  whatever  of  what  she  was
writing.  "  It  must  be  a  spirit,"  she  would  say,  "  which  guides  my  hand  ;  it  is
certainly  not  I."

One  day, — it  was,  I  think,  February  7th,  1868,  about  8  A.M.,  when  just  about  to
seat  herself  at  table  for  breakfast,  she  felt  a  kind  of  need,  an  impulse  which
prompted  her  to  write  ; — it  was  what  she  called  a  trance, — and  she  rushed  off
at  once  to  her  large  note-book,  where  she  wrote  in  pencil,  with  feverish  haste,
certain  undecipherable  words.  She  wrote  the  same  words  again  and  again  on
the  pages  which  followed,  and  at  last,  as  her  agitation  diminished,  it  was
possible  to  read  that  a  person  called  Margue'rite  was  thus  announcing  her
death.  The  family  at  once  assumed  that  a  young  lady  of  that  name,  a  friend
of  Mile  B.'s  and  her  companion  and  colleague  in  the  Coblentz  High  School,  must
have  just  expired.  They  all  came  immediately  to  me,  M1Ie  B.  among  them,
and  we  decided  to  verify  the  announcement  of  death  that  very  day.  Mlle  B.
wrote  to  a  young  English  lady  who  was  also  a  teacher  in  that  same  school.
She  gave  some  other  reason  for  writing ; — taking  care  not  to  reveal  the  true
motive  of  the  letter.  By  return  of  post  we  received  an  answer  in  English,  of
which  they  copied  for  me  the  essential  part.  I  found  this  answer  in  a  portfolio
hardly  a  fortnight  ago,  and  have  mislaid  it  again.  It  expressed  the  surprise  of
the  English  lady  at  the  receipt  of  Mlle  B.'s  unexpected  and  apparently  motive-


1 70  CHAPTER    VIII  [867

less  letter.  But  at  the  same  time  the  English  correspondent  made  haste  to
announce  to  MUe  B.  that  their  common  friend,  Marguerite,  had  died  on
February  7th,  at  about  8  A.M.  Moreover,  the  letter  contained  a  little  square
piece  of  printed  paper; — the  announcement  of  death  sent  round  to  friends.

I  need  not  say  that  I  examined  the  envelope,  and  that  the  letter  appeared
to  me  to  have  veritably  come  from  Coblentz.  Yet  I  have  since  felt  a  certain
regret.  In  the  interests  of  science  I  ought  to  have  asked  the  G.  family  to
allow  me  to  go  with  them  to  the  telegraph  office  to  inquire  whether  they  had
received  a  telegram  early  on  February  7th.  Science  should  feel  no  shame;  truth
does  not  dread  exposure.  My  proof  of  the  fact  is  ultimately  a  moral  one  :  the
honour  of  the  G.  family, — which  has  always  appeared  to  me  to  be  absolutely
above  suspicion.  A.  A.  LIEBEAULT.

Upon  these  last  sentences  Gurney  remarks  that,  apart  from  the  impro-
bability that  the  whole  family  would  join  in  a  conspiracy  to  deceive  their
friend,  the  nature  of  the  answer  received  from  Coblentz  shows  that  the
writer  of  it  cannot  have  been  aware  that  any  telegraphic  announcement
had  been  sent.  And  it  is  in  itself  unlikely  that  the  authorities  of  the
school  would  have  felt  it  necessary  instantly  to  communicate  the  news  to
Mdlle.  B.

867.  I  shall  next  give  in  867  A  a  case  of  curious  complexity  received
from  M.  Aksakoff ; — an  automatic  message  written  by  a  Mdlle.  Stramm,
informing  her  of  the  death  of  a  M.  Duvanel.  The  principal  incidents
may  here  be  disentangled  as  follows  : —

Duvanel  dies  by  his  own  hand  on  January  i5th,  1887,  in  a  Swiss  village,
where  he  lives  alone,  having  no  relations  except  a  brother  living  at  a  distance,
whom  Mdlle.  Stramm  had  never  seen  (as  the  principal  witness,  M.  Kaigorodoff,
informs  us  in  a  letter  of  May  1890).

Mdlle.  Stramm's  father  does  not  hear  of  Duvanel's  death  till  two  days
later,  and  sends  her  the  news  in  a  letter  dated  January  i8th,  1887.

Five  hours  after  Duvanel's  death  an  automatic  message  announcing  it  is
written  at  the  house  of  M.  Kaigorodoff,  at  Wilna  in  Russia,  by  Mdlle.  Stramm,
who  had  certainly  at  that  time  received  no  news  of  the  event.

From  what  mind  are  we  to  suppose  that  this  information  came?

(i)  We  may  first  attempt  to  account  for  Mdlle.  Stramm's  message  on  the
theory  of  latency.  We  may  suppose  that  the  telepathic  message  came  from
the  dying  man,  but  did  not  rise  into  consciousness  until  an  opportunity  was
afforded  by  Mdlle.  Stramm's  sitting  down  to  write  automatically.

But  to  this  interpretation  there  is  an  objection  of  a  very  curious  kind.
The  message  written  by  Mdlle.  Stramm  was  not  precisely  accurate.  Instead
of  ascribing  Duvanel's  death  to  suicide,  it  ascribed  it  to  a  stoppage  of  blood,
"  un  engorgement  de  sang."

And  when  M.  Stramm,  three  days  after  the  death,  wrote  to  his  daughter
in  Russia  to  tell  her  of  it,  he  also  used  the  same  expression,  "  un  engorgement
de  sang,"  thus  disguising  the  actual  truth  in  order  to  spare  the  feelings  of  his
daughter,  who  had  formerly  refused  to  marry  Duvanel,  and  who  (as  her  father
feared)  might  receive  a  painful  shock  if  she  learnt  the  tragic  nature  of  his  end.
There  was,  therefore,  a  singular  coincidence  between  the  automatic  and  the
normally-written  message  as  to  the  death ; — a  coincidence  which  looks  as  thou<


871]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  171

the  same  mind  had  been  at  work  in  each  instance.  But  that  mind  cannot  have
been  M.  Stramm's  ordinary  mind,  as  he  was  not  supraliminally  aware  of
Duvanel's  death  at  the  time  when  the  first  message  was  written.  It  may,
however,  be  supposed  that  his  subliminal  self  had  received  the  information  of
the  death  telepathically,  had  transmitted  it  in  a  deliberately  modified  form  to
his  daughter,  while  it  remained  latent  in  himself,  and  had  afterwards  influenced
his  supraliminal  self  to  modify  the  information  in  the  same  way  when  writing
to  her.

(2)  But  we  must  also  consider  the  explanation  of  the  coincidence  given  by
the  intelligence  which  controlled  the  automatic  writing.  That  intelligence
asserted  itself  to  be  a  brother  of  Mdlle.  Stramm's,  who  died  some  years  before.
And  this  "  Louis"  further  asserted  that  he  had  himself  influenced  M.  Stramm
to  make  use  of  the  same  euphemistic  phrase,  with  the  object  of  avoiding  a
shock  to  Mdlle.  Stramm;  for  which  purpose  it  was  needful  that  the  two
messages  should  agree  in  ascribing  the  death  to  the  same  form  of  sudden
illness.

Now  if  this  be  true,  and  the  message  did  indeed  come  from  the  deceased
"  Louis,"  we  have  an  indication  of  continued  existence,  and  continued  knowledge
of  earthly  affairs,  on  the  part  of  a  person  long  dead.

But  if  we  consider  that  the  case,  as  presented  to  us,  contains  no  proof  of
"  Louis'  "  identity,  so  that  "  Louis  "  maybe  merely  one  of  those  arbitrary  names
which  the  automatist's  subliminal  intelligence  seems  so  prone  to  assume ;
then  we  must  suppose  that  Duvanel  was  actually  operative  on  two  occasions
after  death,  first  inspiring  in  Mdlle.  Stramm  the  automatic  message,  and
then  modifying  in  M.  Stramm  the  message  which  the  father  might  otherwise
have  sent.

868.  I  next  give  in  868  A  and  B  two  cases  where  certain  telekinetic
phenomena  seem  to  have  been  connected  with  the  announcement   of  a
recent  death,  which  in  the  first  case  was  given  by  raps,  and  in  the  second
was  accompanied  by  other  physical  disturbances.     It  must  be  observed,
however,  that  the  evidence  for  the  identity  of  the  spirit  who  was  supposed
to  be  communicating  in  this  second  case  is  far  from  complete.     I  have
already  pointed  out  that  the  class  of  motor  automatisms  seems  to  lead  to
telekinetic  phenomena,  but  I  shall  postpone  any  discussion  of  them  till
the  following  chapter.

869.  I  next  give  in  869  A   and  B  two  cases  where  the  supposed
communicators  had  been  dead  some  time,  the  deaths  being  known  to  the
automatists,  but  certain    details  of  the  deaths  were  correctly  given,    in
opposition  to  the  beliefs  of  the  automatists.

870.  I  add  to  these  in  870  A  another  curious  case  where  various
i  details  known  to  the  alleged  communicator  were  correctly  given,  although

unknown  to  the  sitters ;  yet  where  other  circumstances  were  described
'  as  they  were  at  the  time  of  the  communicator's  death,  although  the  sitters
.  were  aware  that  these  circumstances  had  since  altered.

871.  I  know  not  in  what  light   I  should  have  regarded    the    next
case    I    give    (in    871  A)    had   I    seen  it  only  in   a  book    bearing    the
somewhat    alarming   title    of   The  Holy   Truth    (Arthur   Hallah,    1876).


1


i;2  CHAPTER    VIII  [872

But  the  aggressiveness  of  religious  conviction  with  which  Mr.  Hugh
Junor  Browne's  experiences  have  inspired  him  does  not  prevent  his  being,
as  I  have  heard  from  the  Hon.  Sir  W.  G.  Windeyer,  Judge  of  Supreme
Court,  Sydney,  and  have  found  on  personal  acquaintance,  a  man  of  high
standing  as  to  both  character  and  practical  capacity.  He  is  a  prosperous
man  of  business  at  Melbourne,  and  the  elder  of  the  two  daughters  with
whose  automatism  we  have  to  deal  is  married  to  one  of  the  foremost  men
of  the  Colony  of  Victoria.  I  regard  him,  therefore,  as  a  witness  whose
strong  opinions,  indeed,  might  help  a  fraudulent  medium  to  deceive  him,
but  who  is  fully  to  be  trusted  as  regards  easily  observed  events  occurring
in  his  own  family  circle.  I  discussed  this  case  with  him  and  Mrs.  Browne
on  October  3rd,  1891.  Mrs.  Browne  seemed  tome  a  good  witness,  and
corroborated  the  facts  so  far  as  immediately  known  to  her,  giving  me  a
written  confirmation  of  the  writing  of  the  young  child,  who  was  present
at  our  interne w  as  a  young  lady  of  about  twenty.  Miss  Browne  cannot
remember  the  incident  in  her  fifth  year,  but  told  me  that  she  had  some-
times written  automatically  since  that  date ; — her  arm  used  to  feel  numb
while  doing  so.

872.  I  give  in  872  A  another  instance  of  a  little  girl,  only  four
years  of  age,  who  had  no  knowledge   of  her   letters,   and   who   wrote
several  significant  words — "  Your  Aunt  Emma."

873.  I  now  quote  in  full  a  general  account  of  his  experiences  in
automatic  writing  by  a  Mr.  W.,  from  whom  I  have  already  cited  a  minor
experience,  also  of  a  motor  type,  in  823.     Dr.  Hodgson  visited  and  had
long  talks  with  him,  and  formed  the  highest  impression  of  his   ability
and  care.     Some  of  the  automatic  messages  are  perhaps  best  explicable
on  the  hypothesis   of  subliminal  telsesthesia,   others  by  telepathy  from
living  minds,  while  others  are  at  least  primd  facie  referable  to  a  source
in  the  mind  of  a  departed  person,  from  whom  they  professed  to  come.
Whether  there  are  in  reality  so  many   different  origins  of  a  series  of
messages  given  to  one  automatist,  or  whether  any  one  explanation  can  be
made  to  cover  them  all,  is  a  matter  to  which  we  shall  have  to  return  in
the  next  chapter.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  242-48.)

N.Y.,  November  i$th,  1891.

DR.  RICHARD  HODGSON,— DEAR  SIR,— Recently  I  learned  that  you  are
the  Secretary  of  the  American  Branch  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.
Being  interested  in  the  subject,  I  concluded  to  write  to  you,  offering  a  state-
ment of  my  own  experience.  As  so-called  spiritual  manifestations  are  viewed
unfavourably  here,  and  as  it  would  be  much  to  my  detriment  if  my  connection
with  the  subject  were  to  become  known,  I  ask  that  my  name  be  withheld  from
the  public.

For  the  past  five  years  I  have  been  a  so-called  writing  medium.  The
writing  is  involuntary  on  my  part,  and  the  thoughts  expressed  are  not  mine —
that  is,  as  far  as  I  know  they  are  not  mine.


873]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  173

Sometimes,  instead  of  writing,  off-hand  pen  work  will  be  done,  but  it  is  not
of  a  very  high  order.  In  the  writing  the  penmanship  is  generally  very  good,
and  the  thoughts  expressed  are  generally  good,  and  are  sometimes  valuable.
As  you  are  undoubtedly  familiar  with  this  class  of  writing,  I  will  not  go  into
details,  but  will  leave  you  to  inquire  for  such  facts  as  you  see  fit.

I  am  anxious  to  find  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  this,  and  I  hope  the
Society  may  yet  be  able  to  furnish  one.

As  an  indication  of  the  trend  of  my  thoughts,  I  will  add  that  for  the  past
thirteen  or  fourteen  years  I  have  been  a  student  of  the  works  of  Herbert  Spencer
and  other  great  men  of  liberal  views,  and  that  I  am  an  evolutionist,  so  called.

If  you  think  my  experience  will  be  of  use,  please  call  for  it.  You  may  send
questions,  or  you  may  state  in  a  general  way  the  outline  of  what  will  be  of  use.

N.Y.,  December  22nd,  1891.

DR.  RICHARD  HODGSON, — SIR, — .  .  .  Five  years  ago  I  was  in  Vermont  on
business,  and  while  there  made  a  visit  at  the  home  of  a  relative.  In  the  even-
ing, for  amusement,  a  planch ette  was  produced  and  operated.  Pretty  soon  it
was  written  that  I  was  a  writing  medium,  and  I  was  requested  to  try  with  a
pencil.  I  took  a  pencil  in  my  hand  and  to  my  surprise  I  found  I  could  write
some  in  the  "  automatic  "  manner.  The  writing  was  not  very  good  and  was
accompanied  with  more  or  less  breaks  and  difficulties.  It  was  written  that
practice  would  make  it  much  freer  and  better.  This  I  found  to  be  so.  Persons
in  the  room  asked  as  to  dates  on  pieces  of  money  and  other  similar  tests,  and
the  answers  were  generally  correct.  After  that  I  wrote  some  almost  daily  for
some  time  and  soon  became  quite  a  ready  writer  in  this  manner.

On  one  occasion,  not  long  after,  a  friend,  of  whose  life  I  had  known  nothing
until  about  that  time,  proposed  to  ask  some  questions  mentally  and  see  if  the
answers  written  would  be  correct.  It  was  written  that  the  spirit  of  his  wife  was
present.  I  inquired  (mentally)  for  her  name.  In  reply  her  name  was  written
out  in  full,  correctly.  I  did  not  know  her  name :  I  knew  that  he  was  a  widower,
and  I  knew  no  more  of  his  wife  or  the  matters  inquired  about.  My  friend  then
asked  (mentally)  where  she  died  and  when  ?  The  answers  were  correct.  He
then  asked,  "  What  was  the  cause  of  her  death  ? "  The  answer,  "  Heart
disease,"  was  correct.  He  then  asked  for  the  circumstances  of  her  death.  It
was  written  that  she  died  suddenly,  at  night,  by  the  side  of  him,  in  bed,  and
that  the  first  thing  he  knew  of  herfdeath  was  when  he  found  her  dead  in  the
morning.  This  was  correct.  He  asked  for  her  age,  size,  and  for  any  particular
mark  by  which  she  could  be  identified  ?  The  answer  was  correct  as  to  age  and
size,  and  as  to  identification  it  was  written  that  she  had  a  large  scar  near  the
knee,  caused  by  a  burn.  This  was  also  correct.

Many  other  questions  were  asked  and  answered  ;  and  whether  he  asked  the
questions  aloud,  or  mentally  to  himself,  the  answers  were  strictly  correct  in
almost  every  instance.  There  was  no  one  but  us  two  present.

On  another  occasion,  about  the  same  time,  I  made  inquiry  (I  was  alone)
touching  a  case  I  was  then  investigating.  Briefly,  the  facts  are  these  :—
A  wealthy  widow,  Mrs.  X.,  had  died  at  her  summer  cottage  with  no  one
present  save  her  sister  and  a  neighbour.  She  left  a  will :  by  its  terms  this
sister  was  to  receive  several  thousand  dollars.  Our  client,  Mrs.  Y.,  was  also
a  legatee  and  the  executrix  of  the  will ;  and  as  such  it  was  her  duty  to  collect
in  all  assets.  Our  client  knew  it  to  be  a  fact  that  the  deceased  had  in  cash
in  her  possession  a  short  time  before  her  death  about  $700.  After  Mrs.  X.'s


i/4  CHAPTER   VIII  [873

death  no  money  was  found,  and  the  sister  who  was  with  her  claimed  there
was  no  money;  that  Mrs.  X.  had  no  money  at  the  time  of  her  death  about
her,  except  some  $15.  Our  client  saw  this  sister  and  questioned  her  closely,
but  to  no  purpose.  I  did  not  see  or  know  this  sister  until  some  time  after
the  writing  I  am  about  to  give.  The  question  was,  what  had  become  of  the
$700  ?  Alone  by  myself  I  asked  for  the  facts,  which  were  written  out  much  in
detail,  but  in  substance  the  facts  as  written  were  these :  That  the  deceased  had
on  her  person  at  the  time  of  her  death  about  $600;  that  she  had  spent  the
other  $100  ;  that  immediately  after  her  death  her  sister,  Mrs.  Z.,  had  stolen  the
$600  from  her  dead  body ;  that  she  had  since  spent  some  of  it  and  deposited
the  balance,  some  $500,  in  a  bank  in  the  village  of  A.  In  the  course  of  a  few
days  we  made  inquiry,  and  learned  that  Mrs.  Z.  had  made  the  deposit  there,
but  had  recently  drawn  it  out.  We  then  cited  her  before  the  Surrogate,  and
she  swore  that  just  before  the  death  of  Mrs.  X.  (the  same  night  she  died)  Mrs.
X.  gave  her  the  money,  $520,  to  give  to  a  nephew  as  a  present;  that  there  was
only  $520;  that  she  had  just  given  it  to  the  nephew.  We  commenced  a  suit
against  her  for  the  money  ($520)  and  recovered  it.  The  jury  did  not  believe
her  defence  and  made  her  pay.  I  have  only  stated  so  much  of  the  case  as
seems  to  bear  on  the  "  automatic  "  writing.  The  question  is,  where  did  I  get
the  knowledge  of  the  theft,  the  amount  and  the  deposit  in  the  bank  ?  I  may
add  that  we  afterwards  learned  she  did  spend  some  money  about  that  time
that  we  always  thought  was  some  she  took  in  addition  to  the  $526,  and  it
would  have  made  the  sum  stolen  about  $600.

About  four  and  a  half  years  ago  an  aunt  of  mine,  Miss  T.,  learned  that  she
had  a  cancer  growing  on  her  breast.  She  had  it  cut  out,  and  soon  was
apparently  in  very  fair  health.  After  a  few  months  she  began  to  fail  very
much  ;  was  about  the  house,  but  was  very  generally  run  down.  Cancer  did  not
reappear.  She  was  not  said  by  her  doctors  to  be  in  any  immediate  danger;
but  for  some  reason  I  made  inquiry,  and  to  my  surprise  it  was  written  that  she
was  very  badly  off,  and  that  she  would  only  live  a  very  short  time.  I  inquired
the  cause,  &c.,  and  it  was  written  that  her  system  was  poisoned  through  and
through  with  cancerous  matter.  I  inquired  as  to  when  she  would  die  ?  The
answer  was  that  it  was  impossible  to  tell  just  when,  that  the  most  that
could  be  said  was  that  she  would  live  about  thirty  days,  judging  from  a
careful  examination  of  her  case  made  at  that  time.  It  was  written  that  she
would  certainly  die,  that  she  could  not  possibly  get  better  or  live  much  longer
than  thirty  days.  Within  the  next  week  or  so  I  inquired  on  several  occasions
as  to  the  matter,  but  the  answers  were  always  to  the  same  effect  and  positive.
My  aunt  declined  fast  and  died  at  the  time  set  within  a  day,  and  I  think  it  was
just  thirty  days.  She  was  abed  only  ten  days  or  so.  A  post-mortem  showed
she  died  from  cancerous  poisoning.

On  many  occasions  I  have  made  inquiry  as  to  whether  certain  sick  ones
would  die  or  recover ;  and  if  die,  when  ?  Generally  the  answers  proved  very
correct.

About  a  year  ago  I  was  writing  (for  the  spirit  of  deceased  friend,  Mr.  A.  so
claimed}.  After  some  writing  of  a  friendly  nature,  it  was  written  substantially
as  follows : — "  There  is  one  thing  that  I  wish  you  could  do  for  me,  but  I  don't
see  how  you  can,  and  that  is,  stop  my  son  "  (name  fully  given)  "  from  drinking."
I  answered  (by  thought),  "  Why,  I  am  surprised.  He  doesn't  drink,  does  he?
that  is,  not  any  to  speak  of,  any  way  ?  "  A. :  "  Yes,  I  am  sorry  to  say  he  drinks


873]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  175

a  good  deal  too  much."  O. :  "  Where  does  he  do  his  drinking  mostly  ?  "  A.  :
"  At  the  B.  Hotel."  I  said  I  never  heard  of  his  drinking.  A.  :  "  Well,  you
watch  and  inquire,  and  you  will  find  out  that  he  does."  "  I  should  be  very  glad
to  be  of  some  service  in' the  matter."  A.  :  "  If  I  see  a  chance  where  you  can  I
shall  certainly  call  on  you."

Upon  investigation  I  found  this  was  all  true.

In  May  1887,  while  looking  for  authorities  on  an  obscure  point  in  a  case
I  was  then  preparing  for  trial,  it  was  written  in  substance  :  "  I  know  where  the
authority  is  that  you  need."  Q.  :  "  Where  ?  "  A. :  "  In  '  Wendell's  Reports,'
vol. — }  page — ."  Q.  :  "  Who  are  you?  "  A.  :  "  I  am  A.  B."  The  volume  and
page,  as  well  as  the  name,  were  given  in  full;  the  name  was  that  of  an  old
lawyer  that  I  had  known  well.  The  case  cited  was  just  what  I  needed.  I  had
never  seen  or  heard  of  the  case  before  to  my  best  knowledge.  There  are
twenty-six  volumes  of  "Wendell's  Reports,"  of  about  700  pages  each.

I  frequently  find  as  I  am  examining  indexes  for  judgment-debtors,  grantees
or  grantors,  &c.,  in  clerks'  offices,  and  elsewhere,  that  there  is  the  same
manifestation  of  intelligence  in  another  form.  Let  me  explain  :  Say  I  am
searching  an  index  under  the  head  of  "  S,"  looking  for  the  name  of  Stearns,
John  J.  By  placing  my  hand  or  finger  on  the  book,  drawing  it  along  down
over  the  names,  with  no  thought  of  the  work  in  hand,  as  soon  as  my  finger
passes  the  name  desired  my  finger  will  stop.  My  eyes  must  be  directed
•  towards  the  book,  but  no  matter  how  listless  or  absent-minded  I  may  be,  still
at  such  times  my  finger  will  stop  at  the  name  in  question.  When  contrasted
with  ordinary  searching  the  unconscious  intelligence  that  seems  to  be  behind
this  is  very  marked.

Once,  being  much  in  doubt,  I  asked,  "What  ails ?"  (one  of  my  sons)

'  "  What  shall  I  do  for  him  ?  "  The  answer  was,  "  You  had  better  not  try  to  do
anything  for  him,  but  go  and  get  Dr.  T.  He  will  know  what  to  do."  I  called
Dr.  T.  He  examined  him  and  immediately  gave  an  emetic.  The  contents  of
the  stomach  showed  that  digestion  had  been  stopped,  or  rather,  that  the  food
had  not  digested  at  all.  The  boy  recovered  rapidly.  Dr.  T.  said  it  was  well  I
called  him.  The  boy  had  been  rather  suddenly  taken  ill  a  few  hours  after  a
hearty  meal  and  soon  after  a  severe  fright  or  mental  strain.

In  a  contested  case  over  a  certain  clause  or  bequest  in  the  will  of  C.  we
had  been  defeated  and  were  about  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeals,  our
highest  court.  It  was  my  opinion,  also  my  partner's,  that  we  would  win  on
the  appeal;  but  upon  inquiry  it  was  written  that  we  should  be  beaten,  and
this  opinion  was  expressed  on  several  occasions,  with  very  good  reasons
assigned.  We  were  advised  not  to  appeal.  We  brought  the  appeal  and  were
defeated.

I  have  made  many  inquiries  as  to  whether  certain  sick  persons  would  re-
cover or  die.  The  answers  have  been  very  correct,  generally.  Writing  touching
the  future  is  generally  stated  to  be  but  an  opinion,  based  on  known  facts,  and
fallibility  is  freely  admitted.  When  opinions  are  written  the  reasons  assigned
are  very  frequently  not  only  new  to. me,  or  unthought  of,  but  are  generally  good
reasons.

I  have  had  a  good  deal  of  experience  and  made  a  good  many  tests.     Those

'  I  have  given  are  a  fair  sample,  I   think,  of  the  writing  that  proved  to  be  true.

Many  statements  made  were  false  and  many  predictions  made  proved  untrue;

of  these  I  have  given  no  illustration,  but  could  if  necessary.     I  have  done  most


i;6  CHAPTER    VIII  [873

of  my  writing  when  no  one  was  present.  Perhaps  I  should  state  that  it  has
been  repeatedly  written  not  to  believe  any  writing  or  statement  unless  my  own
good  judgment  approved  of  it.  I  have  written  a  good  deal  touching  a  future
state,  political  and  philosophical  matters.  Of  all  this  I  have  not  spoken,  as  it
does  not  seem  of  much  importance  for  our  present  purposes.  In  passing  I  will
say  that  much  of  it  was  apparently  very  good,  and  quite  reasonable.

•  December  2$>th,

On  Christmas  Eve  there  was,  as  you  are  probably  aware,  a  railway  accident
near  Hastings,  a  little  way  out  from  New  York  City,  in  which  twelve  persons
were  killed  and  another  has  since  died  from  injuries  received.  This  last-men-
tioned person  resided  near  me.  The  news  of  the  injury  to  this  person  reached
me  on  Christmas  Day.  Telegrams  in  the  afternoon  were  favourable,  and  indi-
cated a  recovery.  I  made  inquiry  as  to  the  matter,  and  it  was  written  in
substance  that  the  person  would  not  recover.  I  suggested  that  telegrams
indicated  a  recovery.  The  answer  was :  "  Yes ;  but  we  have  made  an
examination,  and  are  of  opinion  that  no  recovery  will  take  place."  Telegrams
the  second  day  were  still  more  favourable,  but  my  writing  did  not  change
in  opinion.  The  party  died  at  nine  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the  26th,  .  .

January  2gth,  1892.

DR.  R.  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — In  reply  to  your  inquiry  for  such  facts  as  I
may  be  able  to  give,  touching  the  experiences  given  you  by  my  husband,  as
automatic  writer,  I  will  state  : —

Not  long  after  he  began  to  write,  some  five  years  ago,  I  saw  a  sheet  of  paper
upon  which  was  written  a  full  account  of  the  robbing  of  the  body  of  the  dead
sister.  I  read  the  account  carefully.  My  husband  said  that  he  had  written  it
automatically ;  that  he  had  asked  for  the  facts  and  that  was  the  answer.  The
account  of  it,  as  written  out  for  you  by  my  husband,  is  the  same  in  substance
as  what  I  saw  and  read,  except  it  is  very  much  shortened.  I  had  the  paper  for
some  time,  and,  I  think,  until  after  the  facts  as  given  were  proven  true ;  but  it
was  destroyed  long  ago.  I  attended  the  trial  of  the  suit  brought  to  recover  the
money.  His  account  given  you  I  believe  to  be  correct.

The  lady,  Miss  T.,  who  had  a  cancer,  was  my  aunt.  The  account  of  her
sickness  and  death  are  correctly  given  you  by  my  husband,  but  I  saw  no
writing,  although  my  husband  told  me  at  the  time  he  had  written  something
concerning  her,  and  he  stated  that  it  was  written  that  she  would  die  and  told
when.  I  do  not  recall  the  time  set,  but  I  recollect  her  death  occurred  at  the
time  predicted.

I  recollect  the  time  referred  to  when  our  son was  sick.  I  saw  my

husband  doing  some  writing  on  that  occasion,  and  it  was  written  to  go  and  get
Dr.  T.  The  account  as  written  out  for  you  by  my  husband  is,  as  I  recollect  it,
true  in  every  respect.

Concerning  the  accident  of  Christmas  Eve,  I  remember  that  on  Christmas
Day,  after  we  heard  of  the  accident,  my  husband  did  some  writing.  He  said
he  had  inquired  as  to  Mr.  E.'s  condition,  &c.,  and  that  it  was  written  that  E.
would  die,  that  he  was  internally  and  dangerously  injured.  On  the  next  day
the  answers  that  he  received  as  to  Mr.  E.'s  condition  were  to  the  same  effect.
The  telegrams  received  during  the  same  time  indicated  that  he  would  recover —
one  reported  him  out  of  danger.  E.  died  about  nine  on  the  night  of  the  26th.


873]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  177

I  have  known  my  husband  to  write  out  correctly  quite  a  good  many  things
that  were  out  of  the  knowledge  of  ordinary  persons,  but  of  the  circumstances
which  he  has  given  to  you  I  do  not  now  recall  anything  further.

[MRS.  W.]

January  29^,  1892.

DR.  RICHARD  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — I  recollect  the  occasion  referred
to  by  Mr.  W.  I  think  it  was  about  five  years  ago.  We  were  alone  ;  he
spoke  of  the  queer  writing  he  was  doing.  After  some  talk  on  the  subject
Mr.  W.  consented  to  try  his  skill.  I  inquired  what  spirits  were  present,  and
Mr.  W.'s  hand  wrote  that  my  wife  was.  I  inquired  for  her  name,  and  he  wrote
Adelia  O.  B.,  which  was  correct.  I  also  inquired  [when]  she  died,  and  where
and  under  what  circumstances,  and  I  asked  for  a  description  of  her.  Mr.  W.
wrote  out  answers  to  all  the  questions  as  I  asked  them.  As  I  recall  it,  I
asked  most  of  the  questions  by  thinking.  He  wrote  that  she  died  of  heart
disease,  and  the  date  of  her  death  was  correctly  given,  as  was  also  her  per-
sonal appearance.  And  it  was  written  that  she  died  in  bed  with  me  ;  that  the
first  I  knew  of  her  death  was  when  I  awoke  in  the  morning.  He  also  wrote
that  there  was  a  large  scar  near  the  knee  on  the  left  leg.

I  recollect  that  the  answers  were  correct,  although  I  don't  recollect  all  the
words  used,  perhaps.  I  am  very  certain  that  Mr.  W.  did  not  know  anything
about  my  wife.  I  had  not  lived  within  twenty  miles  of  him,  neither  had  I  known
him  until  several  years  after  the  death  of  my  wife.  It  puzzled  me  how  he  was
able  to  answer  as  he  did,  as  I  have  no  reason  to  think  he  had  any  knowledge
on  the  subject.  I  will  add  that  the  height,  colour  of  eyes  and  hair,  and  the
entire  personal  description  given  were  exceedingly  exact  and  correct.

Mr.  W.  also  wrote  on  that  occasion  what  purported  to  come  from  an  old
friend  of  mine — that  he  went  fishing  with  me  to  Lake  Ontario,  that  I  tipped  the
boat  over  near  shore  and  got  him  wet.  This  was  true,  but  I  hadn't  thought  of
it  in  a  long  time.  Mr.  W.  never  heard  of  it,  I  am  confident,  until  he  wrote
it  out.  S.  H.  BRITTON.

As  soon  as  Mr.  Britton  called  my  attention  to  the  tipping  over  of  the  boat
I  recalled  that  I  wrote  about  it  at  the  time.  W.

Mr.  W.  adds  later  :—

NEW  YORK,  February  \th,  1892.

I  began  my  automatic  writing  with  my  left  hand,  and  have  ever  since
been  able  to  write  in  that  manner  with  my  left  hand,  but  I  am  naturally  right-
handed,  and  I  can  write  more  rapidly  and  readily  with  my  right  hand,
although  the  ideas  expressed,  &c.,  are  of  as  high  an  order,  as  far  as  I  have
observed,  when  written  with  one  hand  as  when  written  with  the  other.

In  automatic  work,  when  the  mechanical  ability  to  form  letters  is  not  re-

,  quired,  as,  for  instance,  in  running  the  hand  down  an  index,  I  find  my  left  hand

;  is  fully  the  equal  of  my  right.     Perhaps  I  should  state  that  I  met  with  a  serious

injury  to  my  right  hand  many  years  ago,  by  which  I  lost  the  two  first  fingers

and  greatly  crippled  my  hand  otherwise.

The  reason  that  I  did  my  first  automatic  writing  with  my  left  hand  was  that

»  the  planchette  directed  me  to  do  so.     I  wrote  a  day  or  two  with  my  left  hand,

and  then  I  tried  my  right,  and  since  that  I  have  generally  written  with  my

right.     I  can  write  some  slowly  in  the  natural  manner  with  my  left  hand,  but

have  never  done  so  but  very  little.     The  special  point  I  wish  to  call  attention  to

VOL.    II.  M


i;8  CHAPTER    VIII  [874

is,  that  the  ideas  automatically  written  are  of  as  high  an  order,  written  with  one
hand,  as  with  the  other.  .  .  .

Another  experience  of  Mr.  W.'s  is  given  in  873  A.

It  is  plain  that  if  we  admit  that  departed  spirits  can  still  see  and  judge
of  earthly  matters,  and  can  impress  their  knowledge  on  incarnate  minds,
we  should  have  a  single  explanation  which  would  cover  all  Mr.  W.'s
experiences  as  here  recorded.  It  is  to  be  noted,  moreover,  that  the
premonitions,  of  which  he  gives  several  instances,  are  such  as  might  fall
within  the  scope  of  a  discarnate  spirit,  with  intelligence  comparable  with
our  own,  but  able  to  examine  certain  diseased  organisms  more  thoroughly
than  any  earthly  physician  could  do.  This,  it  may  be  observed,  was  not
the  case  with  the  premonitions  given  to  Lady  Mabel  Howard  (851  A),
which  involved  a  complexity  of  incident  which  looks  as  though  it  must
lie  beyond  the  calculation  of  an  intelligence  like  our  own,  however  fully
informed  of  existing  circumstances.

874.  Deferring  till  the  next  chapter  any  further  discussion  of  this
problem,  I  give  here  in  874  A  a  well-evidenced  case  of  a  prediction  by
table-tilting  of  a  precise  date  of  death,  at  a  distance  of  forty  days.

875.  I   next   quote  a  case   which  illustrates  the  continued  terrene
knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  dead  of  which  other  instances  were  given  in
the  last  chapter.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  349-53.  The  narrative  is  a  transla-
tion from  an  article  in  Psychische  Studien^  December  1889,  pp.  572-77,  by  the
Editor,  the  Hon.  Alexander  Aksakoff.)

The  case  belongs  not  to  the  category  of  facts  which  are  known  only  to  the
deceased,  but  to  the  category  of  those  which  could  only  be  imparted  by  the
deceased,  for  it  relates  to  a  political  secret  concerning  a  living  person,  which
was  revealed  by  an  intimate  friend  of  that  living  person  for  the  purpose  of
saving  him.  I  shall  set  forth  this  case  in  all  possible  detail,  because  I  consider
it  a  most  convincing  one  in  support  of  the  Spiritualistic  hypothesis.  I  will
even  express  myself  still  more  strongly.  I  consider  that  it  affords  as  absolute
a  proof  of  identity  as  it  is  possible  for  evidence  of  this  kind  to  present.

My  readers  are  already  acquainted  with  my  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  A.  von
Wiesler,  from  the  part  she  took  in  the  family  stances  held  with  me  in  the
years  1880-1883,  after  the  decease  of  my  wife.  She  has  an  only  daughter,
Sophie,  who  at  the  time  of  those  stances  was  completing  her  studies.  She
had  taken  no  part,  either  at  our  stances  or  at  any  others,  and  she  had  not
read  anything  about  Spiritualism.  Her  mother  also  had  not  joined  in  any
stances  except  our  own.  One  evening  in  October  1884,  during  the  visit  of  a
distant  relative,  the  conversation  turned  upon  Spiritualism,  and  in  order  to
please  him  a  trial  with  the  table  was  arranged.  The  sdance,  however,  gave
no  satisfactory  result.  It  only  showed  that  the  two  ladies  were  able  to  get
something.  On  Tuesday  evening,  January  ist,  1885,  Mrs.  von  Wiesler  being
alone  with  her  daughter,  in  order  to  divert  her  mind  from  some  matters
which  made  her  anxious,  proposed  to  hold  a  little  se'ance.  An  alphabet  was
written  out  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  a  saucer  with  a  black  line  as  pointer  served
as  a  planchette,  and,  behold,  the  name  Andreas  was  indicated.  This  was


875]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  179

quite  natural,  for  Andreas  was  the  name  of  Sophie's  father,  the  deceased
husband  of  Mrs.  von  Wiesler.  The  communication  presented  nothing  re-
markable, but  it  was  nevertheless  resolved  to  continue  the  stances  once  a
week,  on  every  Tuesday.  For  three  weeks  the  character  of  the  communica-
tions remained  unchanged.  The  name  Andreas  was  continually  repeated.

But  on  the  fourth  Tuesday— January  22nd— in  place  of  the  customary
name,  Andreas,  the  name  "  Schura  "  was  spelt  out,  to  the  great  astonishment
of  both  sitters.  Then,  by  quick  and  precise  movements  of  the  pointer,  these
words  were  added  : —

"  It  is  given  to  thee  to  save  Nikolaus."

"  What  does  this  mean  ?  "  asked  the  astonished  ladies.

"  He  is  compromised  as  Michael  was,  and  will  like  him  go  to  ruin.  A  band
of  good-for-nothing  fellows  are  leading  him  astray."

"  What  can  be  done  to  counteract  it  ?  "

"  Thou  must  go  to  the  Technological  Institute  before  three  o'clock,  let  Niko-
laus be  called  out,  and  make  an  appointment  with  him  at  his  house."

This  being  all  addressed  to  the  young  lady,  Sophie,  she  replied  that  it
would  be  difficult  for  her  to  carry  out  these  directions  on  account  of  the  slight
acquaintanceship  which  existed  between  her  and  Nikolaus's  family.

"  Absurd  ideas  of  propriety  !  "  was  "  Schura's"  indignant  reply.

14  But  in  what  way  shall  I  be  able  to  influence  him  ? "  asked  Sophie.

"  Thou  wilt  speak  to  him  in  my  name."

"  Then  your  convictions  no  longer  remain  the  same?"

"  Revolting  error !  "  was  the  reply.

I  must  now  explain  the  meaning  of  this  mysterious  communication.
"  Schura  "  is  the  Russian  pet  name  for  Alexandrine.  Nikolaus  and  Michael
were  her  cousins.  Michael,  quite  a  young  man,  had  unfortunately  allowed
himself  to  become  entangled  by  the  revolutionary  ideas  of  our  Anarchists  or
Socialists.  He  was  arrested,  tried,  and  condemned  to  imprisonment  at  a
distance  from  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  lost  his  life  in  an  attempt  to  escape.
"  Schura  "  loved  him  dearly,  and  fully  sympathised  with  his  political  convic-
tions, making  no  secret  of  it.  After  his  death,  which  occurred  in  September
1884,  she  was  discouraged  in  her  revolutionary  aspirations,  and  ended  her
life  by  poison,  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  on  the  1 5th  of  January  1885,  just  one  week
before  the  seance  above  described.  Nikolaus,  Michael's  brother,  was  then  a
student  at  the  Technological  Institute.

Mrs.  von  Wiesler  and  her  daughter  were  aware  of  these  circumstances,  for
they  had  long  been  acquainted  with  "  Schura's  "  parents,  and  with  those  of  her
cousins,  who  belong  to  the  best  society  of  St.  Petersburg.  It  will  be  obvious
that  I  cannot  publish  the  names  of  these  families.  I  have  also  changed  those
of  the  young  people.  The  acquaintanceship  was,  however,  far  from  being
intimate.  They  saw  each  other  occasionally,  but  nothing  more.  Later  I  will
give  further  details.  We  will  now  continue  our  narrative.

Naturally,  neither  Mrs.  von  Wiesler  nor  her  daughter  knew  anything  as  to
the  views  or  secret  conduct  of  Nikolaus.  The  communication  was  just  as
unexpected  as  it  was  important.  It  involved  a  great  responsibility.  Sophie's
position  was  a  very  difficult  one.  The  literal  carrying  out  of  "Schura's"
demands  was,  for  a  young  lady,  simply  impossible,  merely  from  considerations
of  social  propriety.  What  right  could  she  have,  on  the  ground  of  simple
acquaintanceship,  to  interfere  in  family  affairs  of  so  delicate  a  character  ?


i So.  CHAPTER    VIII  [875

Besides,  it  might  not  be  true;  or,  quite  simply  and  most  probably,  Nikolaus
might  deny  it.  What  position  would  she  then  find  herself  in?  Mrs.  von
Wiesler  knew  only  too  well,  from  the  stances  she  had  taken  part  in  with  me,
how  little  dependence  can  be  placed  on  Spiritualistic  communications.  She
counselled  her  daughter,  in  the  first  place,  to  convince  herself  of  "  Schura's  "
identity.  This  advice  was  followed  without  any  hesitation  as  one  way  out  of
the  difficulty.

On  the  following  Tuesday  "  Schura  "  manifested  at  once,  and  Sophie  asked
for  a  proof  of  her  identity,  to  which  "  Schura  "  forthwith  replied  : —

"  Invite  Nikolaus,  arrange  a  seance,  and  I  will  come."

It  will  be  seen  from  this  reply  that  "Schura,"  who  during  her  life  had
learnt  to  despise  the  conventionalities  of  society,  as  is  the  custom  among  the
Socialists,  remained  true  to  her  character,  and  again  demanded  what  was  an
impossibility.  Nikolaus  had  never  been  in  Mrs.  von  Wiesler's  house.  Sophie
then  asked  for  another  proof  of  her  identity,  without  Nikolaus  being  brought
in  at  all,  and  requested  that  it  might  be  a  convincing  one.

"  I  will  appear  to  thee,"  was  the  reply.

"  How  ?  "

"Thou  wilt  see."

A  few  days  later  Sophie  was  returning  home  from  a  soire'e  ;  it  was  nearly
4  A.M.  She  was  just  retiring,  and  was  at  the  door  between  her  bedroom  and
the  dining-room,  there  being  no  lights  in  the  latter,  when  she  saw  on  the  wall
of  the  dining-room,  in  sight  of  the  door  at  which  she  stood,  a  luminous  round
spot,  with,  as  it  were,  shoulders.  This  lasted  for  two  or  three  seconds,  and  dis-
appeared, ascending  towards  the  ceiling.  Sophie  immediately  assured  herself
that  it  was  not  the  reflection  of  any  light  coming  from  the  street.

At  the  stance  on  the  following  Tuesday,  an  explanation  of  this  appearance
being  asked  for,  "  Schura  "  replied  : —

"  It  was  the  outline  of  a  head  with  shoulders.  I  cannot  appear  more  dis-
tinctly. I  am  still  weak."

Many  other  details,  which  I  have  passed  over,  tended  to  convince  Sophie  of
the  reality  of  "  Schura's  "  identity,  yet  she  could  not  bring  herself  to  carry  out
that  which  "Schura"  desired  her  to  do.  She  therefore  proposed  as  a  suit-
able compromise  that  she  should  acquaint  Nikolaus's  parents  with  what  had
occurred.

This  proposal  aroused  "  Schura's "  strongest  displeasure,  expressed  by
violent  movements  of  the  saucer,  and  by  the  sentence  : —

"  That  will  lead  to  nothing;" — after  which  disparaging  epithets  followed,
impossible  to  repeat  here,  especially  applicable  to  persons  of  weak  and  irreso-
lute character,  with  whom  the  energetic  and  decisive  "  Schura  "  had  no  patience
— epithets  which  are  not  found  in  dictionaries,  but  which  were  expressions  used
by  "Schura"  in  her  lifetime,  and  characteristic  of  her.  This  was  confirmed  in
the  sequel.

Nevertheless  Sophie  continued  to  hesitate,  and  at  each  successive  stance
"  Schura  "  insisted  more  and  more  imperatively  that  Sophie  must  act  at  once.
This  is  very  important  to  notice,  as  we  shall  see  later.  This  want  of  resolution
on  the  part  of  Sophie  was  ascribed  by  "  Schura  "  to  the  influence  of  Mrs.  von
Wiesler.  From  the  beginning  "  Schura"  had  seemed  to  bear  a  grudge  against
Mrs.  von  Wiesler.  From  the  first  stance  she  addressed  Sophie  only.  She
never  permitted  Mrs.  von  Wiesler  to  ask  a  question.  Whenever  she  attempted


875]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  181

to  do  so,  she  met  her  with  a—"  Be  silent— be  silent !  "  Whereas  in  addressing
Sophie  she  overwhelmed  her  with  the  tenderest  expressions.

How  great  was  the  astonishment  and  consternation  of  the  ladies,  when  at
the  sdance  on  the  26th  of  February  the  first  words  were  :•—

"It  is  too  late.  Thou  wilt  repent  it  bitterly.  The  pangs  of  remorse  will
follow  thee.  Expect  his  arrest !  "

These  were  "  Schura's  "  last  words.  From  this  time  she  was  silent.  A
seance  was  attempted  on  the  following  Tuesday,  but  there  was  no  result.  The
seances  of  Mrs.  von  Wiesler  and  her  daughter  were  from  that  time  entirely
given  up.

While  these  stances  were  being  held,  Mrs.  von  Wiesler  naturally  kept  me
informed  of  what  transpired,  and  consulted  with  me  as  to  what  was  to  be  done
in  view  of  the  extraordinary  character  of  "Schura's"  requests.  Some  time
after  they  had  ceased  Mrs.  von  Wiesler,  to  satisfy  her  own  conscience  and  to
comfort  her  daughter,  resolved  to  communicate  the  whole  episode  to  the  parents
of  Nikolaus.  They  paid  no  attention  to  it.  Nothing  was  elicited  that  any  fault
could  be  found  with.  The  family  were  quite  satisfied  in  regard  to  Nikolaus's
conduct.  But  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  these  Spiritualistic
communications  were  made  known  to  the  parents  before  the  final  issue.  When
during  the  remainder  of  the  year  everything  went  on  happily,  Sophie  became
fully  convinced  that  all  the  communications  were  only  lies,  and  formed  a  resolu-
tion that  she  would  never  again  occupy  herself  with  Spiritualistic  stances.

Another  year  passed  without  any  special  event.  But  on  the  gth  of  March,
1887,  the  secret  police  suddenly  searched  Nikolaus's  rooms.  He  was  arrested
in  his  own  house,  and  within  twenty-four  hours  was  exiled  from  St.  Petersburg.
It  came  out  later  that  his  crime  was  taking  part  in  anarchical  assemblies —
assemblies  which  were  held  in  the  months  of  January  and  February  1885,  exactly
corresponding  with  the  time  when  "Schura"  was  insisting  that  steps  should
then  be  taken  to  dissuade  Nikolaus  from  taking  part  in  such  meetings.  Only
now  were  the  communications  of  "  Schura  "  estimated  at  their  true  value.  The
notes  which  Mrs.  von  Wiesler  had  made  were  read  again  and  again  by  the
families  both  of  "  Schura  "  and  of  Nikolaus.  "  Schura's  "  identity  in  all  those
manifestations  was  recognised  as  incontestably  demonstrated,  in  the  first  place,
by  the  main  fact  in  relation  to  Nikolaus,  by  other  intimate  particulars,  and  also
by  the  totality  of  the  features  which  characterised  her  personality.  This
mournful  occurrence  fell  like  a  fresh  thunderclap  on  Nikolaus's  family,  and
they  had  only  to  thank  God  that  the  errors  of  the  young  man  were  not
followed  by  more  fatal  results.

In  order  to  estimate  this  incident  aright,  it  is  of  great  importance  to  establish
the  relations  which  existed  between  the  two  young  ladies.  I  have  requested
Madame  and  Mdlle.  von  Wiesler  to  give  me  on  this,  as  on  the  previous  points,
a  written  memorandum  in  full  detail ;  and  from  that  memorandum  I  extract
what  follows  [somewhat  abridged  here]  : —

In  December  1880  Madame  von  Wiesler  and  her  daughter  paid  a  Christ-
mas visit  to  "  Schura's  "  grandfather,  Senator  N.,  where  Sophie  saw  "  Schura  "
for  the  first  time.  Sophie  was  then  about  thirteen  years  old,  and  "  Schura  "  even
younger.  Sophie  was  astonished  to  see  *'  Schura's  "  writing-table  covered  with
books  [and  had  a  talk  with  her  about  favourite  authors].  The  two  girls  often
saw  each  other  at  a  distance  in  the  recreation- room  of  their  school  during  the
winter,  but  "  Schura  "  was  soon  transferred  to  another  school.  [They  met  once


182  CHAPTER    VIII  [876

at  a  country-house  without  exchanging  a  word,  and  saw  each  other  once  across
a  theatre.  Sophie,  in  fact,  had  had  one  childish  talk  with  "  Schura  "  ;  Madame
von  Wiesler  had  never  had  any  real  talk  with  her.]  Hence  it  is  clear  that  the
relations  of  these  ladies  with  "  Schura  "  were  of  the  most  distant  kind,  and  that
they  could  not  know  anything  of  her  political  secrets.

876.  I  now  give  a  case  which  in  one  respect  stands  alone.  It
narrates  the  success  of  a  direct  experiment, — a  test-message  planned  before
death,  and  communicated  after  death,  by  a  man  who  held  that  the  hope
of  an  assurance  of  continued  presence  was  worth  at  least  a  resolute  effort,
whatever  its  result  might  be.  His  tests,  indeed,  were  two,  and  both  were
successful.  One  was  the  revealing  of  the  place  where,  before  death,  he
hid  a  piece  of  brick  marked  and  broken  for  special  recognition,  and  the
other  was  the  communication  of  the  contents  of  a  short  letter  which  he
wrote  and  sealed  before  death.  We  may  say  that  the  information  was
certainly  not  possessed  supraliminally  by  any  living  person.  I  give  two
other  cases  in  876  A  and  B  where  information  given  through  automatists
may  hypothetically  be  explicable  by  telepathy  from  the  living,  although,
indeed,  in  my  own  view  it  probably  emanated  from  the  deceased  as
alleged.  In  one  of  these  cases  the  place  where  a  missing  will  had  been
hidden  was  revealed  to  the  automatist,  but  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  will
was  actually  discovered  or  not  before  the  automatic  writing  was  obtained
(although  the  automatist  was  unaware  of  its  discovery),  and  in  any  case,
apparently,  its  whereabouts  was  known  to  some  living  person  who  had
hidden  it,  and  may  not  have  been  known  to  the  deceased  before  death.

In  the  other  case  the  whereabouts  of  a  missing  note  of  hand  was
revealed  to  the  automatists,  and  even  if  this  could  be  regarded  as
absolutely  unknown  supraliminally  to  any  living  person,  it  is  not  by  any
means  certain  that  the  fact  was  known  before  death  to  the  deceased
person  from  whom  the  message  purported  to  come.

These  cases,  therefore,  are  not  such  strong  evidence  for  personal
identity  as  the  one  to  which  I  have  referred  above,  and  which  I  now  give,
as  recording  what  purports  to  be  the  successful  accomplishment  of  an
experiment  which  every  one  may  make  ; — which  every  one  ought  to  make  ;
— for,  small  as  may  be  the  chances  of  success,  a  few  score  of  distinct
successes  would  establish  a  presumption  of  man's  survival  which  the
common  sense  of  mankind  would  refuse  to  explain  away.  If  accepted,
the  incident  shows  a  continued  perception  on  the  part  of  the  deceased  of
the  efforts  made  by  friends  to  communicate  with  him.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  248-51.)  l

1  An  account  of  this  case  appeared  in  an  article  by  Herman  Snow  in  the  Religio-
Philosophical  Journal  for  January  3 ist,  1891,  and  Mr.  Snow  also  sent  us  an  earlier
article  on  the  subject  which  he  had  written  in  1881,  and  of  which  his  second  account
was  a  mere  repetition.  The  facts  were  related  to  him  by  the  Unitarian  minister  of  the
place  where  Mrs.  Finney  lived  ;  and  this  third-hand  account  recorded  by  Mr.  Snow
fifteen  years  after  the  event  closely  coincides  with  Mrs.  Finney's  first-hand  one,
recorded  twenty-five  years  after  the  event.


876]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  183

The  following  letters  were  received  from  the  principal  witness,  Mrs.
Finney : —

ROCKLAND,  MASS.,  April  ityh,  1891.

MR.  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — Some  weeks  ago  I  received  from  you  a  few
lines  asking  me  to  give  you  an  account  of  the  communication  received  from
Cousin  Benja  in  spirit-life,  some  twenty-five  years  ago.

For  weeks  and  months  before  my  brother  left  the  form  we  conversed  freely
on  the  subject  of  spirit  communion  and  such  matters,  and  one  morning  he
requested  me  to  bring  him  a  small  piece  of  brick,  also  pen  and  ink;  he  then
made  two  marks  on  one  side,  and  one  on  the  other  with  the  ink,  then  breaking
the  brick  in  two,  gave  me  one  piece,  telling  me  at  the  time  to  take  care  of  it,
and  some  day  he  would  hide  the  other  piece  away  where  no  one  but  himself
would  know,  and  after  leaving  the  form,  if  possible,  would  return  in  some  way
and  tell  me  where  it  was.  I  could  then  compare  them  together,  and  it  would
be  a  test  that  he  could  return  and  communicate,  and  my  mind  could  not  have
any  influence  over  it,  as  I  did  not  know  where  he  put  it,

After  he  left  the  form  our  anxiety  was  very  great  to  hear  and  learn  all  we
could  of  communicating  with  spirits,  and  for  months  we  got  nothing  satis-
factory.

We  then  commenced  sitting  at  the  table  at  home  (mother  and  myself),
which  we  did  for  some  little  time  ;  at  last  it  commenced  tipping,  and  by  calling
the  alphabet  spelled  out  where  we  could  find  the  piece  of  brick  that  he  put
away, — that  was  the  way  we  got  the  test.  To  us  that  was  truth  that  spirits  can
and  do  communicate  with  us,  and  nothing  but  the  influence  and  power  of  Benja
could  tell  us  that  test. — Truly  yours,  MRS.  WM.  A.  FINNEY.

ROCKLAND,  May  yd,  1891.

MR.  R.  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — Yours  of  April  zist  received,  and  I  will
add  a  few  more  lines  as  to  statement  of  brother  Benja's  communication.

By  calling  the  alphabet  we  spelled  out : —

"  You  will  find  that  piece  of  brick  in  the  cabinet  under  the  tomahawk. —
BENJA."

I  went  to  that  room  and  took  the  key,  unlocked  the  cabinet,  which  had  not
been  touched  by  any  one  after  he  locked  it  and  put  away  the  key.  There  I
found  that  piece  of  brick  just  as  it  had  spelled  out,  and  it  corresponded  with  the
piece  I  had  retained,  fitting  on  exactly  where  he  broke  it  off  the  piece  I  had.
It  was  wrapped  in  a  bit  of  paper  and  tucked  into  a  shell,  and  placed  in  the
bottom  of  the  cabinet  exactly  imder  the  tomahawk,  as  was  spelled  out  by  the
alphabet.

This  is  truth,  and  no  power  but  Benja's  could  tell  that.

Mother  is  not  living;  I  am  the  only  one  of  the  family  that  is  living. —
Yours  respectfully,  MRS.  WM.  A.  FINNEY.

ROCKLAND,  May  nth,  1891.

MR.  R.  HODGSON,— DEAR  SIR,— Yours  of  6th  received.  I  will  continue
to  say,  in  answer  to  your  questions,  that  the  piece  of  brick  was  entirely  con-
cealed in  the  shell,  so  that  it  could  not  be  seen  from  outside  of  cabinet.  It
was  wrapped  in  a  piece  of  paper  stuck  together  with  mucilage  and  tucked  into
the  end  of  the  shell,  then  a  piece  of  paper  gummed  over  that,  so  that  nothing
was  visible  from  the  shell.  The  shell  was  on  the  lower  shelf  of  the  cabinet,  and
only  the  top  of  the  shell  was  visible  outside  the  cabinet.


1 84  CHAPTER    VIII  [876

One  more  little  incident  I  will  mention,  for  to  me  it  is  as  valuable  as  the
other.  He  wrote  me  a  letter  (about  the  time  he  gave  me  the  piece  of  brick)
and  sealed  it,  saying  at  the  time  it  was  not  to  be  answered,  but  the  contents  of
the  letter  to  be  told.  I  got  that  in  the  same  way  I  did  the  other,  by  calling  the
alphabet  and  the  table  tipping.  It  was  these  words  : —

u  Julia  !  do  right  and  be  happy. — BENJA."

That  was  correct.  Just  the  contents  of  my  letter.  I  have  no  particular
objection  as  to  giving  my  name,  for  I  have  stated  nothing  but  the  truth.

At  my  home  in  Kingston  I  have  that  little  shell  with  the  piece  of  brick,  and
if  you  would  like  them  I  will  send  them  to  you.  Will  place  the  brick  into  the
shell  as  it  was  when  I  found  it.  Of  course,  the  paper  that  was  around  it  then  is
worn  out  years  ago.  The  cabinet  is  disposed  of.  JULIA  A.  FJNNEY.

Mrs.  Finney  further  writes  : —

ROCKLAND,/W«<?  26th,  1891.

I  send  you  by  express  a  box  containing  the  letter  and  shell  with  the  piece
of  brick.  I  have  placed  one  piece  in  the  shell  just  as  it  was  when  I  found  it,
so  you  can  see  how  nicely  it  was  concealed  in  the  shell.  The  papers  that  were
around  it  then  are  worn  out.  You  can  retain  them  if  you  like,  as  I  do  not  care
for  them  now.

To  me  it  is  a  positive  truth  that  he  did  communicate  to  us,  and  our  minds
could  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  J.  A.  FINNEY.

ROCKLAND,  July  igf/t,  1891.

.  .  .  The  shell  was  placed  on  the  same  shelf  with  the  tomahawk,  and
no  other  shells  on  that  shelf.  It  was  placed  with  the  open  side  down,  and  the
tomahawk  stood  directly  over  it.  I  cannot  say  why  he  did  not  tell  us  to  look
inside  of  the  shell.  We  started  to  look  as  soon  as  he  told  us.  It  was  in  the
cabinet  under  the  tomahawk.  We  did  not  wait  for  any  more  to  be  said.

I  am  not  intimately  acquainted  with  many  public  people.  As  to  my
integrity,  will  refer  you  to  Rev.  C.  Y.  de  Normandie,  of  Kingston.

J.  A.  FINNEY.

Dr.  Hodgson  writes  : —

The  shell  is  a  large  Triton,  about  ten  inches  long.  The  piece  of  brick  was
wrapped  in  folds  of  soft  paper  and  tucked  deeply  into  the  recess.  Another
piece  of  paper  was  then  gummed  around  the  sides  of  the  shell  in  the  interior,
so  as  absolutely  to  prevent  the  piece  of  brick  from  falling  out.  When  I
received  the  shell  from  Mrs.  Finney  and  looked  into  the  interior  and  shook  the
shell  violently,  there  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  shell  contained  anything
but  the  piece  of  gummed  paper.

The  piece  of  brick  in  the  shell  weighs  one  and  a  half  ounces,  and  the  piece
of  brick  retained  by  Mrs.  Finney  weighs  about  two  and  a  quarter  ounces.  The
shell  with  the  piece  of  brick  and  paper  wrapping  weighs  about  eleven  and  a
half  ounces.

Mrs.  Finney  also  forwarded  me  the  letter  written  by  her  brother.  The
shell  and  the  pieces  of  brick  and  the  letter  are  now  all  in  my  possession.

R.  HODGSON.

We  have  a  letter  (in  original)  from  the  Rev.  C.  Y.  de  Normandie,  of
Kingston,  Canada,  to  Mrs.  Finney.  "  I  expressed  then,"  he  says,  speaking  of
a  former  note  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  which  accidentally  went  astray,  "  that  to  the  best


878]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  185

knowledge  I  had  of  you  and  to  my  firm  belief  your  word  could  be  implicitly
relied  on.  I  felt  confident  that  you  would  state  a  matter  as  you  understood  it,
as  you  regarded  it,  without  reference  to  the  consequences  ;  and  that  you  would
not  be  any  more  likely  to  be  misled  and  deceived  about  a  matter  of  that  kind
than  others  similarly  situated."

877.  The  experiment  which  was  in  this  case  successful  is  one    (I
repeat)  which  might  be  tried  by  everybody  (see  877  A).     And  I  may  add
the  remark  that  it  is  to  experiment  with  automatic  writing,  crystal-vision,
&c.,  rather  than  to  spontaneous  apparitions,  that  we  must  look  for  any
real  information  as  to  the  degree  in  which  departed  spirits  retain  their
knowledge  of  the  things  of  earth.

Once  more  I  must  express  my  astonishment  and  regret  that  amongst
some  tens — perhaps  hundreds — of  thousands  of  persons,  scattered  over
many  countries,  who  already  believe  that  the  road  of  communication
between  the  two  worlds  is  open,  there  should  be  so  very  few  who  can  or
will  make  any  serious  effort  to  obtain  fresh  evidence  of  so  important  a
fact.  But,  quite  apart  from  the  Spiritist  camp,  there  are  now  many
inquirers  who  know  that  automatic  writing  is  a  real  fact  in  nature,  and
who  are  willing  to  discuss  with  an  open  mind  the  origin  of  any  message
which  may  thus  be  given.  Let  these  set  themselves  to  the  task,  and  the
result  of  organised  and  intelligent  effort  will  soon,  as  I  believe,  be  made
plain.

For  aught  that  we  can  tell,  there  may  be — I  believe  that  there  are —
collaborators  elsewhere  who  only  await  our  appeal.  Why  should  not
every  death-bed  be  made  the  starting-point  of  a  long  experiment?  And
why  should  not  every  friend  who  sails  forth  KIOJ/WI/  v-rrtp  'HpafcAe'os — into
the  unknown  sea — endeavour  to  send  us  news  from  that  bourne  from
which  few  travellers,  perhaps,  have  as  yet  made  any  adequate  or  systematic
preparation  to  return?

878.  Here,    then,   let   us   pause   and   consider   to   what   point  the
evidence  contained  in  this  chapter  has  gradually  led  us.     We  shall  per-
ceive that  the  motor  phenomena  have  confirmed,  and  have  also  greatly
extended,   the   results   to   which   the  cognate    sensory   phenomena   had
already  pointed.     We  have  already  noted,  in  each  of  the  two  states  of
sleep  and  of  waking,  the  variously  expanding  capacities  of  the  subliminal
self.     We  have  watched  a  hyperaesthetic  intensification  of  ordinary  faculty,
—leading  up  to  telaesthesia,  and  to  telepathy  from  the  living  and  from  the
departed.     Along   with    these  powers,  which,  on    the  hypothesis  of  the
soul's  independent  existence,  are  at  least  within  our  range  of  analogical
conception,  we  have  noted  also  a  precognitive  capacity  of  a  type  which  no
fact  as  yet  known  to  science  will  help  us  to  explain.

Proceeding  to  the  study  of  motor  automatisms,  we  have  found  a  third
group  of  cases  which  independently  confirm  in  each  of  these  lines  in  turn
the  results  of  our  analysis  of  sensory  automatisms  both  in  sleep  and
in  waking.  Evidence  thus  convergent  will  already  need  no  ordinary


186  CHAPTER    VIII  [879

boldness  of  negative  assumption  if  it  is  to  be  set  aside.  But  motor  auto-
matisms have  taught  us  much  more  than  this.  At  once  more  energetic  and
more  persistent  than  the  sensory,  they  oblige  us  to  face  certain  problems
which  the  lightness  and  fugitiveness  of  sensory  impressions  allowed  us  in
some  measure  to  evade.  Thus  when  we  discussed  the  mechanism  (so  to
call  it)  of  visual  and  auditory  phantasms,  two  competing  conceptions
presented  themselves  for  our  choice, — the  conception  of  telepathic  impact,
and  the  conception  of  psychical  invasion.  Either  (we  said)  there  was  an
influence  exerted  by  the  agent  on  the  percipient's  mind,  which  so  stimu-
lated the  sensory  tracts  of  his  brain  that  he  externalised  that  impression
as  a  quasi-percept,  or  else  the  agent  in  some  way  modified  an  actual
portion  of  space  where  (say)  an  apparition  was  discerned,  perhaps  by
several  percipients  at  once.

Phrased  in  this  manner,  the  telepathic  impact  seemed  the  less  startling,
the  less  extreme  hypothesis  of  the  two, — mainly,  perhaps,  because  the
picture  which  it  called  up  was  left  so  vague  and  obscure.  But  now
instead  of  a  fleeting  hallucination  we  have  to  deal  with  a  strong  and
lasting  impulse — such,  for  instance,  as  the  girl's  impulse  to  write,  in
Dr.  Lie"beault's  case  (866)  : — an  impulse  which  seems  to  come  from
the  depths  of  the  being,  and  which  (like  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion)  may
over-ride  even  strong  disinclination,  and  keep  the  automatist  uncomfort-
able until  it  has  worked  itself  out.  We  may  still  call  this  a  telepathic
impact,  if  we  will,  but  we  shall  find  it  hard  to  distinguish  that  term  from  a
psychical  invasion.  This  strong,  yet  apparently  alien,  motor  innervation
corresponds  in  fact  as  closely  as  possible  to  our  idea  of  an  invasion — an
invasion  no  longer  of  the  room  only  in  which  the  percipient  is  sitting,
but  of  his  own  body  and  his  own  powers.  It  is  an  invasion  which,  if
sufficiently  prolonged,  would  become  a  possession  /  and  it  both  unites  and
intensifies  those  two  earlier  conjectures; — of  telepathic  impact  on  the  per-
cipient's mind,  and  of  " phantasmogenetic  presence"  in  the  percipient's
surroundings.  What  seemed  at  first  a  mere  impact  is  tending  to  become
a  persistent  control ;  what  seemed  an  incursion  merely  into  the  percipient's
environment  has  become  an  incursion  into  his  organism  itself.

879.  As  has  been  usual  in  this  inquiry,  this  slight  forward  step
from  vagueness  to  comparative  clearness  of  conception  introduces  us  at
once  to  a  whole  series  of  novel  problems.  Yet,  as  we  have  also  learnt  to
expect,  some  of  our  earlier  phenomena  may  have  to  be  called  in  with
advantage  to  illustrate  phenomena  more  advanced.

In  cases  of  split  personality,  to  begin  with,  we  have  seen  just  the  same
phenomena  occurring  where  certainly  no  personality  was  concerned  save
the  percipient's  own.  We  have  seen  a  section  of  the  subliminal  self
partially  or  temporarily  dominating  the  organism ;  perhaps  (as  in  Anna
Winsor's  case,  237  A)  controlling  permanently  one  arm  alone  ;  or  perhaps
controlling  intermittently  the  whole  nervous  system; — and  all  this  with
varying  degrees  of  displacement  of  the  primary  personality.


880]  MOTOR    AUTOMATISM  187

Similarly  with  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  We  have  seen  the  subliminal
self  ordered  to  write  (say)  "  It  has  left  off  raining  " — and  thereupon  writing
the  words  without  the  conscious  will  of  the  automatist — and  again  with
varying  degrees  of  displacement  of  the  waking  self.  The  step  hence  to
such  a  case  as  Mrs.  Newnham's  (849  A)  is  thus  not  a  very  long  one.
Mrs.  Newnham's  subliminal  self,  exercising  supernormal  faculty,  and  by
some  effort  of  us  own,  acquires  certain  facts  from  Mr.  Newnham's  mind,
and  uses  her  hand  to-  write  them  down  automatically.  The  great  problem
here  introduced  is  how  the  subliminal  self  acquires  the  facts,  rather  than
how  it  succeeds  in  writing  them  down  when  it  has  once  acquired  them.

But  as  we  go  further  we  can  no  longer  limit  the  problem  in  this
way, — to  the  activities  of  the  automatist's  subliminal  self.  We  cannot
always  assume  that  some  portion  of  the  automatist's  personality  gets  at  the
supernormal  knowledge  by  some  effort  of  its  own.  Our  evidence,  as  we
know,  has  pointed  decisively  to  telepathic  impacts  or  influences  from
without.  In  the  Kirby  case  (852),  for  instance,  we  have  supposed  that  the
spirit  of  the  sleeping  sister  affected  the  brother  by  a  telepathic  impact,  from
without,  which  worked  itself  out  by  automatic  movements  just  like  those
automatic  movements  which  we  have  already  described  as  originating
wholly  from  within.  What,  then,  is  the  mechanism  here?  Are  we  still
to  suppose  that  the  automatist's  subliminal  self  executes  the  movements —
obeying  somehow  the  bidding  of  the  impulse  from  without?  or  does  the
external  agent,  who  sends  the  telepathic  message,  himself  execute  the
movements  also,  directly  using  the  automatist's  arm  ?  And  if  telekinetic
movements  accompany  the  message,  (a  subject  thus  far  deferred,  but  of
prime  importance),  are  we  to  suppose  that  these  also  are  effected  by  the
percipient's  subliminal  self,  under  the  guidance  of  some  external  spirit,
incarnate  or  discarnate?  or  are  they  effected  directly  by  that  external
spirit  ?

880.  We  cannot  really  say  which  of  these  two  is  the  easier
hypothesis.

From  one  point  of  view  it  may  seem  simpler  to  keep  as  long  as  we
can  to  that  acknowledged  vera  causa,  the  automatist's  subliminal  self;  and
to  collect  such  observations  as  may  indicate  any  power  on  its  part  of  pro-
ducing physical  effects  outside  the  organism.  Such  scattered  observations
occur  at  every  stage,  and  even  Mrs.  Newnham,  (I  may  briefly  observe  in
passing),  thought  that  her  pencil,  when  writing  down  the  messages  tele-
pathically  derived  from  her  husband,  was  moved  by  something  other  than
the  ordinary  muscular  action  of  the  ringers  which  held  it.  On  the  other
hand,  there  seems  something  very  forced  in  attributing  to  an  external
spirit's  agency  impulses  and  impressions  which  seem  intimately  the  auto-
matist's own,  and  at  the  same  time  refusing  to  ascribe  to  that  external
agency  phenomena  which  take  place  outside  the  automatist's  organism,
and  which  present  themselves  to  him  as  objective  facts,  as  much  outside
his  own  being  as  the  fall  of  the  apple  to  the  ground.


188  CHAPTER    VIII

Reflecting  on  such  points — and  once  admitting  this  kind  of  interaction
between  the  automatist's  own  spirit  and  an  external  spirit,  incarnate  or
discarnate — we  find  the  possible  combinations  presenting  themselves  in
perplexing  variety ; — a  variety  both  of  agencies  on  the  part  of  the  invading
spirit,  and  of  effects  on  the  part  of  the  invaded  spirit  and  organism.

What  is  that  which  invades  ?  and  what  is  that  which  is  displaced  or
superseded  by  this  invasion  ?  In  what  ways  may  two  spirits  co-operate
in  the  possession  and  control  of  the  same  organism  ?

These  last  words — control  and  possession — remind  us  of  the  great
mass  of  vague  tradition  and  belief  to  the  effect  that  spirits  of  the  departed
may  exercise  such  possession  or  control  over  the  living.  To  those  ancient
and  vague  beliefs  it  will  be  our  task  in  the  next  chapter  to  give  a  form  as
exact  and  stable  as  we  can.  And  observe  with  how  entirely  novel  a
preparation  of  mind  we  now  enter  on  that  task.  The  examination  of
"  possession  "  is  no  longer  to  us,  as  to  the  ordinary  civilised  inquirer,  a
merely  antiquarian  or  anthropological  research  into  forms  of  superstition
lying  wholly  apart  from  any  valid  or  systematic  thought.  On  the  contrary,
it  is  an  inquiry  directly  growing  out  of  previous  evidence ;  directly  needed
for  the  full  comprehension  of  known  facts  as  well  as  for  the  discovery  of
facts  unknown.  We  need  (so  to  say),  to  analyse  the  spectrum  of  helium,
as  detected  in  the  sun,  in  order  to  check  and  correct  our  spectrum  of
helium  as  detected  in  the  Bath  waters.  We  are  obliged  to  seek  for  certain
definite  phenomena  in  the  spiritual  world  in  order  to  explain  certain
definite  phenomena  of  the  world  of  matter.


900]


CHAPTER    IX
TRANCE,   POSSESSION    AND    ECSTASY

Vicit  iter  durum  pietas.

— VIRGIL.

900.  The  appearance  of  this  book  has  been  delayed  for  several  years
by  several  causes,  of  which  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  chief  has  been  that
cause  which  the  gods  call  Sheer  Indolence,  and  men  the  Pressure  of
Occupation.  What  evil  may  have  resulted  from  the  long  deferment  it  is
not  for  the  author  to  say.  What  counterbalancing  good  there  may  have
accrued  ought  to  be  manifest  in  the  following  chapter.  For  it  is  in  this
chapter  that  the  main  difference  lies  between  what  I  should  have  written
ten  years  ago,  and  what  it  seems  to  me  not  only  permissible,  but  even
urgently  necessary  to  write  to-day.  It  is  in  what  must  needs  be  said  about
Possession  that  the  great  change  has  come.

Possession,  to  define  it  for  the  moment  in  the  narrowest  way,  is  a  more
developed  form  of  Motor  Automatism.  The  difference  broadly  is,  that  in
Possession  the  automatist's  own  personality  does  for  the  time  altogether
disappear,  while  there  is  a  more  or  less  complete  substitution  of  personality ;
writing  or  speech  being  given  by  a  spirit  through  the  entranced  organism.
The  change  which  has  come  over  this  branch  of  evidence  since  the  present
work  was  first  projected,  in  1888,  is  most  significant.  There  existed
indeed,  at  that  date,  a  good  deal  of  evidence  which  pointed  in  this
direction,1  but  for  various  reasons  most  of  that  evidence  was  still  possibly
explicable  in  other  ways.  Even  the  phenomena  of  Mr.  W.  S.  Moses  left
it  possible  to  argue  that  the  main  "controls"  under  which  he  wrote  or
spoke  when  entranced  were  self-suggestions  of  his  own  mind,  or  phases  of
his  own  deeper  personality.  I  had  not  then  had  the  opportunity,  which
the  kindness  of  his  executors  after  his  death  afforded  to  me,  of  studying
the  whole  series  of  his  original  note-books,  and  forming  at  first-hand  my
present  conviction  that  spiritual  agency  was  an  actual  and  important
element  in  that  long  sequence  of  communications.  On  the  whole,  I  did
not  then  anticipate  that  the  theory  of  possession  could  be  presented  as
more  than  a  plausible  speculation,  or  as  a  supplement  to  other  lines  of
proof  of  man's  survival  of  death.

1  The  cases  of  Swedenborg,  Cahagnet's  subject,  D.  D.  Home,  and  Stainton  Moses
will  be  discussed  in  the  course  of  this  chapter.

189


190  CHAPTER    IX  [901

The  position  of  things,  as  the  reader  of  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings  knows,
has  in  the  last  decade  undergone  a  complete  change.  The  trance-
phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper — so  long  and  so  carefully  watched  by  Dr.
Hodgson  and  others — formed,  I  think,  by  far  the  most  remarkable  mass
of  psychical  evidence  till  then  adduced  in  any  quarter.  And  more
recently  other  series  of  trance-phenomena  with  other  "mediums" —
though  still  incomplete — have  added  materially  to  the  evidence  obtained
through  Mrs.  Piper.  The  result  broadly  is  that  these  phenomena  of
possession  are  now  the  most  amply  attested,  as  well  as  intrinsically  the
most  advanced,  in  our  whole  repertory.

901.  Nor,  again,  is  the  mere  increment  of  direct  evidence,  important
though  that  is,  the  sole  factor  in  the  changed  situation.  Not  only  has
direct  evidence  grown,  but  indirect  evidence,  so  to  say,  has  moved  to
meet  it.  The  notion  of  personality, — of  the  control  of  organism  by  spirit,
— has  gradually  been  so  modified  that  Possession,  which  passed  till  the
other  day  as  a  mere  survival  of  savage  thought,  is  now  seen  to  be  the
consummation,  the  furthest  development,  of  many  lines  of  experiment,
observation,  reflection,  which  the  preceding  chapters  have  opened  to  our
view.

Let  us  then  at  once  consider  what  the  notion  of  possession  does
actually  claim.  It  will  be  better  to  face  that  claim  in  its  full  extent  at
once,  as  it  will  be  seen  that  the  evidence,  while  rising  through  various
stages,  does  in  the  end  insist  on  all  that  the  ancient  term  implies.  The
leading  modern  cases,  of  which  Stainton  Moses  and  Mrs.  Piper  may
be  taken  as  types,  are  closely  analogous,  presenting  many  undesigned
coincidences,  some  of  which  come  out  only  on  close  examination.

The  claim,  then,  is  that  the  automatist,  in  the  first  place,  falls  into  a
trance,  during  which  his  spirit  partially  "  quits  his  body  "  :  enters  at  any
rate  into  a  state  in  which  the  spiritual  world  is  more  or  less  open  to  its
perception ;  and  in  which  also — and  this  is  the  novelty — it  so  far  ceases
to  occupy  the  organism  as  to  leave  room  for  an  invading  spirit  to  use  it  in
somewhat  the  same  fashion  as  its  owner  is  accustomed  to  use  it.

The  brain  being  thus  left  temporarily  and  partially  uncontrolled,  a
disembodied  spirit  sometimes,  but  not  always,  succeeds  in  occupying  it ;
and  occupies  it  with  varying  degrees  of  control.  In  some  cases  (Mrs.
Piper)  two  or  more  spirits  may  simultaneously  control  different  portions  of
the  same  organism.

The  controlling  spirit  proves  his  identity  mainly  by  reproducing,  in
speech  or  writing,  facts  which  belong  to  his  memory  and  not  to  the
automatist's  memory.  He  may  also  give  evidence  of  supernormal  per-
ception of  other  kinds.

His  manifestations  may  differ  very  considerably  from  the  automatist's
normal  personality.  Yet  in  one  sense  it  is  a  process  of  selection  rather
than  of  addition ;  the  spirit  selects  what  parts  of  the  brain-machinery  he
will  use,  but  he  cannot  get  out  of  that  machinery  more  than  it  is  con-


902]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        191

structed  to  perform.  The  spirit  can  indeed  produce  facts  and  names
unknown  to  the  automatist ;  but  they  must  be,  as  a  rule,  such  facts  and
names  as  the  automatist  could  easily  have  repeated,  had  they  been  known
to  him  : — not,  for  instance,  mathematical  formulae  or  Chinese  sentences,  if
the  automatist  is  ignorant  of  mathematics  or  of  Chinese.

After  a  time  the  control  gives  way,  and  the  automatist's  spirit  returns.
The  automatist,  awaking,  may  or  may  not  remember  his  experiences  in
the  spiritual  world  during  the  trance.  In  some  cases  (Swedenborg)  there
is  this  memory  of  the  spiritual  world,  but  no  possession  of  the  organism
by  an  external  spirit.  In  others  (Cahagnet's  subject)  there  is  utterance
during  the  trance  as  to  what  is  being  discerned  by  the  automatist,  yet  no
memory  thereof  on  waking.  In  others  (Mrs.  Piper)  there  is  neither  utter-
ance as  a  rule,  or  at  least  no  prolonged  utterance,  by  the  automatist's  own
spirit,  nor  subsequent  memory ;  but  there  is  writing  or  utterance  during
the  trance  by  controlling  spirits.

902.  Now  this  seems  a  strange  doctrine  to  have  reached  after  so
much  disputation.  For  it  simply  brings  us  back  to  the  creeds  of  the
Stone  Age.  We  have  come  round  again  to  the  primitive  practices  of  the
shaman  and  the  medicine-man; — to  a  doctrine  of  spiritual  intercourse
which  was  once  oecumenical,  but  has  now  taken  refuge  in  African  swamps
and  Siberian  tundras  and  the  snow-clad  wastes  of  the  Red  Indian  and  the
Esquimaux.  If,  as  is  sometimes  advised,  we  judge  of  the  worth  of  ideas
by  tracing  their  origins,  no  conception  could  start  from  a  lower  level  of
humanity.  It  might  be  put  out  of  court  at  once  as  unworthy  of  civilised
men.

Fortunately,  however,  our  previous  discussions  have  supplied  us  with
a  somewhat  more  searching  criterion.  Instead  of  asking  in  what  age  a
doctrine  originated — with  the  implied  assumption  that  the  more  recent
it  is,  the  better — we  can  now  ask  how  far  it  is  in  accord  or  in  discord
with  a  great  mass  of  actual  recent  evidence  which  comes  into  contact,
in  one  way  or  another,  with  nearly  every  belief  as  to  an  unseen  world
which  has  been  held  at  least  by  western  men.  Submitted  to  this  test,
the  theory  of  possession  gives  a  remarkable  result.  It  cannot  be  said
to  be  inconsistent  with  any  of  our  proved  facts.  We  know  absolutely
nothing  which  negatives  its  possibility.

Nay,  more  than  this.  The  theory  of  possession  actually  supplies  us
with  a  powerful  method  of  co-ordinating  and  explaining  many  earlier
groups  of  phenomena,  if  only  we  will  consent  to  explain  them  in  a  way
which  at  first  sight  seemed  extreme  in  its  assumptions — seemed  unduly
prodigal  of  the  marvellous.  Yet  as  to  that  difficulty  we  have  learnt  by
this  time  that  no  explanation  of  psychical  phenomena  is  really  simple,  and
that  our  best  clue  is  to  get  hold  of  some  group  which  seems  to  admit  of
one  interpretation  only,  and  then  to  use  that  group  as  a  point  de  repere
from  which  to  attack  more  complex  problems.

Now  I  think  that  the  Moses-Piper  group  of  trance-phenomena  cannot


192  CHAPTER    IX  [903

be  intelligently  explained  on  any  theory  except  that  of  possession.  And
I  therefore  think  it  important  to  consider  in  what  way  earlier  phenomena
have  led  up  to  possession,  and  in  what  way  the  facts  of  possession,  in  their
turn,  affect  our  view  of  these  earlier  phenomena.

If  we  analyse  our  observations  of  possession,  we  find  two  main  factors
— the  central  operation,  which  is  the  control  by  a  spirit  of  the  sensitive's
organism;  and  the  indispensable  prerequisite,  which  is  the  partial  and
temporary  desertion  of  that  organism  by  the  percipient's  own  spirit.

Let  us  consider  first  how  far  this  withdrawal  of  the  living  man's  spirit
from  his  organism  has  been  rendered  conceivable  by  evidence  already
obtained.

903.  First  of  all,  the  splits,  and  substitutions  of  phases  of  personality
with  which  our  second  chapter  made  us  familiar  have  great  significance
for  possession  also.

We  have  there  seen  some  secondary  personality,  beginning  with  slight
and  isolated  sensory  and  motor  manifestations,  yet  going  on  gradually
to  complete  predominance, — complete  control  of  all  supraliminal  mani-
festation.

The  mere  collection  and  description  of  such  phenomena  has  up  till
now  savoured  of  a  certain  boldness.  The  idea  of  tracing  the  possible
mechanism  involved  in  these  transitions  has  scarcely  arisen.

Yet  it  is  manifest  that  there  must  be  a  complex  set  of  laws  concerned
with  such  alternating  use  of  brain-centres; — developments,  one  may
suppose,  of  those  unknown  physical  laws  underlying  ordinary  memory,
of  which  no  one  has  formed  as  yet  even  a  first  rough  conception.

An  ordinary  case  of  ecmnesia  may  present  problems  as  insoluble  in
their  way  as  those  offered  by  spirit- possession  itself.  There  may  be  in
ecmnesia  periods  of  life  absolutely  and  permanently  extruded  from
memory ;  and  there  may  be  also  periods  which  are  only  temporarily  thus
extruded.  Thus  on  Wednesday  and  Thursday  I  may  be  unaware  of
what  I  learnt  and  did  on  Monday  and  Tuesday;  and  then  on  Friday  I
may  recover  Monday's  and  Tuesday's  knowledge,  as  well  as  retaining
Wednesday's  and  Thursday's,  so  that  my  brain-cells  have  taken  on,  so  to
say,  two  separate  lines  of  education  since  Sunday — that  which  began  on
Monday,  and  that  which  began  on  Wednesday.  These  intercurrent
educations  may  have  been  naturally  discordant,  and  may  be  fused  in  all
kinds  of  ways  in  the  ultimate  synthesis.

These  processes  are  completely  obscure ;  and  all  that  can  be  said  is
that  their  mechanism  probably  belongs  to  the  same  unknown  series  of
operations  which  ultimately  lead  to  that  completest  break  in  the  history
of  the  brain-cells  which  consists  in  their  intercalary  occupation  by  an
external  spirit.

904.  Passing  on  to  genius,  which  I  discussed  in  my  third  chapter,
it  is  noticeable  that  there  also  there  is  a  certain  degree  of  temporary
substitution   of  one   control   for   another   over   important  brain-centres.


906]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        193

We  must  here  regard  the  subliminal  self  as  an  entity  partially  distinct
from  the  supraliminal,  and  its  occupation  of  these  brain-centres  habitually
devoted  to  supraliminal  work  is  a  kind  of  possession,  which  illustrates  in
yet  another  way  the  rapid  metastasis  of  psychical  product  (so  to  term  it)
of  which  these  highest  centres  are  capable.  The  highest  genius  would
thus  be  the  completest  self-possession^ — the  occupation  and  dominance
of  the  whole  organism  by  those  profoundest  elements  of  the  self  which
act  from  the  fullest  knowledge,  and  in  the  wisest  way.

905.  The    next  main  subject  which  fell  under  our  description    was
sleep.     And  this  state — the  normal  state  which  most  resembles  trance —
has  long  ago  suggested  the  question  which  first  hints  at  the  possibility  of
ecstasy,  namely,  What  becomes  of  the  soul  during  sleep?     I  think  that
our  evidence  has  shown  that  sometimes  during  apparent  ordinary  sleep
the  spirit  may  travel  away  from  the  body,  and  may  bring  back  a  memory,
more  or  less  confused,  of  what  it  has  seen  in  this  clairvoyant  excursion.
This  may  indeed  happen  for  brief  flashes  during  waking  moments  also.
But  ordinary  sleep  seems  to  help  the  process ;  and  deeper  states  of  sleep
— spontaneous   or    induced — seem    still    further    to  facilitate  it.     In  the
coma  preceding  death,  or  during  that  "  suspended  animation  "  which  is
sometimes  taken  for  death,  this  travelling  faculty  has  seemed  to  reach  its
highest  point.

906.  I  have  spoken  of  deeper  states  of  sleep,  "spontaneous  or  in-
duced," and  here  the  reader  will  naturally  recall  much  that  has  been  said
of  ordinary  somnambulism,  much  that  has  been  said  of  hypnotic  trance.
Hypnotic  trance  has  created  for  us,  with  perfect  facility,  situations  ex-
ternally  indistinguishable   from    what    I    shall   presently   claim   as    true
possession.     A   quasi-personality,    arbitrarily    created,    may   occupy    the
organism,  responding  to  speech  or  sign  in  some  characteristic  fashion,
although  without  producing  any  fresh  verifiable  facts  as  evidence  to  the
alleged  identity.     Nay  sometimes,  as  in  a  few  of  the  Pesaro  experiments,
(see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  563-565),  there  may  be  indications  that
something  of  a  new  personality  is  there.     And  on  the  other  hand,  the
sensitive's  own  spirit  often  claims  to  have  been  absent  elsewhere, — much
in  the  fashion  in  which  it  sometimes  imagines  itself  to  have  been  absent
during  ordinary  sleep,  but  with  greater  persistence  and  lucidity.

Our  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  what  is  thus  alleged  to  be  seen  in  sleep
and  cognate  states  has  proved  instructive.  Sometimes  known  earthly
scenes  appear  to  be  revisited — with  only  such  alteration  as  may  have
taken  place  since  the  sleeper  last  visited  them  in  waking  hours.  But
sometimes  also  there  is  an  admixture  of  an  apparently  symbolical  element.
The  earthly  scene  includes  some  element  of  human  action,  which  is  pre-
sented in  a  selected  or  abbreviated  fashion,  as  though  some  mind  had
been  concerned  to  bring  out  a  special  significance  from  the  complex
story.  Sometimes  this  element  becomes  quite  dominant;  phantasmal
figures  are  seen  ;  or  (as  in  Dr.  Wiltse's  case  of  apparent  death,  713  A)  there
VOL.  ii.  N


194  CHAPTER    IX  [906

may  be  a  prolonged  symbolical  representation  of  an  entry  into  the  spiritual
world.

Cases  like  these  do  of  course  apparently  support  that  primitive  doc-
trine of  the  spirit's  actual  wandering  in  space.  On  the  other  hand,  this
notion  has  become  unwelcome  to  modern  thought,  which  is  less  unwilling
to  believe  in  some  telepathic  intercourse  between  mind  and  mind  in
which  space  is  not  involved.  For  my  own  part,  I  have  already  explained
that  I  think  that  the  evidence  to  an  at  least  apparent  movement  of  some
kind  in  space  must  outweigh  any  mere  speculative  presumption  against  it.
And  I  hold  that  these  new  experiences  of  possession  fall  on  this  contro-
versy with  decisive  force.  It  is  so  strongly  claimed,  in  every  instance  of
possession,  that  the  sensitive's  own  spirit  must  in  some  sense  vacate  the
organism,  in  order  to  allow  another  spirit  to  enter, — and  the  evidence  for
the  reality  of  possession  is  at  the  same  time  so  strong, — that  I  think  that
we  must  argue  back  from  this  spatial  change  as  a  relatively  certain  fact,
and  must  place  a  corresponding  interpretation  on  earlier  phenomena.
Such  an  interpretation,  if  once  admitted,  does  certainly  meet  the  phe-
nomena in  the  way  most  accordant  with  the  subjective  impressions  of  the
various  percipients.

As  we  have  already  repeatedly  found,  it  is  the  bold  evolutionary
hypothesis  which  best  fixes  and  colligates  the  scattered  facts.  We  en-
counter in  these  studies  phenomena  of  degeneration  and  phenomena  of
evolution.  The  degenerative  phenomena  are  explicable  singly  and  in
detail  as  declensions  in  divergent  directions  from  an  existing  level.  The
evolutive  phenomena  point,  on  the  other  hand,  to  new  generalisations ; —
to  powers  previously  unrecognised  towards  which  our  evidence  converges
along  constantly  multiplying  lines.

This  matter  of  psychical  excursion  from  the  organism  ultimately  in-
volves the  extremest  claim  to  novel  faculty  which  has  ever  been  advanced
for  men.  For  it  involves,  as  we  shall  see,  the  claim  to  ecstasy : — to  a
wandering  vision  which  is  not  confined  to  this  earth  or  this  material  world
alone,  but  introduces  the  seer  into  the  spiritual  world  and  among  com-
munities higher  than  any  which  this  planet  knows.  The  discussion  of  this
transportation,  however,  will  be  better  deferred  until  after  the  evidence  for
possession  has  been  laid  before  the  reader  at  some  length.

Continuing,  then,  for  the  present  our  analysis  of  the  idea  of  possession,
we  come  now  to  its  specific  feature, — the  occupation  by  a  spiritual  agency
of  the  entranced  and  partially  vacated  organism.  Here  it  is  that  our
previous  studies  will  do  most  to  clear  our  conceptions.  Instead  of  at
once  leaping  to  the  question  of  what  spirits  in  their  essence  are, — of  what
they  can  do  and  cannot  do, — of  the  antecedent  possibility  of  their  re-entry
into  matter,  and  the  like, — we  must  begin  by  simply  carrying  the  idea
of  telepathy  to  its  furthest  point.  We  must  imagine  telepathy  becoming
as  central  and  as  intense  as  possible ; — and  we  shall  find  that  of  two
diverging  types  of  telepathic  intercourse  which  will  thus  present  them-


908]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        195

selves,  the  one  will   gradually  correspond  to  possession,  and  the  other
to  ecstasy.

907.  But  here  let  us  pause,  and  consider  what  is  the  truest  conception
which  we  are  by  this  time  able  to  form  of  telepathy.     The  word  has  been
a  convenient   one ;  the  central  notion — of  communication  beyond    this
range  of  sense — can  at  any  rate  thus  be  expressed  in  simple  terms.     But
nevertheless  there  has  been  nothing  to  assure  us  that  our  real  compre-
hension of  telepathic  processes  has  got   much  deeper  than  that  verbal
definition.      Our   conception    of  telepathy,    indeed,   to    say   nothing   of
telaesthesia,   has  needed  to   be  broadened  with  each  fresh  stage  of  our
evidence.     That  evidence  at  first  revealed  to  us  certain  transmissions  of
thoughts  and  images  which  suggested  the  passage  of  actual  etherial  vibra-
tions from  brain  to  brain.     Nor  indeed  can  any  one  say  at  any  point  of
our  evidence  that  etherial  vibrations  are  demonstrably  not  concerned  in
the  phenomena.     We  cannot  tell  how  far  from  the  material  world  (to  use
a  crude  phrase)    some  etherial  agency  may  possibly  extend.     But  tele-
pathic phenomena  are  in  fact   soon  seen    to   overpass  any  development
which  imaginative  analogy  can  give  to  the  conception  of  etherial  radiation
from  one  material  point  to  another.

For  from  the  mere  transmission  of  isolated  ideas  or  pictures  there  is,
as  my  readers  know,  a  continuous  progression  to  impressions  and  appari-
tions far  more  persistent  and  complex.  We  encounter  an  influence  which
suggests  no  mere  impact  of  etherial  waves,  but  an  intelligent  and  respon-
sive presence,  resembling  nothing  so  much  as  the  ordinary  human  inter-
course of  persons  in  bodily  nearness.  Such  visions  or  auditions,  inward
or  externalised,  are  indeed  sometimes  felt  to  involve  an  even  closer
contact  of  spirits  than  the  common  intercourse  of  earth  allows.  One
could  hardly  assign  etherial  undulations  as  their  cause  without  assigning
that  same  mechanism  to  all  our  emotions  felt  towards  each  other,  or
even  to  our  control  over  our  own  organisms.

Nay,  more.  There  is — as  I  have  striven  to  show — a  further  pro-
gression from  these  telepathic  intercommunications  between  living  men
to  intercommunications  between  living  men  and  discarnate  spirits.  And
this  new  thesis, — in  every  way  of  vital  importance, — while  practically
solving  one  problem  on  which  I  have  already  dwelt,  opens  also  a  pos-
sibility of  the  determination  of  another  problem,  nowise  accessible  until
now.  In  the  first  place,  we  may  now  rest  assured  that  telepathic  com-
munication is  not  necessarily  propagated  by  vibrations  proceeding  from
an  ordinary  material  brain.  For  the  discarnate  spirit  at  any  rate  has
no  such  brain  from  which  to  start  them.

908.  So  much,  in  the  first  place,  for  the  agenfs  end  of  the  com-
munication.

And  in  the  second  place,  we  now  discern  a  possibility  of  getting
at  the  percipient's  end ;  of  determining  whether  the  telepathic  im-
pact is  received  by  the  brain  or  by  the  spirit  of  the  living  man,


196  CHAPTER    IX  [909

or  by  both  inseparably,  or  sometimes  by  one  and  sometimes   by  the
other.

On  this  problem,  I  say,  the  phenomena  of  automatic  script,  of  trance-
utterance,  of  spirit-possession,  throw  more  of  light  than  we  could  have
ventured  to  hope.

Stated  broadly,  our  trance-phenomena  show  us  to  begin  with  that
several  currents  of  communication  can  pass  at  once  from  discarnate
spirits  to  a  living  man; — and  can  pass  in  very  varying  ways.  For
clearness'  sake  I  will  put  aside  for  the  present  all  cases  where  the
telepathic  impact  takes  an  externalised  or  sensory  form,  and  will  speak
only  of  intellectual  impressions  and  motor  automatisms.

Now  these  may  pass  through  all  grades  of  apparent  centrality.  If  a
man,  awake  and  in  other  respects  fully  self-controlled,  feels  his  hand
impelled  to  scrawl  words  on  a  piece  of  paper,  without  consciousness  of
motor  effort  of  his  own,  the  impulse  does  not  seem  to  him  a  central  one,
although  some  part  of  his  brain  is  presumably  involved.  On  the  other
hand,  a  much  less  conspicuous  invasion  of  his  personality  may  feel  much
more  central ;  as,  for  instance,  a  premonition  of  evil, — an  inward  heavi-
ness which  he  can  scarcely  define.  Well,  the  motor  automatism  goes  on
until  it  reaches  the  point  of  possession  / — that  is  to  say,  until  the  man's
own  consciousness  is  absolutely  in  abeyance,  and  every  part  of  his  body  is
utilised  by  the  invading  spirit  or  spirits.  What  happens  in  such  condi-
tions to  the  man's  ruling  principle — to  his  own  spirit — we  must  consider
presently.  But  so  far  as  his  organism  is  concerned,  the  invasion  seems
complete  :  and  it  indicates  a  power  which  is  indeed  telepathic  in  a  true
sense ; — yet  not  quite  in  the  sense  which  we  originally  attached  to  the
word.  We  first  thought  of  telepathy  as  of  a  communication  between  two
minds,  whereas  what  we  have  here  looks  more  like  a  communication
between  a  mind  and  a  body, — an  external  mind,  in  place  of  the  mind
which  is  accustomed  to  rule  that  particular  body.

There  is  in  such  a  case  no  apparent  communication  between  the
discarnate  mind  and  the  mind  of  the  automatist.  Rather  there  is  a  kind
of  contact  between  the  discarnate  mind  and  the  brain  of  the  automatist,
in  so  far  that  the  discarnate  mind,  pursuing  its  own  ends,  is  helped  up  to
a  certain  point  by  the  accumulated  capacities  of  the  automatist's  brain ;
— and  similarly  is  hindered  by  its  incapacities.

909.     Yet  here  the  most  characteristic  element  of  telepathy,  I  repeat,
seems  to  have  dropped  out  altogether.     There  is  no  perceptible  com-
munion between  the  mind  of  the  entranced  person  and  any  other  mind
whatever.     He  is  possessed,  but  is  kept  in  unconsciousness,  and  never  ;
regains  memory  of  what  his  lips  have  uttered  during  his  trance.

But  let  us  see  whether  we  have  thus  grasped  all  the  trance-phenomena ;  ;
— whether  something  else  may  not  be  going  on,  which  is  more  truly,  more  i
centrally  telepathic.

To  go  back  to  the  earliest  stage  of  telepathic  experience,  we  can  see


910]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       197

well  enough  that  the  experimental  process  might  quite  possibly  involve
two  different  factors.  The  percipient's  mind  must  somehow  receive  the
telepathic  impression ; — and  to  this  reception  we  can  assign  no  definite
physical  correlative  ; — and  also  the  percipient's  motor  or  sensory  centres
must  receive  an  excitation ; — which  excitation  may  be  communicated,  for
aught  we  know,  either  by  his  own  mind  in  the  ordinary  way,  or  by  the
agent's  mind  in  some  direct  way, — which  I  may  call  telergic,  thus  giving  a
more  precise  sense  to  a  word  which  I  long  ago  suggested  as  a  kind  of
correlative  to  telepathic.  That  is  to  say,  there  may  even  in  these  appa-
rently simple  cases  be  first  a  transmission  from  agent  to  percipient  in  the
spiritual  world,  and  then  an  action  on  the  percipient's  physical  brain,
of  the  same  type  as  spirit-possession.  This  action  on  the  physical  brain
may  be  due  either  to  the  percipient's  own  spirit,  or  subliminal  self,  or
else  directly  to  the  agent's  spirit.  For  I  must  repeat  that  the  phenomena
of  possession  seem  to  indicate  that  the  extraneous  spirit  acts  on  a  man's
organism  in  very  much  the  same  way  as  the  man's  own  spirit  habitually
acts  on  it.  One  must  thus  practically  regard  the  body  as  an  instrument
upon  which  a  spirit  plays; — an  ancient  metaphor  which  now  seems
actually  our  nearest  approximation  to  truth.

Proceeding  to  the  case  of  telepathic  or  veridical  apparitions,  we  see
the  same  hints  of  a  double  nature  in  the  process ; — traces  of  two  elements
mingling  in  various  degrees.  At  the  spiritual  end  there  may  be  what  we
have  called  "  clairvoyant  visions," — pictures  manifestly  symbolical,  and  not
located  by  the  observer  in  ordinary  three-dimensional  space.  These  seem
analogous  to  the  views  of  the  spiritual  world  which  the  sensitive  enjoys
during  entrancement.  Then  comes  that  larger  class  of  veridical  apparitions
where  the  figure  seems  to  be  externalised  from  the  percipient's  mind,
some  stimulus  having  actually  been  applied, — whether  by  agent's  or
percipient's  spirit, — to  the  appropriate  brain-centre.  These  cases  of
"  sensory  automatism "  resemble  those  experimental  transferences  of
pictures  of  cards,  &c.  And  beyond  these  again,  on  the  physical  or  rather
the  ultra-physical  side,  come  those  collective  apparitions  which  in  my  view
involve  some  unknown  kind  of  modification  of  a  certain  portion  of  space
not  occupied  by  any  organism, — as  opposed  to  a  modification  of  centres
in  one  special  brain.  Here  comes  in,  as  I  hold,  the  gradual  transition
from  subjective  to  objective,  as  the  portion  of  space  in  question  is  modified
in  a  manner  to  affect  a  larger  and  larger  number  of  percipient  minds.

910.  Now  when  we  proceed  from  these  apparitions  of  the  living  to
apparitions  of  the  departed,  we  find  very  much  the  same  types  persisting
still.  We  find  symbolical  visions  of  departed  persons,  and  of  scenes
among  which  they  seem  to  dwell.  We  find  externalised  apparitions  or
phantasms  of  departed  persons, — indicating  that  some  point  in  the  per-
cipient's brain  has  been  stimulated  by  his  own  or  by  some  other  spirit.
And  finally,  as  has  already  been  said,  we  find  that  in  certain  cases  of
possession  these  two  kinds  of  influence  are  simultaneously  carried  to  an


193  CHAPTER    IX  [911

extreme.  The  percipient  automatist  of  earlier  stages  becomes  no  longer  a
percipient  but  an  automatist  pure  and  simple, — so  far  as  his  body  is
concerned, — for  his  whole  brain — not  one  point  alone — seems  now  to  be
stimulated  and  controlled  by  an  extraneous  spirit,  and  he  is  not  himself
aware  of  what  his  body  writes  or  utters.  And  meantime  his  spirit,
partially  set  free  from  the  body,  may  be  purely  percipient; — may  be
enjoying  that  other  spiritual  form  of  communication  more  completely  than
in  any  type  of  vision  which  our  description  had  hitherto  reached.

911.  This  point  attained,  another  analogy,  already  mentioned,  will  be
at  once  recalled.  There  is  another  class  of  phenomena,  besides  telepathy,
of  which  this  definition  of  possession  at  once  reminds  us.  We  have
dealt  much  with  secondary  personalities, — with  severances  and  alternations
affecting  a  man's  own  spirit,  in  varying  relation  with  his  organism.
Fe"lida  X.'s  developed  secondary  personality,  for  instance  (231  A),  might
be  defined  as  another  fragment — or  another  synthesis — of  Felida's  spirit
acting  upon  her  organism  in  much  the  same  way  as  the  original  fragment
— or  the  primary  synthesis — of  her  spirit  was  wont  to  act  upon  it.

Plainly,  this  analogy  is  close  enough  to  be  likely  to  lead  to  practical
confusion.  On  what  grounds  can  we  base  our  distinctions?  What
justifies  us  in  saying  that  FeUida  X.'s  organism  was  controlled  only  by
another  modification  of  her  own  personality,  but  that  Mrs.  Piper's  is  con-
trolled by  George  Pelham  (959)  ?  May  there  not  be  any  amount  of  self-
suggestion,  colouring  with  the  fictitious  hue  of  all  kinds  of  identities  what
is  in  reality  no  more  than  an  allotropic  form  of  the  entranced  person
himself?  Is  even  the  possession  by  the  new  personality  of  some  frag-
ments of  fresh  knowledge  any  proof  of  spirit-control?  May  not  that
knowledge  be  gained  (as  by  Le"onie  B.,  see  230  A  and  568  A)  clairvoyantly
or  telepathically,  with  no  intervention  of  any  spirit  other  than  of  living
men?

Yes,  indeed,  we  must  reply,  there  is  here  a  danger  of  confusion,  there
is  a  lack  of  any  well-defined  dividing  line.  While  we  must  decide  on
general  rules,  we  must  also  keep  our  minds  open  to  possible  ex-
ceptions.

On  the  negative  side,  indeed,  general  rules  will  carry  us  a  good  way.
We  must  not  allow  ourselves  to  ascribe  to  spirit-control  cases  where  no
new  knowledge  is  shown  in  the  trance  state.  And  this  rule  has  at  once
an  important  consequence, — a  consequence  which  profoundly  modifies  the
antique  idea  of  possession.  I  know  of  no  evidence, — reaching  in  any
way  our  habitual  standard, — either  for  angelic,  for  diabolical,  or  for  hostile
possession.

912.  And  here  comes  the  question  :  What  attitude  are  we  to  assume
to  savage  cases  of  possession  ?  Are  we  to  accept  as  genuine  the  possession
of  the  Esquimaux,  the  Chinaman, — nay,  of  the  Hebrew  of  old  days  ?

Chinese  possession  is  a  good  example,  as  described  in  Dr.  Nevius'
book  (an  account  of  which  by  Professor  Newbold  I  give  in  912  A).


913]        TRANCE,     POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        199

I  agree  with  Professor  Newbold  in  holding  that  no  proof  has  been  shown
that  there  is  more  in  the  Chinese  cases  than  that  hysterical  duplication
of  personality  with  which  we  are  so  familiar  in  France  and  elsewhere.

A  devil  is  not  a  creature  whose  existence  is  independently  known  to
science ;  and  the  accounts  of  the  behaviour  of  the  invading  devils  seems
due  to  mere  self-suggestion.  With  uncivilised  races,  even  more  than
among  our  own  friends,  we  are  bound  to  insist  on  the  rule  that  there  must
be  some  supernormal  knowledge  shown  before  we  may  assume  an
external  influence.  It  may  of  course  be  replied  that  the  character  shown
by  the  "  devils  "  was  fiendish  and  actually  hostile  to  the  possessed  person.
Can  we  suppose  that  the  tormentor  was  actually  a  fraction  of  the
tormented?

I  reply  that  such  a  supposition,  so  far  from  being  absurd,  is  supported
by  well-known  phenomena  both  in  insanity  and  in  mere  hysteria.

Especially  in  the  Middle  Ages, — amid  powerful  self-suggestions  of  evil
and  terror, — did  these  quasi-possessions  reach  an  intensity  and  violence
which  the  calm  and  sceptical  atmosphere  of  the  modern  hospital  checks
and  discredits.  The  devils  with  terrifying  names  which  possessed  Soeur
Angelique  of  Loudun  (see  832  B)  would  at  the  Salpetriere  under  Charcot
in  our  days  have  figured  merely  as  stages  of  "  clounisme  "  and  "  attitudes
passionelles."

And  even  now  these  splits  of  personality  seem  occasionally  to  destroy
all  sympathy  between  the  normal  individual  and  a  divergent  fraction.  No
great  sympathy  was  felt  by  Leonie  II.  for  L6onie  I.  (230  A).  And
Dr.  Morton  Prince's  case  (234  A)  shows  us  the  deepest  and  ablest
of  the  personalities  of  his  "Miss  Beauchamp,"  positively  spiteful  in  its
relation  to  her  main  identity.

Bizarre  though  a  house  thus  divided  against  itself  may  seem,  the
moral  dissidence  is  merely  an  exaggeration  of  the  moral  discontinuity
already  observable  in  the  typical  case  of  Mrs.  Newnham  (849  A).  There
the  secondary  intelligence  was  merely  tricky,  not  malevolent.  But  its
trickiness  was  wholly  alien  from  Mrs.  Newnham's  character, — was  some-
thing, indeed,  which  she  would  have  energetically  repudiated.

913.  It  seems  therefore, — and  the  analogy  of  dreams  points  in  this
direction  also, — that  our  moral  nature  is  as  easily  split  up  as  our  intellec-
tual nature,  and  that  we  cannot  be  any  more  certain  that  the  minor
current  of  personality  which  is  diverted  into  some  new  channel  will
retain  moral  than  that  it  will  retain  intellectual  coherence.

To  return  once  more  to  the  Chinese  devil-possessions.  Dr.  Nevius
asserts,  though  without  adducing  definite  proof,  that  the  possessing  devils
sometimes  showed  supernormal  knowledge.  This  is  a  better  argument
for  their  separate  existence  than  their  fiendish  temper  is ;  but  it  is  not  in
itself  enough.  The  knowledge  does  not  seem  to  have  been  specially
appropriate  to  the  supposed  informing  spirit.  It  seems  as  though  it  may
have  depended  upon  heightened  memory,  with  possibly  some  slight  tele-


200  CHAPTER    IX  [913

pathic  or  telaesthetic  perception.  Heightened  memory  is  thoroughly
characteristic  of  some  hysterical  phases ;  and  even  the  possible  traces  of
telepathy  (although  far  the  most  important  feature  of  the  phenomena,  if
they  really  occurred)  are,  as  we  have  seen,  not  unknown  in  trance  states
(like  Leonie's)  where  there  is  no  indication  of  an  invading  spirit.

Temporary  control  of  the  organism  by  a  widely  divergent  fragment  of
the  personality,  self-suggested  in  some  dream-like  manner  into  hostility  to
the  main  mass  of  the  personality,  and  perhaps  better  able  than  that
normal  personality  to  reach  and  manipulate  certain  stored  impressions, —
or  even  certain  supernormal  influences, — such  will  be  the  formula  to
which  we  shall  reduce  the  invading  Chinese  devil,  as  described  by  Dr.
Nevius, — and  probably  the  great  majority  of  supposed  devil-possessions
of  similar  type.

The  great  majority,  no  doubt,  but  perhaps  not  all.  It  would  indeed
be  matter  for  surprise  if  such  trance-phenomena  as  those  of  Mrs.  Piper
and  other  modern  cases  had  appeared  in  the  world  without  previous
parallel.  Much  more  probable  is  it  that  similar  phenomena  have
occurred  sporadically  from  the  earliest  times, — although  men  have  not
had  enough  of  training  to  analyse  them.

And,  in  fact,  among  the  endless  descriptions  of  trance-phenomena  with
which  travellers  furnish  us,  there  are  many  which  include  points  so
concordant  with  our  recent  observations  that  we  cannot  but  attach  some
weight  to  coincidences  so  wholly  undesigned.1  But  although  this  may  be
admitted,  I  still  maintain  that  the  only  invaders  of  the  organism  who  have
as  yet  made  good  their  title  have  been  human,  and  have  been  friendly.
"The  devils  of  Loudun  "  and  the  like  have,  I  repeat,  entirely  failed  to  sub-
stantiate their  independent  existence.  The  higher  influences  which  inspired
the  "  Martyrs  of  the  Cevennes  "  are  not  at  this  distance  of  time  clearly  separ-
able from  the  inspirations  of  genius.  The  teasing,  mystifying  "  controls  "
whom  we  have  encountered  so  often  in  earlier  stages  of  motor  automatisms
(deceptive  written  messages  and  the  like)  are  perhaps  the  most  puzzling.
They  suggest — nor  can  we  absolutely  disprove  the  suggestion — a  type  of
intelligences  inferior  to  human, — animal-like,  and  perhaps  parasitic.  But
we  have  seen  already  that  for  these  cases  too  a  simpler  explanation  is
forthcoming.  There  is  nothing  in  the  mere  fact  of  the  teasing  annoyance
to  negative  the  supposition  that  these  controls  are  also  fragments — we  may

1  One  important  point  of  similarity  is  the  concurrence  in  some  savage  ceremonies
of  utterance  through  an  invading  spirit  and  travelling  clairvoyance  exercised  meantime
by  the  man  whose  organism  is  thus  invaded.  The  uncouth  spirit  shouts  and  bellows,
presumably  with  the  lungs  of  the  medicine-man,  hidden  from  view  in  profound  slumber.
Then  the  medicine-man  awakes, — and  tells  the  listening  tribe  the  news  which  his  sleep-
wanderings,  among  gods  or  men,  have  won.

If  this  indeed  be  thus,  it  fits  in  strangely  with  the  experiences  of  our  modern  seers, —
with  the  spiritual  interchange  which  takes  place  when  a  discarnate  intelligence  occupies
the  organism  and  meantime  the  incarnate  intelligence,  temporarily  freed,  awakes  to
wider  percipience, — in  this  or  in  another  world.


915]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        201

call  them  splinters — of  the  man's  own  split  personality.     His  will  and
character  may  divide  up  in  manifestation  just  as  his  intellect  may  do.

914.  Thus  far,  then,  our  field  is  clear,  and  with  this  clearance,   I
think,  should  vanish  the  somewhat  grim  associations  which  have  gathered
around  the  word  possession.     Th   what  is   now   to   be    described   there
may  often  be  cause  for  perplexity,  but  I  have  never  seen  cause  for  fear.
Nay,  how  far  remote  from  fear  is  the  resultant  feeling,  the  sequel  will
show.

Assuming  then,  as  I  think  we  at  present  may  assume,  that  we  have  to
deal  only  with  spirits  who  have  been  men  like  ourselves,  and  who  are
still  animated  by  much  the  same  motives  as  those  which  influence  us,  we
may  briefly  consider,  on  similar  analogical  grounds,  what  range  of  spirits
are  likely  to  be  able  to  affect  us,  and  what  difficulties  they  are  likely  to
find  in  doing  so.  Of  course,  actual  experience  alone  can  decide  this ;
but  nevertheless  our  expectations  may  be  usefully  modified  if  we  reflect
beforehand  how  far  such  changes  of  personality  as  we  already  know  can
suggest  to  us  the  limits  of  these  profounder  substitutions.

What,  to  begin  with,  do  we  find  to  be  the  case  as  to  addition  of
faculty  in  alternating  states  ?  How  far  do  such  changes  bring  with  them
unfamiliar  powers  ?

Reference  to  the  recorded  cases  will  show  us  that  existing  faculty  may
be  greatly  quickened  and  exalted.  There  may  be  an  increase  both  in
actual  perception  and  in  power  of  remembering  or  reproducing  what  has
once  been  perceived.  There  may  be  increased  control  over  muscular
action, — as  shown,  for  instance,  in  improved  billiard-playing, — in  the
secondary  state.  But  there  is  little  evidence  of  the  acquisition — telepathy
apart— of  any  actual  mass  of  fresh  knowledge, — such  as  a  new  language,
or  a  stage  of  mathematical  knowledge  unreached  before.  We  shall  not
therefore  be  justified  by  analogy  in  expecting  that  an  external  spirit  con-
trolling an  organism  will  be  able  easily  to  modify  it  in  such  a  way  as  to
produce  speech  in  a  language  previously  unknown.  The  brain  is  used
as  something  between  a  typewriter  and  a  calculating  machine.  German
words,  for  instance,  are  not  mere  combinations  of  letters,  but  specific
formulae ;  they  can  only  seldom  and  with  great  difficulty  be  got  out  of
a  machine  which  has  not  been  previously  fashioned  for  their  production.

915.  Consider,  again,  the  analogies  as  to  memory.     In  the  case  of
alternations  of  personality,  memory  fails   and  changes  in  what   seems  a
quite  capricious  way.     The  gaps  which  then  occur  recall  (as  I  have  said)
the  ecmnesice  or  blank  unrecollected  spaces   which  follow  upon  accidents
to  the  head,  or  upon  crises  of  fever,  when  all  memories  that  belong  to  a
particular  person  or  to  a  particular  period  of  life  are  clean  wiped  out,
other   memories    remaining    intact.       Compare,    again,    the    memory    of
waking  life  which  we  retain  in  dream.     This  too  is  absolutely  capricious ;
—I  may  forget  my  own   name  in  a  dream,  and  yet  remember  perfectly
the  kind  of  chairs  in  my  dining-room.     Or  I  may  remember  the  chairs,


202  CHAPTER    IX  [916

but  locate  them  in  some  one  else's  house.     No  one  can  predict  the  kind
of  confusion  which  may  occur.

916.  We  have  also  the  parallel  of  somnambulic  utterance.     In  talking
with  a  somnambulist,  be  the  somnambulism  natural  or  induced,  we  find
it  hard  to  get  into  continuous  colloquy  on  our  own  subjects.     To  begin
with,  he  probably  will  not  speak  continuously  for  long  together.     He
drops  back  into  a  state  in  which  he  cannot  express  himself  at  all.     And
when  he  does  talk,  he  is  apt  to  talk  only  on  his  own  subjects ; — to  follow
out  his  own  train  of  ideas, — interrupted  rather  than  influenced  by  what
we  say  to  him.     The  difference  of  state  between  waking  and  sleep  is  in
many  ways  hard  to  bridge  over.

We  have  thus  three  parallelisms  which  may  guide  and  limit  our
expectations.  From  the  parallelism  of  possession  with  split  personalities
we  may  infer  that  a  possessing  spirit  is  not  likely  to  be  able  to  inspire
into  the  recipient  brain  ideas  or  words  of  very  unfamiliar  type.  From
the  parallelism  of  possession  with  dream  we  may  infer  that  the  memory
of  the  possessing  spirit  may  be  subject  to  strange  omissions  and  con-
fusions. From  the  parallelism  with  somnambulism  we  may  infer  that
colloquy  between  a  human  observer  and  the  possessing  spirit  is  not
likely  to  be  full  or  free,  but  rather  to  be  hampered  by  difference  of  state,
and  abbreviated  by  the  difficulty  of  maintaining  psychical  contact  for
long  together.

917.  And  here  observe  how  different  is  the  form  our  expectations
will  gradually  assume  from  the  commonplace — or  even  from  the  poetic —
notion  of  what  communication  with  the  dead  is  likely  to  be,  if  it  can  take
place  at  all.     We  now  expect  to  have  to  do,  not  with  a  voice  "  monotonous
and  hollow  like  a  ghost's,  denouncing  judgment  " ; — but  rather  with  a
voice  incoherent  and  fugitive,  like  the  voice  of  a  sleeper  ; — with  memories
broken  and  arbitrary,  like  the  memories  of  a  dream.

And  similarly  as  to  what  the  voice  is  to  tell  us.  We  have  no  reason
for  anticipating  either  "judgment"  or  high  revelation.  We  feel  pretty
sure,  indeed,  that  there  will  be  no  ideas  expressed  which  much  transcend
the  automatist's  habitual  range.  And,  moreover,  on  the  principle  of
continuity  which  has  guided  us  throughout  this  work,  we  cannot  assume
that  the  departed  spirit  has  already  gained  any  vast  increment  of  know-
ledge.

Whatever  his  new  opportunities,  we  feel  that  his  own  capacity  for
learning  may  not  have  undergone  any  sudden  change.  We  can  hardly
at  first  expect  from  him  much  more  than  some  such  account  of  his  new
state  as  may  be  intelligible  to  our  material  conceptions.

This,  I  say,  is  what  we  who  are  prepared  by  these  previous  studies
are  likely  to  expect.  And  I  shall  presently  show  that  this  is  very  much
what  we  actually  find.  The  expectations  of  the  ordinary  public,  however,
as  seen  both  in  fiction,  and  in  the  disappointed  comments  with  which  our
actual  results  are  greeted,  are  of  very  different  scope.


919]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,     ECSTASY        203

918.  There  are  three  strong  currents  of  expectation  of  which  we  find
constant  traces,  but  with  which  the  phenomena  do  not  comply.     The
failure  of  compliance,  indeed,  leads  to  indifference  or  even  to  ridicule.

(i.)  There  is  the  orthodox  or  traditional  line  of  expectation.  This
leads  people  to  expect  an  immediate  vision  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  of  angels
or  devils ;  or  some  marked  and  definite  division  of  good  and  evil  souls ;
— or  at  least  some  foresight  of  the  Last  Judgment.  There  is  not,  however,
so  far  as  I  know,  any  confirmation  at  all,  from  apparitions  or  messages,  of
any  of  these  anticipations.

Perhaps  the  most  striking  part  of  this  negative  evidence  is  the  absence,
in  well-attested  cases,  of  any  mention  of  evil  spirits  other  than  human.1
The  belief  in  devils  has  played  an  enormous  part  in  almost  all  human
creeds,  and  it  was  undoubtedly  strong  in  the  minds  of  many  of  the
persons  with  whom  communication  has  been  held.  Unhappy  figures
have  been  seen ;  regret  and  remorse  have  been  expressed.  But  of  evil
spirits  other  than  human  there  is  no  news  whatever.

Here  is  a  definite  case  in  which  I  venture  to  hope  that  theological
dogma  will  be  insensibly  modified  by  fresh  information,  and  that  an  error
which  has  caused  much  misery  will  cease  to  trouble  mankind.

(2.)  The  strain  of  religious  anticipation  merges  gradually  into  what  I
have  called  the  romantic.  Men  are  tempted  to  think  that  the  apparition
or  message  of  a  departed  friend  is  a  special  privilege  ; — directly  granted
by  Providence,  or  won  in  some  way  by  strength  of  affection.  In  actual
experience  we  find  that  although  affection  may  help  by  inspiring  the  wish
to  communicate,  the  power  is  something  quite  independent  of  affection ; —
something  which  love  may  lack  and  indifference  possess.  Nay,  it  is  by
no  means  certain  that  any  act  of  will  need  be  involved  in  the  apparition,
which  may  very  probably  occur  in  automatic  fashion.

This  has  been  made  a  subject  of  ridicule, — as  though  it  were  a
meaningless  thing  that  B  should  appear  to  A  who  cares  nothing  about
him.  Of  course  the  meaning  belongs  to  the  realm  of  science,  not  of
romance.

(3.)  Again,  there  seems  to  be  a  common  notion  that  messages  from
the  next  world  ought  to  subserve  some  practical  purpose  in  this.  In  fact,
such  a  result  seldom  occurs  :  and  its  absence  has  been  a  frequent  ground
for  doubting  or  deriding  the  message.  Yet  the  coarseness  of  such  a  view
hardly  needs  exposition.

919.  The  foregoing  remarks  may,  I  hope,  have  prepared  the  reader
to  consider  the  problems  of  possession  with  the  same  open-mindedness
which  has  been  needed  for  the  study  of  previous  problems  attacked  in  the
present  work.     I  have    shown   indeed   that   this   new  problem  may  be
regarded  as    the  natural  sequence  or  development  of  the  old.     I  have
shown  that  in  the  movements  or  utterances  of  the  possessed  organism  we
have  motor  automatism  carried  to  its  furthest  stage ;  that  in  the  incursion

1  See  Chapter  VII.,  section  753.


204  CHAPTER    IX  [920

of  the  possessing  spirit  we  have  telepathic  invasion  achieving  its  com-
pletest  victory.  And  I  have  uttered,  too,  an  initial  warning  against
certain  misconceptions  which  have  in  past  time  deterred  men  from
serious  study  of  the  messages  received  through  such  channels.

It  is  time,  then,  to  proceed  to  the  actual  evidence,  to  detail  the
various  proofs  which  we  have  as  yet  collected  to  show  that  such  possession
has  in  fact  occurred.  When  this  shall  have  been  done,  we  must  again
look  round  us; — and  we  shall  find  that  in  describing  this  complete  or
"  mediumistic  "  form  of  trance,  we  have  opened  up  analogies  with  other
forms  of  trance  also,  which  will  be  discerned  as  elements  in  a  continuous
and  mutually  corroborative  chain  of  psychological  facts.

920.  Yet  there  must  needs  be  one  more  delay.     There  is  another
aspect  of  possession  which  must  be  explained  before  we  can  go  further ; —
involving  a  group  of  phenomena  which  have  in  various  ways  done  much,
to  confuse  and  even  to  retard  our  main  inquiry,  but  which,  when  properly
placed  and  understood,  are  seen  to  form  an  inevitable  part  of  any  scheme
which  strives  to  discover  the  influence  of  unseen  agencies  in  the  world  we
know.

In  our  discussion  of  all  telepathic  and  other  supernormal  influence  I
have  thus  far  regarded  it  mainly  from  the  psychological  and  not  from  the
physical  side.  I  have  spoken  as  though  the  field  of  supernormal  action
has  been  always  the  metetherial  world.  Yet  true  as  this  dictum  may  be
in  its  deepest  sense,  it  cannot  represent  the  whole  truth  "  for  beings  such
as  we  are,  in  a  world  like  the  present."  For  us  every  psychological  fact
has  (so  far  as  we  know)  a  physical  side ;  and  metetherial  events,  to  be
perceptible  to  us,  must  somehow  affect  the  world  of  matter.

In  sensory  and  motor  automatisms,  then,  we  see  effects,  supernormally
initiated,  upon  the  world  of  matter.

Imprimis,  of  course,  and  in  ordinary  life  our  own  spirits  (their
existence  once  granted)  affect  our  own  bodies  and  are  our  standing
examples  of  spirit  affecting  matter.  Next,  if  a  man  receives  a  telepathic
impact  from  another  incarnate  spirit  which  causes  him  to  see  a  phantasmal
figure,  that  man's  brain  has,  we  may  suppose,  been  directly  affected  by
his  own  spirit  rather  than  by  the  spirit  of  the  distant  friend.  But  it  may
not  always  be  true  even  in  the  case  of  sensory  automatisms  that  the
distant  spirit  has  made  a  suggestion  merely  to  the  percipient's  spirit  which
the  percipient's  own  spirit  carries  out ;  and  in  motor  automatisms,  as  they
develop  into  possession,  there  are  indications,  as  I  have  already  pointed
out,  that  the  influence  of  the  agent's  spirit  is  telergic  rather  than  telepathic,
and  that  we  have  extraneous  spirits  influencing  the  human  brain  or
organism.  That  is  to  say,  they  are  producing  movements  in  matter; —
even  though  that  matter  be  organised  matter  and  those  movements
molecular.

921.  So  soon  as  this  fact  is  grasped, — and  it  has  not  always  been
grasped  by  those  who  have  striven  to  establish  a  fundamental  difference


922]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       205

between  spiritual  influence  on  our  spirits  and  spiritual  influence  on  the
material  world, — we  shall  naturally  be  prompted  to  inquire  whether  inor-
ganic matter  as  well  as  organic  ever  shows  the  agency  of  extraneous  spirits
upon  it.  The  reply  which  first  suggests  itself  is,  of  course,  in  the  negative.
We  are  constantly  dealing  with  inorganic  matter,  and  no  hypothesis  of
spiritual  influence  exerted  on  such  matter  is  needed  to  explain  our  experi-
ments. But  this  is  a  rough  general  statement,  hardly  likely  to  cover
phenomena  so  rare  and  fugitive  as  many  of  those  with  which  in  this
inquiry  we  deal.  Let  us  begin,  so  to  say,  at  the  other  end ;  not  with  the
broad  experience  of  life,  but  with  the  delicate  and  exceptional  cases  of
possession  of  which  we  have  lately  been  speaking.

Suppose  that  a  discarnate  spirit,  in  temporary  possession  of  a  living
organism,  is  impelling  it  to  motor  automatisms.  Can  we  say  a  priori
what  the  limits  of  such  automatic  movements  of  that  organism  are  likely
to  be,  in  the  same  way  as  we  can  say  what  the  limits  of  any  of  its  voluntary
movements  are  likely  to  be?  May  not  this  extraneous  spirit  get  more
motor  power  out  of  the  organism  than  the  waking  man  himself  can  get
out  of  it?  It  would  not  surprise  us,  for  example,  if  the  movements  in
trance  showed  increased  concentration  ;  if  a  dynamometer  (for  instance)
was  more  forcibly  squeezed  by  the  spirit  acting  through  the  man  than  by
the  man  himself.  Is  there  any  other  way  in  which  one  would  imagine
that  a  spirit  possessing  me  could  use  my  vital  force  more  skilfully  than
I  could  use  it  myself?

I  do  not  know  how  my  will  moves  my  arm ;  but  I  know  by  experience
that  my  will  generally  moves  only  my  arm  and  what  my  arm  can  touch  ; —
whatever  objects  are  actually  in  contact  with  the  "  protoplasmic  skeleton  "
which  represents  the  life  of  my  organism.  Yet  I  can  sometimes  move
objects  not  in  actual  contact,  as  by  melting  them  with  the  heat  or  (in  the
dry  air  of  Colorado)  kindling  them  with  the  electricity,  which  my
fingers  emit.  I  see  no  very  definite  limit  to  this  power.  I  do  not  know
all  the  forms  of  energy  which  my  fingers  might,  under  suitable  training,
emit.

922.  And  now  suppose  that  a  possessing  spirit  can  use  my  organism
more  skilfully  than  I  can.  May  he  not  manage  to  emit  from  that  organism
some  energy  which  can  visibly  move  ponderable  objects  not  actually  in
contact  with  my  flesh?  That  would  be  a  phenomenon  of  possession  not
very  unlike  its  other  phenomena ; — and  it  would  be  telekinesis.

By  that  word  (due  to  M.  Aksakoff )  it  is  convenient  to  describe  what
have  been  called  "  the  physical  phenomena  of  spiritualism,"  as  to  whose
existence  as  a  reality,  and  not  as  a  system  of  fraudulent  pretences,  fierce
controversy  has  raged  for  half  a  century,  and  is  still  raging.

My  own  method  of  dealing  with  this  thorny  subject  in  this  book  will
be  as  follows : — I  have  first  indicated,  in  the  pages  just  preceding,  that
telekinetic  phenomena  can  be  fitted,  with  no  manifest  illogicality,  into
that  conception  of  possession  which  forms  the  most  advanced  point  to


206  CHAPTER    IX  [923

which  our  evidence  leads  us.  I  shall  next  feel  bound  to  utter  an  earnest
warning  against  the  fraud  and  folly  which  have  gathered  with  exceptional
thickness  round  this  special  group  of  phenomena.  I  shall  then  refer  to
certain  phenomena  of  telekinesis,  in  cases  where  they  are  inextricably
mixed  up  with  the  psychological  phenomena  which  I  consider  as  my  more
especial  field.  And  finally,  in  a  long  Appendix  (926  A),  I  shall  set  forth
a  "Scheme  of  Vital  Faculty"  which  will  suggest  some  possible  parallels
between  the  operations  of  the  supraliminal  self,  the  subliminal  self,  and  the
possessing  spirit.

923.  Along  this  line,  as  I  believe,  we  reach  important  truths ; — and
truths  entirely  concordant  with  the  psychological  evidence  of  preceding
chapters.  And  yet  it  is  with  a  half-reluctant  feeling  that  I  admit  the
topic  into  this  work.  So  sorely  needed  here  is  the  word  of  warning  of
which  I  have  spoken ; — so  humiliating  is  the  confession  which  must  be
made  of  the  fraud  and  folly  which  have  made  of  spiritualism  a  kind  of
by-word  in  scientific  circles  ; — which  have  presented  the  very  men  who  have
obtained  the  first  inkling  of  momentous  truths  in  the  guise  of  a  credulous
sect,  preyed  upon  by  a  specially  repulsive  group  of  impostors.  The  fact
is,  that  just  here,  and  not  earlier,  we  reach  the  points  where  the  enormous
issues,  which  have  in  truth  underlain  each  stage  and  step  in  our  long
inquiry,  become  conspicuous  to  the  ordinary  mind.  We  somewhat  sud-
denly pass  from  speculations  and  experiments  on  which  the  public  look
with  the  indifference  which  they  feel  for  philosophy  to  speculations  and
experiments  on  which  they  look  with  the  interest  which  they  feel  in  the
religious  dogmas  which  are  to  decide  their  own  future.  I  do  not  say
that  the  public  interested  has  been  a  very  wide  one.  It  has  indeed
been  wide  enough,  as  I  have  said,  to  foster  and  support  a  particularly
detestable  group  of  charlatans;  but  it  has  not  been  wide  enough,  or
earnest  enough,  to  compile  any  considerable  mass  of  careful  experiment.
I  conjectured  in  a  previous  chapter  that  not  a  hundred  men,  at  the
ordinary  professional  level,  had  up  till  now  made  the  study  of  the
phenomena  of  hypnotism  the  main  intellectual  business  of  their  lives.  If
for  hypnotism  we  substitute  these  "  phenomena  of  spiritualism  "  the  list  of
serious  students  might  probably  be  reduced  to  fifty.

It  is  well  to  point  out  the  scantiness  of  efficient  investigators  of  these
problems,  in  view  of  the  objection  often  made  to  the  lack  of  progress  in
the  difficult  task.  Outside  some  comparatively  small  group  the  number
of  spiritists  rather  resemble  that  multitude  of  indiscriminate  givers  who,
in  the  days  of  haphazard  charity,  encouraged  impostors,  and  brought
philanthropy  into  contempt.

Confronted  with  these  evils,  the  early  members  of  the  Charity
Organisation  Society  had  a  painful  and  invidious  task  to  perform.  They
had  to  repress  where  they  would  fain  have  stimulated ;  to  act  as  detec-
tives where  they  would  fain  have  acted  as  benefactors ;  to  pass  judgment
on  men  whose  charitable  impulses  were  as  pure  and  ardent  as  their  own.


925]        TRANCE,     POSSESSION,     ECSTASY        207

Only  through  the  seeming  sternness  of  such  training  could  the  public  learn
to  help  the  miserable  without  fostering  the  impostors.

The  parallel  at  which  I  am  pointing  here  is  obvious  enough ;  but  in
the  realm  of  psychical  research — as  indeed  in  the  realm  of  almsgiving —
that  needed  lesson  has  as  yet  been  very  imperfectly  acquired.  I  propose
to  indicate  in  Appendices  (923  A  and  B)  some  of  the  work  which  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  done  in  exposing  and  guarding  against
fraud  and  credulity ;  and  I  further  refer  my  readers  to  a  forthcoming  book
by  my  friend  and  colleague,  Mr.  Podmore,  in  which  the  imposture  which
has  dogged  so-called  "  Modern  Spiritualism  "  from  its  inception  will  be
exposed  with  a  distinctness  which  needs  must  be  salutary ; — even  though
in  a  history  so  complex  it  be  always  possible  that  more  intimate  knowledge
might  have  modified  judgment  on  one  or  other  detail.1

924.  This  serious  warning  given,  I  may  pursue  my  task  of  describing
that  most  interesting   of  supernormal    phenomena   which    we   term  Pos-
session ; — a  phenomenon  to  which  the  telekinesis  which  has  often  accom-
panied it  lends   an  additional  element  of  attractive  mystery.     It  has,  of
course,  been  that  interest,  that  mystery,  which  has  attracted  the  fraudulent
imitations  of  which   I  have  spoken ; — and  which  it  would  not  have  been
worth  while  to  contrive  except  for  some  phenomena  thus  strongly  mani-
festing spiritual  presence  and  spiritual  power.

This  persistent  simulation  of  telekinesis  has,  naturally  enough,  in-
spired persistent  doubt  as  to  its  genuine  occurrence  even  in  cases  where
simulation  has  been  carefully  guarded  against,  or  is  antecedently  improb-
able. Important  though  the  phenomenon  is,  it  is  not  so  intimately  linked
with  my  own  general  thesis  in  this  work  as  to  render  it  needful  for  me  to
review  its  whole  history  in  detail.  I  deal  with  it  only  where  it  comes
immediately  before  me  as  an  element  in  spirit-possession ; — especially
noticeable  in  the  two  important  cases  of  D.  D.  Home  and  of  W.
Stainton  Moses.

And  recognising,  as  I  do,  that  telekinesis — like  the  simpler  motor
automatisms  of  which  it  forms  the  extreme  term — reaches  in  cases  of
possession  its  maximum  intensity,  I  feel  bound  (if  it  were  only  for  the
sake  of  analogical  completeness)  to  show  that,  like  other  motor  auto-
matisms, telekinesis  has  appeared  occasionally  at  earlier  stages,  although
needing  the  free  play  of  a  possessed  organism  to  develop  itself  to  the  full.

925.  It  is  not,  indeed,  necessary  to  suppose  that  all  telekinesis  is
due  to  spiritual  action.     Rather  we    may  begin    by    regarding    it    as    a
form  of  motor  automatism,   initiated  by  the   subliminal  self.     I   believe
that   there   is   sometimes   an    element   of  telekinesis  in    such    common
phenomena  as  table-tilting  and  automatic  writing  with  planchette  or  even
with  pencil  (eg.  in  Mr.  Wedgwood's  and  Mrs.   Newnham's  experiments,
see  861,  862,  and  849  A).

1  Modern  Spiritualism  ;   a  History  and  a  Criticism,  by  Frank  Podmore  (Methuen
and  Co.,  London,  1902).


208  CHAPTER    IX  [926

We  cannot,  of  course,  expect  that  any  such  slight  and  obscure  admix-
ture of  telekinesis  can  be  sifted  out  from  an  act  of  motor  automatism
in  any  evidential  form.  But  from  my  point  of*  view  this  kind  of
evidential  difficulty  is  pretty  sure  to  occur,  from  the  very  nature  of  the
supernormal  movement.  If  that  movement  could  be  started  with  equal
ease  from  any  given  point  in  space,  and  in  any  direction,  we  might  fairly
expect  that  such  points  would  be  chosen,  and  such  movements  performed,
as  gave  the  best  evidence  of  the  movement's  independence  of  ordinary
human  agency.  But  the  telekinetic  force,  in  my  view,  is  generally  (I  do
not  say  always)  a  mere  extension  to  a  short  distance  from  the  sensitive's
Organism  of  a  small  part  of  his  ordinary  muscular  power.  It  even  seems
tg  tend  to  simulate  that  ordinary  action ; — much  as  other  supernormal
exercises  of  faculty  follow,  so  far  as  they  can,  the  modes  in  which  normal
faculty  operates.

So  gradual,  so  inconspicuous,  are  the  beginnings  of  telekinesis ; —
which  presently  develop,  no  doubt,  into  something  which  we  can  no
longer  ascribe  to  any  hyperboulic  activities  of  the  subliminal  self.  It
develops,  indeed,  in  two  directions, — into  messages  and  into  marvels.
Genuine  raps,  or  percussive  sounds,  are  rare  (see  925  A),  nor  is  it  possible
by  mere  description  of  the  noises  to  prove  their  genuineness  in  any  given
case,  unmistakable  and  inimitable  though  they  are  when  actually  heard.
But  with  one  sensitive  known  intimately  to  me, — the  lady  described  as
Miss  A.  (see  859), — raps  have  occurred  (as  I  know  both  by  actually
hearing  them  and  by  abundant  attestation)  as  a  means  of  attracting
attention  under  many  circumstances,  and  of  conveying  advice  and  infor-
mation of  all  kinds ; — from  such  dicta  as  subliminal  perception  might
furnish  up  to  evidential  messages  ascribed  to  deceased  persons.

Midway  between  the  raps  which  spell  out  messages  and  the  sheer
marvels  which  may  be  performed  "  to  show  spirit-power  "  come  the
various  displacements  of  objects,  &c.,  which  are  attested  as  coinciding
(like  veridical  phantasms)  with  moments  of  death  or  crisis  (see,  e.g.,  case
III.  in  716  C), — or  merely  as  testifying  to  presences, — as  of  a  dear  friend
recently  dead.

926.  Thus  much  it  was  needful  to  say  in  order  to  make  certain
cases  of  possession  soon  to  be  cited  intelligible  to  the  reader,  but  I
should  not  have  deferred  my  mention  of  telekinesis  to  this  point  in  my
book  had  I  intended  to  deal  with  these  physical  phenomena  as  fully  as
with  the  psychical  phenomena  which  I  endeavour  to  expound  and  in
some  measure  to  connect  and  correlate.

While  believing  absolutely  in  the  occurrence  of  telekinetic  pheno-
mena, I  yet  hold  that  it  would  be  premature  to  press  them  upon  my
reader's  belief,  or  to  introduce  them  as  an  integral  part  of  my  general
expository  scheme.  From  one  point  of  view,  their  detailed  establishment,
as  against  the  theory  of  fraud,  demands  an  expert  knowledge  of  conjuring
and  other  arts  which  I  cannot  claim  to  possess.  From  another  point  of


927]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       209

view,  their  right  comprehension  must  depend  upon  a  knowledge  of  the
relations  between  matter  and  ether  such  as  is  now  only  dimly  adum-
brated by  the  most  recent  discoveries ; — for  instance,  discoveries  as  to
previously  unsuspected  forms  of  radiation.

In  a  long  Appendix,  viz.,  "Scheme  of  Vital  Faculty"  (926  A)—
originally  written  with  reference  to  the  manifestations  through  Mr.  Stainton
Moses — I  have  tried  to  prepare  the  way  for  future  inquiries ;  to  indicate  in
what  directions  a  better  equipped  exploration  may  hereafter  reap  rich
reward.  Even  that  tentative  sketch,  perhaps,  may  have  been  too  am-
bitious for  my  powers  in  the  present  state  not  only  of  my  own,  but  of
human  knowledge ;  and  in  the  text  of  this  chapter  I  shall  allude  to
telekinetic  phenomena  only  where  unavoidable, — owing  to  their  inmixture
into  phenomena  more  directly  psychological, — and  in  the  tone  of  the
historian  rather  than  of  the  scientific  critic.  As  a  matter  of  history  I
shall  give  in  926  B  references  to  the  best  extant  accounts  of  telekinetic
phenomena.

*  *  *  *  *  *  i

927.  The  way  has  now  been  so  far  cleared  for  our  cases  of  Possession
that  at  least  the  principal  phenomena  claimed  have  been  (I  hope)  made
intelligible,  and  shown  to  be  concordant  with  other  phenomena  already
described  and  attested.  It  will  be  best,  however,  to  consider  first  some
of  the  more  rudimentary  cases  before  going  on  to  our  own  special  instances
of  possession, — those  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  or  Mrs.  Piper.

I  have  reason  to  believe,  both  from  what  I  have  witnessed  myself  and
from  the  reports  of  others,  that  occasional  phenomena  of  ecstasy  or  posses-
sion are  not  infrequent  in  some  family  circles  or  groups  of  intimate  friends
(see,  e.g.,  the  case  of  Mr.  O.  in  927  A).

The  persons  concerned,  however,  generally  do  not  realise  the  import-
ance of  accurate  records ;  in  some  cases  the  manifestations  are  sporadic
in  character  and  scarcely  susceptible  of  any  detailed  investigation ;  and
often  the  very  occurrence  of  the  phenomena  has  been  sedulously  con-
cealed from  all  outside  the  circle.  Sometimes  the  sacredness  of  the  mani-
festations has  been  pleaded  as  a  sufficient  reason  for  their  concealment,
or  the  tendency  to  trance  on  the  part  of  the  "  sensitive  "  has  been  regarded
as  a  calamity,  to  be  checked  and  prohibited  as  though  it  were  a  distressing
disease.

There  are  further  occasional  cases  of  the  frankly  "  mediumistic  "  type
(of  which  I  give  examples  in  927  B  and  C).  But  the  problems  involved
are  so  complicated,  and  the  main  question — that  of  the  agency  of  dis-
carnate  spirits  in  the  matter — is  so  difficult  of  determination,  that  no

1  The  asterisks  indicate  the  end  of  the  part  of  this  Chapter  which  was  consecutively
composed  by  the  author.  See  Preface.  The  rest  of  the  Chapter  consists  chiefly  of
fragments  written  by  him  at  different  times.  In  putting  these  together,  the  Editors  felt
it  desirable  to  preserve  as  much  as  possible  of  the  original  form  and  to  present  as  much
of  the  material  as  was  complete  in  itself,  at  the  risk  of  some  lack  of  transition  and  even
of  a  certain  degree  of  repetition.

VOL.    II.  O


210  CHAPTER    IX  [928

collection  of  such  fragmentary  material  could  be  of  much  service  to  us  in
our  present  inquiry  unless  perhaps  to  indicate  that  the  fully-developed
cases  belong,  after  all,  to  a  not  uncommon  type.

928.  We  have  already  seen  that  there  is  no  great  gulf  between  the
sudden  incursions,  the  rapid  messages  of  the  dead,  with  which  we  are
already  familiar,  and  incursions  so  intimate,  messages  so  prolonged,  as  to
lay  claim  to  a  name  more  descriptive  than  that  of  motor  automatisms.

And  similarly  no  line  of  absolute  separation  can  be  drawn  between
the  brief  psychical  excursions  previously  described,  and  those  more  pro-
longed excursions  of  the  spirit  which  I  would  group  under  the  name  of
ecstasy.

In  the  earlier  part  of  this  book  I  have  naturally  dwelt  rather  on  the
evidence  for  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge  than  on  the  methods
of  such  acquisition,  and  my  present  discussion  must  needs  be  restricted  to
a  certain  extent  in  the  same  way.  We  must,  however,  attempt  some  pro-
visional scheme  of  classification,  though  recognising  that  the  difficulties  of
interpretation  which  I  pointed  out  in  Chapter  IV.  (section  419),  when
endeavouring  to  distinguish  between  telepathy  and  telaesthesia,  meet  us
again  in  dealing  with  possession  and  ecstasy.  We  may  not,  that  is,  be
able  to  say,  as  regards  a  particular  manifestation,  whether  it  is  an  instance
of  incipient  possession,  or  incipient  ecstasy,  or  even  whether  the  organism
is  being  "  controlled  "  directly  by  some  extraneous  spirit  or  by  its  own
incarnate  spirit.  It  is  from  the  extreme  cases  that  we  form  our  categories.
But  now  that  we  have  reached  some  conception  of  what  is  involved  in
ecstasy  and  possession,  we  can  interpret  some  earlier  cases  in  this  new
light.  Such  experiences,  for  instance,  as  those  of  Mr.  Mamtchitch  (714),
Miss  Conley  (721),  Madame  X.  (833),  and  Miss  A.  (859  A),  suggest  a
close  kinship  to  the  more  developed  cases  of  Mr.  Moses  and  Mrs.  Piper.

929.  In  other   cases    it    may  be    clear  that  no  control  of  any  dis-
carnate  spirit  is  involved,  but  there  seems  to  be  something  like  incipient
possession  by  the  subliminal  self  or  incarnate    spirit.     From  this  point
of  view  the  following  incident — recorded,  it   will    be    observed,  on  the
day  of  its  occurrence — is  of  undoubted  psychological  interest.     If  it  is
not  a  case  of  thought-transference  from  Miss  C.  to  Mrs.  Luther  (possibly
between  their  subliminal  selves  during  sleep),  we  must  assume  that  a
very  remarkable  recrudescence  of  latent  memory  occurred  to  the  latter
independently,  at  the  same  time  that  a  similar  though  less  remarkable
revival  of  memory  occurred  to  the  former.     But  I  introduce  the  case  here
simply  as  suggestive  of  the  momentary  domination  of  the  subliminal  over
the  supraliminal  self.     The  account  is  quoted  from  \\iQjournal  S.P.R.,
vol.  v.  p.  253.     Professor  Luther  writes  : —

HARTFORD,  CONN.,  March  2nd,  1892.

.  .  .  Miss  C.  is  often  in  my  study  and  consults  my  books  freely,  so  that
her  dream  was  not  remarkable.  The  dream  of  Mrs.  L.  (my  wife)  was  also


930]       TRANCE,     POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       211

ordinary  in  character.  The  coincidence  in  time  of  the  dreams  may  have
been  merely  a  coincidence.  But  that  after  these  occurrences  Mrs.  L.  should
suddenly,  without  the  least  premeditation  and  without  hesitation,  take  the
right  book  and  open  it  at  the  right  page  with  the  certainty  of  a  somnambulist,
seems  to  me  strange.  .  .  .

These  events  took  place  yesterday,  last  night,  and  this  morning.

F.  S.  LUTHER
(Prof.  Math.,  Trinity  College).

Mrs.  L.  and  Miss  C.  live  at  the  same  hotel  and  meet  daily.  Miss  C.  is
engaged  in  writing  an  essay  upon  Emerson,  and  expresses  to  Mrs.  L.  her  wish
to  obtain  some  particulars  as  to  Emerson's  private  life.  Mrs.  L.  regrets  that
she  has  no  book  treating  of  the  subject.  During  the  night  following  this  con-
versation Mrs.  L.  dreams  of  handing  Miss  C.  a  book  containing  an  article  such
as  is  desired,  and  Miss  C.  dreams  of  telling  Mrs.  L.  that  she  had  procured  just
the  information  which  she  had  been  looking  for.  Each  lady  relates  to  the  other
her  dream  when  they  meet  at  breakfast  the  next  morning.  Mrs.  L.  returns  to
her  room,  and,  while  certainly  not  consciously  thinking  of  Emerson,  suddenly
finds  in  her  mind  the  thought,  "There  is  the  book  which  Miss  C.  needs."  She
goes  directly  to  a  bookcase,  takes  down  vol.  xvii.  of  the  Century  Magazine,  and
opens  immediately  at  the  article,  "  The  Homes  and  Haunts  of  Emerson."
Mrs.  L.  had  undoubtedly  read  this  article  in  1879,  but  she  had  never  studied
Emerson  or  his  works,  nor  had  she  made  any  special  effort  to  assist  Miss  C.  in
her  search,  though  feeling  a  friend's  interest  in  the  proposed  essay.

After  receiving  the  book  and  hearing  how  it  was  selected,  Miss  C.  relates
her  dream  more  fully,  it  appearing  that  she  had  seemed  to  be  standing  in  front
of  Mrs.  L.'s  shelves  with  a  large,  illustrated  book  in  her  hands,  and  that  in  the
book  was  something  about  Emerson.

Still  later  it  is  found  that  Miss  C.  had  actually  noticed  the  article  in  question
while  actually  in  the  position  reproduced  in  her  dream.  This,  however,  had
happened  about  a  month  previous  to  the  events  just  narrated,  and  before  she
had  thought  of  looking  up  authorities  as  to  Emerson,  so  that  she  had  entirely
forgotten  the  occurrence  and  the  article.  Neither  did  she,  at  that  time,  call
Mrs.  L.'s  attention  to  the  article,  or  mention  Emerson.

According  to  the  best  information  attainable,  Miss  C.  was  not  thinking  of
her  essay  at  the  time  when  Mrs.  L.  felt  the  sudden  impulse  to  take  down  a
certain  book.  And  perhaps  it  should  be  added  that  the  volume  is  one  of  a
complete  set  of  the  Century  variously  disposed  upon  Mrs.  L.'s  shelves.

[This  account  is  signed  by  Professor  Luther,  Mrs.  L.,  and  Miss  C.]

930.  Of  special  interest  are  a  few  cases  where  the  actual  mechanism
of  some  brief  communication  from  the  spiritual  world  seems  to  suggest  and
lead  up  to  the  mechanism  which  we  shall  afterwards  describe  either  as
ecstasy  or  as  possession.

I  give  first  a  case  which  suggests  such  knowledge  as  may  be  learnt  in
ecstasy  ; — as  though  a  message  had  been  communicated  to  a  sleeper  during
some  brief  excursion  into  the  spiritual  world, — which  message  was  remem-
bered for  a  few  moments,  in  symbolic  form,  and  then  rapidly  forgotten,  as
the  sleeper  returned  fully  into  the  normal  waking  state.  What  is  to  be


212  CHAPTER    IX  [930

noted  is  that  the  personality  of  sleep  to  which  I  attribute  the  spiritual
excursion,  seems  at  first  to  have  been  "  controlling "  the  awakened
organism.  In  other  words,  Professor  Thoulet  was  partially  entranced  or
possessed  by  his  own  spirit  or  subliminal  self.

I  quote  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  503-5,  a  translation  of
the  original  account  of  the  case  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques
(September— October  1891).

Professor  Thoulet  writes  to  Professor  Richet  as  follows  : —

April  i;M,  1891.

.  .  .  During  the  summer  of  1867,  I  was  officially  the  assistant,  but  in  reality
the  friend,  in  spite  of  difference  in  age,  of  M.  F.,  a  former  officer  in  the  navy,
who  had  gone  into  business.  We  were  trying  to  set  on  foot  again  the  ex-
ploitation of  an  old  sulphur  mine  at  Rivanazzaro,  near  Voghera,  in  Piedmont,
which  had  been  long  abandoned  on  account  of  a  falling  in.

We  occupied  the  same  rooms,  and  our  relations  were  those  of  father  and
son,  or  of  elder  and  younger  brother.  .  .  .

I  knew  that  Madame  F.,  who  lived  at  Toulon,  and  with  whom  I  was  slightly
acquainted,  would  soon  be  confined.  I  cannot  say  I  was  indifferent  about  this
fact,  for  it  concerned  M.  F. ;  but  it  certainly  caused  me  no  profound  emotion ;
it  was  a  second  child,  all  was  going  well,  and  M.  F.  was  not  anxious.  I  myself
was  well  and  calm.  It  is  true  that  a  few  days  before,  in  Burgundy,  my  mother
had  fallen  out  of  a  carriage ;  but  the  fall  had  no  bad  consequences,  and  the
letter  which  informed  me  of  it  also  told  me  there  was  no  harm  done.

M.  F.  and  I  slept  in  adjoining  rooms,  and  as  it  was  hot  we  left  the  door
between  them  open.  One  morning  I  sprang  suddenly  out  of  bed,  crossed  my
room,  entered  that  of  M.  F.,  and  awakened  him  by  crying  out,  "  You  have  just
got  a  little  girl;  the  telegram  says  .  .  ."  Upon  this  I  began  to  read  the
telegram.  M.  F.  sat  up  and  listened  ;  but  all  at  once  I  understood  that  I  had
been  asleep,  and  that  consequently  my  telegram  was  only  a  dream,  not  to  be
believed ;  and  then,  at  the  same  time,  this  telegram  which  was  somehow  in  my
hand  and  of  which  I  had  read  about  three  lines  aloud,  word  for  word,  seemed
to  withdraw  from  my  eyes  as  if  some  one  were  carrying  it  off  open  ;  the  words
disappeared,  though  their  image  still  remained ;  those  which  I  had  pronounced
remained  in  my  memory,  while  the  rest  of  the  telegram  was  only  zform.

I  stammered  something;  M.  F.  got  up  and  led  me  into  the  dining-room,
and  made  me  write  down  the  words  I  had  pronounced  ;  when  I  came  to  the
lines  which,  though  they  had  disappeared  from  my  memory,  still  remained
pictured  in  my  eye,  I  replaced  them  by  dots,  making  a  sort  of  drawing  of  them.
Remark  that  the  telegram  was  not  written  in  common  terms;  there  were  about
six  lines  of  it,  and  I  had  read  more  than  two  of  them.  Then,  becoming  aware
of  our  rather  incorrect  costume,  M.  F.  and  I  began  to  laugh,  and  went  back  to
our  beds.

Two  or  three  days  after  I  left  for  Tore'e  ;  I  tried  in  vain  to  remember  the
rest  of  the  telegram  ;  I  went  on  to  Turin,  and  eight  or  ten  days  after  my  dream
I  received  the  following  telegram  from  M.  F.,  "  Come  directly,  you  were  right."

I  returned  to  Rivanazzaro  and  M.  F.  showed  me  a  telegram  which  he  had
received  the  evening  before ;  I  recognised  it  as  the  one  I  had  seen  in  my
dream ;  the  beginning  was  exactly  what  I  had  written,  and  the  end,  which  was
exactly  like  my  drawing,  enabled  me  to  read  again  the  words  which  I  saw  again.


931]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        213

Please  remark  that  the  confinement  had  taken  place  the  evening  before,  and
therefore  the  fact  was  not  that  I,  being  in  Italy,  had  seen  a  telegram  which
already  existed  in  France — this  I  might  with  some  difficulty  have  understood —
but  that  I  had  seen  it  ten  days  before  it  existed  or  could  have  existed ;  since
the  event  it  announced  had  not  yet  taken  place.  I  have  turned  this  phenomenon
over  in  my  memory  and  reasoned  about  it  many  times,  trying  to  explain  it,  to
connect  it  with  something,  with  a  previous  conversation,  with  some  mental
tension,  with  an  analogy,  a  wish, — and  all  in  vain.  M.  F.  is  dead,  and  the
paper  I  wrote  has  disappeared.  If  I  were  called  before  a  court  of  justice  about
it,  I  could  not  furnish  the  shadow  of  a  material  proof,  and  again  the  two
personalities  which  exist  in  me,  the  animal  and  the  savant,  have  disputed  on
this  subject  so  often  that  sometimes  I  doubt  it  myself.  However,  the  animal,
obstinate  as  an  animal  usually  is,  repeats  incessantly  that  I  have  seen,  and  I
have  read,  and  it  is  useless  for  me  to  tell  myself  that  if  any  one  else  told  me
such  a  story  I  should  not  believe  it.  I  am  obliged  to  admit  that  it  happened.

J.  THOULET,
Professor  at  the  Faculte  des  Sciences  at  Nancy,

Professor  Richet  adds  : —

M.  Thoulet  has  lately  confirmed  all  the  details  contained  in  his  letter.  He
has  no  longer  any  written  trace  of  this  old  story,  but  the  recollection  of  it  is
perfectly  clear.  He  assured  me  that  he  had  seen  and  read  the  telegram  like  a
real  object.  .  .  .

931.  Next  I  quote  a  case  where  a  kind  of  conversation  is  indicated
between  the  sleeper  and  some  communicating  spirit ; — recalling  the  scraps
of  conversation  sometimes  overheard  (as  it  were)  between  Mrs.  Piper  and
some  "control"  when  she  is  in  the  act  of  awaking  from  trance.  These
moments  "  between  two  worlds  "  are  often,  as  will  be  seen,  of  high  signi-
ficance. In  the  case  here  cited  we  seem  to  see  Mr.  Goodall  at  first
misapprehending  a  message,  and  himself  automatically  uttering  the
misapprehension,  and  then  receiving  the  needed  correction  from  his
invisible  interlocutor.

From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  453-5.  The  following  narrative
was  communicated  by  Mr.  Edward  A.  Goodall,  of  the  Royal  Society
of  Painters  in  Water  Colours,  London  : —

May  1888.

At  Midsummer,  1869, 1  left  London  for  Naples.  The  heat  being  excessive,
people  were  leaving  for  Ischia,  and  I  thought  it  best  to  go  there  myself.

Crossing  by  steamer,  I  slept  one  night  at  Casamicciola,  on  the  coast,  and
walked  next  morning  into  the  town  of  Ischia.

Liking  the  hotel  there  better  than  my  quarters  of  the  previous  night,  I
fetched  my  small  amount  of  luggage  by  help  of  a  man,  who  returned  with  me
on  foot  beside  an  animal  which  I  rode — one  of  the  fine,  sure-footed,  big
donkeys  of  the  country.  Arrived  at  the  hotel,  and  while  sitting  perfectly  still
in  my  saddle  talking  to  the  landlady,  the  donkey  went  down  upon  his  knees  as
if  he  had  been  shot  or  struck  by  lightning,  throwing  me  over  his  head  upon  the
lava  pavement.  In  endeavouring  to  save  myself  my  right  hand  was  badly
injured.  It  soon  became  much  swollen  and  very  painful.  A  Neapolitan


214  CHAPTER    IX  [932

doctor  on  the  spot  said  no  bones  were  broken,  but  perfect  rest  would  be
needful,  with  my  arm  in  a  sling.  Sketching,  of  course,  was  impossible,  and
with  neither  books,  newspapers,  nor  letters  I  felt  my  inactivity  keenly.

It  must  have  been  on  my  third  or  fourth  night,  and  about  the  middle  of  it,
when  I  awoke,  as  it  seemed  at  the  sound  of  my  own  voice,  saying,  "  I  know  I
have  lost  my  dearest  little  May."  Another  voice,  which  I  in  no  way  recog-
nised, answered,  "  No,  not  May,  but  your  youngest  boy."

The  distinctness  and  solemnity  of  the  voice  made  such  a  distressing  impres-
sion upon  me  that  I  slept  no  more.  I  got  up  at  daybreak,  and  went  out,
noticing  for  the  first  time  telegraph-poles  and  wires.

Without  delay  I  communicated  with  the  postmaster  at  Naples,  and  by  next
boat  received  two  letters  from  home.  I  opened  them  according  to  dates  out-
side. The  first  told  me  that  my  youngest  boy  was  taken  suddenly  ill;  the
second,  that  he  was  dead.

Neither  on  his  account  nor  on  that  of  any  of  my  family  had  I  any  cause  for
uneasiness.  All  were  quite  well  on  my  taking  leave  of  them  so  lately.  My
impression  ever  since  has  been  that  the  time  of  the  death  coincided  as  nearly
as  we  could  judge  with  the  time  of  my  accident.1

In  writing  to  Mrs.  Goodall,  I  called  the  incident  of  the  voice  a  dream,  as
less  likely  perhaps  to  disturb  her  than  the  details  which  I  gave  on  reaching
home,  and  which  I  have  now  repeated.

My  letters  happen  to  have  been  preserved.

I  have  never  had  any  hallucination  of  any  kind,  nor  am  I  in  the  habit  of
talking  in  my  sleep.  I  do  remember  once  waking  with  some  words  of  mere
nonsense  upon  my  lips,  but  the  experience  of  the  voice  speaking  to  me  was
absolutely  unique.  EDWARD  A.  GOODALL.

Extracts  from  letters  to  Mrs.  E.  A.  Goodall  from  Ischia : —

Wednesday,  August  nth,  1869.

The  postman  brought  me  two  letters  containing  sad  news  indeed.  Poor
little  Percy.  I  dreamt  some  nights  since  the  poor  little  fellow  was  taken  from
us.  ...

August  1 4t/t.

I  did  not  tell  you,  dear,  the  particulars  of  my  dream  about  poor  little  Percy.

I  had  been  for  several  days  very  fidgety  and  wretched  at  getting  no  letters
from  home,  and  had  gone  to  bed  in  worse  spirits  than  usual,  and  in  my  dream
I  fancied  I  said  :  "  I  have  lost  my  dearest  little  May."  A  strange  voice  seemed
to  say:  "No,  not  May,  but  your  youngest  boy,"  not  mentioning  his  name.  .  .  .

Mr.  Goodall  gave  me  verbally  a  concordant  account  of  the  affair,
and  several  members  of  his  family,  who  were  present  at  our  interview,
recollected  the  strong  impression  made  on  him  and  them  at  the  time.

932.  The  next  case  is  precisely  a  miniature  case  of  possession.
(Compare  Mr.  Cameron  Grant's  experience,  in  736  B.)

From  they^Tvm/S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  278-280.

"The  following  account"  (writes  Dr.  Hodgson)  "was  sent  to  me  by
Mr.  John  E.  Wilkie  at  the  suggestion  of  one  of  our  American  members

1  Mr.  Goodall  thinks  that  the  mule's  sudden  fall,  otherwise  unexplainable,  may  have
been  due  to  terror  at  some  apparition  of  the  dying  child.


932]         TRANCE,    POSSESSION,   ECSTASY        215

who   is  well  known  to  me,  and  who  speaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  Mr.
VVilkie  as  a  witness  :  " —

WASHINGTON,  D.C.,  April  nth,  1898.

In  October  1895,  while  living  in  London,  England,  I  was  attacked  by
bronchitis  in  rather  a  severe  form,  and  on  the  advice  of  my  physician,  Dr.
Oscar  C.  De  Wolf,  went  to  his  residence  in  6  Grenville  Place,  Cromwell  Road,
•where  I  could  be  under  his  immediate  care.  For  two  days  I  was  confined  to
my  bed,  and  about  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  third  day,  feeling  some-
what better,  I  partially  dressed  myself,  slipped  on  a  heavy  bath  robe,  and  went
down  to  the  sitting-room  on  the  main  floor,  where  my  friend,  the  doctor,
usually  spent  a  part  of  the  afternoon  in  reading.  A  steamer  chair  was  placed
before  the  fire  by  one  of  the  servants,  and  I  was  made  comfortable  with  pillows.
The  doctor  was  present,  and  sat  immediately  behind  me  reading.  I  dropped
off  into  a  light  doze,  and  slept  for  perhaps  thirty  minutes.  Suddenly  I  became
conscious  of  the  fact  that  I  was  about  to  awaken  ;  I  was  in  a  condition  where  I
was  neither  awake  nor  asleep.  I  realised  fully  that  I  had  been  asleep,  and  I
was  equally  conscious  of  the  fact  that  I  was  not  wide  awake.  While  in  this
peculiar  mental  condition  I  suddenly  said  to  myself  :  "  Wait  a  minute.  Here
is  a  message  for  the  doctor."  At  the  moment  I  fancied  that  I  had  upon  my  lap
a  pad  of  paper,  and  I  thought  I  wrote  upon  this  pad  with  a  pencil  the  following
words  : —

"  DEAR  DOCTOR, — Do  you  remember  Katy  McGuire,  who  used  to  live  with
you  in  Chester?  She  died  in  1872.  She  hopes  you  are  having  a  good  time  in
London."

Instantly  thereafter  I  found  myself  wide  awake,  felt  no  surprise  at  not
finding  the  pad  of  paper  on  my  knee,  because  I  then  realised  that  that  was
but  the  hallucination  of  a  dream,  but  impressed  with  that  feature  of  my  thought
which  related  to  the  message,  I  partly  turned  my  head,  and,  speaking  over  my
shoulder  to  the  doctor,  said  :  "  Doctor,  I  have  a  message  for  you."

The  doctor  looked  up  from  the  British  Medical  Journal  which  he  was  read-
ing, and  said:  "What's  that?"

"  I  have  a  message  for  you,"  I  repeated.  "  It  is  this  :  '  Dear  Doctor  :  Do
you  remember  Katy  McGuire,  who  used  to  live  with  you  in  Chester  ?  She  died
in  1872.  She  hopes  you  are  having  a  good  time  in  London.'  "

The  doctor  looked  at  me  with  amazement  written  all  over  his  face,  and  said :
"  Why, what  the  devil  do  you  mean  ? "

"  I  don't  know  anything  about  it  except  that  just  before  I  woke  up  I  was
impelled  to  receive  this  message  which  I  have  just  delivered  to  you."

"  Did  you  ever  hear  of  Katy  McGuire  ?  "  asked  the  doctor.

"  Never  in  my  life."

"  Well,"  said  the  doctor,  "  that's  one  of  the  most  remarkable  things  I  ever
heard  of.  My  father  for  a  great  many  years  lived  at  Chester,  Mass.  There
was  a  neighbouring  family  named  McGuire,  and  Katy  McGuire,  a  daughter  of
this  neighbour,  frequently  came  over  to  our  house,  as  the  younger  people  in  a
country  village  will  visit  their  neighbours,  and  used  to  assist  my  mother  in  the
lighter  duties  about  the  house.  I  was  absent  from  Chester  from  about  1869  to
about  1873.  I  had  known  Katy,  however,  as  a  daughter  of  our  neighbour  and
knew  that  she  used  to  visit  the  house.  She  died  some  time  during  the  absence
I  speak  of,  but  as  to  the  exact  date  of  her  death  I  am  not  informed."

That  closed  the  incident,  and  although  the  doctor  told  me  that  he  would


216  CHAPTER    IX  [932

write  to  his  old  home  to  ascertain  the  exact  date  of  Katy's  death,  I  have  never
heard  from  him  further  in  the  matter.  I  questioned  him  at  the  time  as  to
whether  he  had  recently  thought  of  Katy  McGuire,  and  he  told  me  that  her
name  had  not  occurred  to  him  for  twenty  years,  and  that  he  might  never  have
recalled  it  had  it  not  been  for  the  rather  curious  incident  which  had  occurred.
In  my  own  mind  I  could  only  explain  the  occurrence  as  a  rather  unusual  coin-
cidence. I  was  personally  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  doctor's  old  home  had
been  in  Chester,  Mass.,  and  had  frequently  talked  with  him  of  his  earlier  ex-
periences in  life  when  he  began  practice  in  that  city,  but  never  at  any  time
during  these  conversations  had  the  name  of  this  neighbour's  daughter  been
mentioned,  nor  had  the  name  of  the  neighbour  been  mentioned,  our  conversa-
tion relating  entirely  to  the  immediate  members  of  the  family,  particularly  the
doctor's  father,  who  was  a  noted  practitioner  in  that  district.

JOHN  E.  WILKIE.

Dr.  De  Wolf,  in  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  first  inquiry,  wrote  : —

6  GRENVILLE  PLACE,  CROMWELL  ROAD,  S.W.,  April  ztyh,  1898.

DEAR  SIR, — In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  27th  inst,  I  regret  that  I  cannot
recall  with  any  definite  recollection  the  incident  to  which  Mr.  Wilkie  refers.

I  do  remember  that  he  told  me  one  morning  he  had  had  a  remarkable
dream — or  conference  with  some  one  who  knew  me  when  a  young  lad.—
Very  truly  yours,  OSCAR  C.  DE  WOLF.

Dr.  Hodgson  then  sent  Mr.  Wilkie's  account  to  Dr.  De  Wolf,  with
further  inquiries,  to  which  Dr.  De  Wolf  replied  as  follows : —

6  GRENVILLE  PLACE,  CROMWELL  ROAD,  S.W.,  May  tfh,  1898.

DEAR  SIR, — Mr.  Wilkie's  statement  is  correct  except  as  to  unimportant
detail.  My  father  practised  his  profession  of  medicine,  in  Chester,  Mass.,  for
sixty  years — dying  in  1890.  I  was  born  in  Chester  and  lived  there  until  1857,
when  I  was  in  Paris  studying  medicine  for  four  years.  In  1861  I  :returned  to
America  and  immediately  entered  the  army  as  surgeon  and  served  until  the
close  of  the  war  in  1865.  In  1866  I  located  in  Northampton,  Mass.,  where  I
practised  my  profession  until  1873,  when  I  removed  to  Chicago.

Chester  is  a  hill  town  in  Western  Mass.,  and  Northampton  is  seventeen
miles  distant.  While  in  Northampton  I  was  often  at  my  father's  house —
probably  every  week — and  during  some  of  the  years  from  1866  to  1873  I  knevr
Katy  McGuire  as  a  servant  assisting  my  mother.

She  was  an  obliging  and  pleasant  girl  and  always  glad  to  see  me.  She
had  no  family  in  Chester  (as  Mr.  Wilkie  says)  and  I  do  not  know  where  she
came  from.  Neither  do  I  know  where  or  when  she  died— but  I  know  she  is
dead.  There  is  nothing  left  of  my  family  in  Chester.  The  old  homestead  still
remains  with  me,  and  I  visit  it  every  year.

The  strange  feature  (to  me)  of  this  incident  is  the  fact  that  I  had  not  thought
of  this  girl  for  many  years,  and  Mr.  Wilkie  was  never  within  500  miles  of
Chester.

We  had  been  warm  friends  since  soon  after  my  location  in  Chicago,  where
he  was  connected  with  a  department  of  the  Chicago  Tribune.  I  came  to
London  in  1892  and  Mr.  Wilkie  followed  the  next  year  as  the  manager  of  Low's-


934]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,  t  ECSTASY        217

American  Exchange,  3  Northumberland  Avenue.     His  family  did  not  join  him
until  1895,  which  explains  his  being  in  my  house  when  ill.

Mr.  Wilkie  is  a  very  straightforward  man  and  not  given  to  illusions  of  any
kind.  He  is  now  the  chief  of  the  Secret  Service  Department  of  the  U.S.
Government,  Washington,  D.C.

Neither  of  us  were  believers  in  spiritual  manifestations  of  this  character,
and  this  event  so  impressed  us  that  we  did  not  like  to  talk  about  it,  and  it  has
been  very  seldom  referred  to  when  we  met. — Very  truly  yours,

OSCAR  C.  DE  WOLF.

933.  These  cases,  then,  may  serve  as  illustrations  both  of  the
incipient  stages  of  a  trance  which  may  develop  into  ecstasy  on  the  one
hand  or  possession  on  the  other,  and  of  the  different  aspects  of  possession
according  as  it  is  regarded  as  a  more  developed  form  of  motor  automatism
or  as  a  special  intensification  of  telepathic  action.  We  have  first,  in
Mrs.  Luther's  case,  a  partial  and  temporary  control  by  the  subliminal
self,  exhibiting  probably  telepathic  influence,  but  with  no  indications  of
any  psychical  excursion  or  invasion ;  in  Professor  Thoulet's  case  we
find  a  fuller  control  by  the  subliminal  self,  with  a  manifestation  of
knowledge  suggesting  some  spiritual  excursion ;  in  Mr.  Goodall's  case
there  seems  to  be  a  telepathic  conversation  between  his  subliminal  self
controlling  his  utterance  and  some  perhaps  discarnate  spirit ;  and  finally,
in  Mr.  Wilkie's  case,  there  is  the  definite  superposition,  as  it  were,  of
a  discarnate  spirit's  message  upon  the  automatist  in  such  a  way  that  we
are  led  to  wonder  whether  it  was  the  mind  or  the  brain  of  the  automatist
that  received  the  message.  The  first  step  apparently  is  the  abeyance  of
the  supraliminal  self  and  the  dominance  of  the  subliminal  self,  which  may
lead  in  rare  cases  to  a  form  of  trance  (or  of  what  we  have  hitherto
called  secondary  personality)  where  the  whole  body  of  the  automatist
is  controlled  by  his  own  subliminal  self,  or  incarnate  spirit,  but  where
there  is  no  indication  of  any  relation  with  discarnate  spirits.  The  next
form  of  trance  is  where  the  incarnate  spirit,  whether  or  not  maintaining
control  of  the  whole  body,  makes  excursions  into  or  holds  telepathic
intercourse  with  the  spiritual  world.  And,  lastly,  there  is  the  trance  of
possession  by  another,  a  discarnate  spirit.  We  cannot,  of  course,
always  distinguish  between  these  three  main  types  of  trance — which,  as
we  shall  see  later,  themselves  admit  of  different  degrees  and  varieties.

934.  The  most  striking  case  known  to  me  of  the  first  form  of
trance — possession  by  the  subliminal  self — is  that  of  the  Rev.  C.  B.
Sanders,  whose  trance-personality  has  always  called  itself  by  the  name
of  "  X  +  Y  =  Z,"  and  of  whom  I  give  an  account  in  934  A.  The  life
of  the  normal  Mr.  Sanders  has  apparently  been  passed  in  the  environ-
ment of  a  special  form  of  Presbyterian  doctrine,  and  there  seems  to
have  been  a  fear  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Sanders  himself  lest  the  trance
manifestations  of  which  he  was  the  subject  should  conflict  with  the
theological  position  which  he  held  as  a  minister;  and  indeed  for


2i8  CHAPTER    IX  [935

several  years  of  his  early  suffering  "  he  was  inclined  to  regard  his  peculiar
case  of  affliction  as  the  result  of  Satanic  agency."  On  the  part  of  some
of  his  friends  also  there  seems  to  be  a  special  desire  to  show  that
"  X  +  Y  =  Z  "  was  not  heterodox.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  perhaps
not  surprising  that  we  find  so  much  reticence  in  "X  +  Y  =  Z"  concern-
ing his  own  relations  to  the  normal  Mr.  Sanders.  What  little  explanation
is  offered  seems  to  be  in  singular  harmony  with  one  of  the  main  tenets
advanced  in  this  book,  since  the  claim  made  by  "  X+  Y  =  Z  "  is  obviously
that  he  represents  the  incarnate  spirit  of  Mr.  Sanders  exercising  the  higher
faculties  which  naturally  pertain  to  it,  but  which  can  be  manifested  to  the
full  only  when  it  is  freed  from  its  fleshly  barriers.  This  frequently  occurs,
he  says,  in  dying  persons,  who  describe  scenes  in  the  spiritual  world,  and
in  his  own  experience  when  "  his  casket  "  is  similarly  affected,  and  the
bodily  obstructions  to  spiritual  vision  are  removed.

The  suggestion  which  I  made  in  the  case  of  Anna  Winsor  (see  vol.  i.,
237  and  237  A) — that  the  intelligence  controlling  her  sane  right  arm
was  her  own  subliminal  self — may  now  perhaps  appear  less  strange  than
it  did  at  the  outset  of  our  inquiry ;  but  whereas  in  that  case  the  supra-
liminal  self  was  only  partially  in  abeyance,  the  supraliminal  self  of  Mr.
Sanders  seems  to  become  completely  dormant  during  his  trances.

935.  In  this  case  then  the  subliminal  self  seems  to  take  complete
control  of  the  organism,  exercising  its  own  powers  of  telepathy  and
telsesthesia,  but  showing  no  evidence  of  direct  communication  with
discarnate  spirits.  We  must  now  pass  on  to  the  most  notable  recent
case  where  such  communication  has  been  claimed, — that  of  Swedenborg,
— to  whose  exceptional  trance-history  and  attempt  to  give  some  scientific
system  to  his  experiences  of  ecstasy  I  referred  in  Chapter  I.  (section  105).

And  here  I  meet  with  a  kind  of  difficulty  which  is  sure  to  present  itself
sooner  or  later  to  all  persons  who  endeavour  to  present  to  the  world  what
they  regard  as  novel  and  important  truths.  There  is  sure  to  be  some
embarrassing  likeness  or  travesty  of  that  truth  in  the  world  already.
There  are  sure  to  be  sects  or  persons,  past  or  present,  holding  something
like  the  same  beliefs  on  different  grounds ; — on  grounds  which  one  may
find  it  equally  difficult  to  endorse  and  to  disavow.

I  have  indeed  already  been  able  to  admit  without  reluctance  that  the
"  humble  thinkers  "  of  the  Stone  Age,  the  believers  in  Witchcraft,  in
Shamanism,  have  been  my  true  precursors  in  many  of  the  ideas  upheld
in  this  book.  But  these  spiritual  ancestors  are  remote  and  unobtrusive ;
and  it  may  be  easier  to  admit  that  one  is  descended  from  an  ape  than
that  one  is  own  brother  to  a  madman.  Swedenborg  is,  in  fact,  a  madman
in  most  men's  view,  and  this  judgment  has  much  to  support  it.  The
great  bulk  of  his  teaching, — almost  the  whole  content  of  Arcana  Ccdestia,
— has  undergone  a  singularly  unfortunate  downfall.  A  seer,  a  mystic,
cannot  often  be  disproved ; — his  visions  may  fall  out  of  favour,  but  they
still  record  one  man's  subjective  outlook  on  the  universe.  Swedenborg's


936]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        219

wildnesses,  on  the  other  hand,  were  based  upon  a  definite  foundation
which  has  definitely  crumbled  away.  No  one  now  regards  the  Old
Testament  as  a  homogeneous  and  verbally  inspired  whole  ; — and  unless
it  be  so,  the  spiritual  meaning  which  Swedenborg  draws  from  its  every
word  by  his  doctrine  of  Correspondences  is  not  only  a  futile  fancy,  but
a  tissue  of  gross  and  demonstrable  errors.  And  yet,  on  the  face  of  it,  was
not  all  this  error  more  amply  accredited  than  any  of  the  utterances  of
possession  or  the  recollections  of  ecstasy  which  I  shall  be  able  to  cite
from  modern  sensitives?  Swedenborg  was  one  of  the  leading  savants
of  Europe  ;  it  would  be  absurd  to  place  any  of  our  sensitives  on  the  same
intellectual  level.  If  his  celestial  revelations  turn  out  to  have  been  non-
sense, what  are  Mrs.  Piper's  likely  to  be  ?

936.  I  might,  of  course,  save  myself  from  this  dilemma  by  re-
pudiating Swedenborg's  seership  altogether.  The  evidential  matter
which  he  has  left  behind  him  is  singularly  scanty  in  comparison  with
his  pretensions  to  a  communion  of  many  years  with  so  many  spirits
of  the  departed.  I  do  not,  however,  accept  this  means  of  escape  from
the  difficulty.  I  think  that  the  half-dozen  "  evidential  cases  "  scattered
through  the  memoirs  of  Swedenborg  are  stamped  with  the  impress  of
truth, — and  I  think,  also,  that  without  some  true  experience  of  the
spiritual  world  Swedenborg  could  not  have  entered  into  that  atmos-
phere of  truth  in  which  even  his  worst  errors  are  held  in  solution.
Swedenborg's  writings  on  the  world  of  spirits  fall  in  the  main  into  two
classes, — albeit  classes  not  easily  divided.  There  are  experiential  writings
and  there  are  dogmatic  writings.  The  first  of  these  classes  contains  ac-
counts of  what  he  saw  and  felt  in  that  world,  and  of  such  inferences
with  regard  to  its  laws  as  his  actual  experience  suggested.  Now,
speaking  broadly,  all  this  mass  of  matter,  covering  some  hundreds  of
propositions,  is  in  substantial  accord  with  what  has  been  given  through
the  most  trustworthy  sensitives  since  Swedenborg's  time.  It  is  indeed
usual  to  suppose  that  they  have  all  been  influenced  by  Swedenborg ;
and  although  I  feel  sure  that  this  was  not  so  in  any  direct  manner  in
the  case  of  the  sensitives  best  known  to  myself,  it  is  probable  that
Swedenborg's  alleged  experiences  have  affected  modern  thought  more
deeply  than  most  modern  thinkers  know.

On  the  other  hand,  the  second  or  purely  dogmatic  class  of  Swedenborg's
writings, — the  records  of  instruction  alleged  to  have  been  given  to  him
by  spirits  on  the  inner  meaning  of  the  Scriptures,  &c., — these  have  more
and  more  appeared  to  be  mere  arbitrary  fancies ; — mere  projections  and
repercussions  of  his  own  preconceived  ideas.

On  the  whole,  then, — with  some  stretching,  yet  no  contravention,  of
inclusions  independently  reached, — I  may  say  that  Swedenborg's  story,
—one  of  the  strangest  lives  yet  lived  by  mortal  men, — is  corroborative
rather  than  destructive  of  the  slowly  rising  fabric  of  knowledge  of  which
:ie  was  the  uniquely  gifted,  but  uniquely  dangerous,  precursor.


220  CHAPTER    IX  [937

It  seemed  desirable  here  to  refer  thus  briefly  to  the  doctrinal  teachings
of  Swedenborg,  but  I  shall  deal  later  with  the  general  question  how
much  or  how  little  of  the  statements  of  "  sensitives  "  about  the  spiritual
world — whether  based  on  their  own  visions  or  on  the  allegations  of  their
"controlling  spirits" — are  worthy  of  credence.  In  the  case  of  Sweden-
borg there  was  at  least  some  evidence,  of  the  kind  to  which  we  can  here
appeal,  of  his  actual  communication  with  discarnate  spirits  (see  936  A)  ;
but  in  most  other  cases  of  alleged  ecstacy  there  is  little  or  nothing  to
show  that  the  supposed  revelations  are  not  purely  subjective.  (See,  e.g.,
the  revelations  of  Alphonse  Cahagnet's  sensitives,  described  in  his  Arcanes
de  la  vie  future  devoilees  and  those  of  the  "  Seeress  of  Prevorst,"  mentioned
in  936  B.)  At  most,  these  visions  must  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of
symbolical  representation  of  the  unseen  world.  (See,  e.g.,  936  C.)

937.  Among  Cahagnet's  subjects,  however,  there  was  one  young
woman,  Adele  Maginot,  who  not  only  saw  heavenly  visions  of  the  usual
post-Swedenborgian  kind,  but  also  obtained  evidential  communications —
not  unlike  those  of  Mrs.  Piper — purporting  to  come  from  discarnate
spirits.  Fortunately  these  were  recorded  with  unusual  care  and  thorough-
ness by  Cahagnet,  and  the  case  thus  becomes  one  of  considerable
importance  for  our  inquiries.  A  general  account  of  Cahagnet's  work
has  recently  been  given  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.  by  Mr.  Podmore  (see
937  A)  who,  though  finding  it  "  almost  impossible  to  doubt  that  Adele's
success  was  due  to  some  kind  of  supernormal  faculty,"  thinks  it
might  be  accounted  for  by  telepathy  from  living  persons.  It  appears
that  in  all  her  trances  Adele — like  Mr.  Sanders — was  controlled  by  her
own  subliminal  self — that  is  to  say,  her  supraliminal  self  became  dormant,
under  " magnetism"  by  Cahagnet,  while  her  subliminal  self  in  trance-
utterance  manifested  a  knowledge  which  was,  as  I  incline  to  think  from
its  analogies  with  more  developed  cases,  obtained  from  the  spiritual
world.  That  this  knowledge  should  be  mixed  with  much  that  was
erroneous  or  unverifiable  is  not  surprising.

It  is  also  interesting  to  note  the  occurrence  in  this  case  of  circum-
stances which  in  their  general  character  have  become  so  habitual  in  trances
of  "  mediumistic  "  type  that  they  are  not  only  found  in  genuine  subjects,
but  are  continually  being  simulated  by  the  fraudulent.  I  refer  to  the  so-
called  "  taking  on  of  the  death  conditions  "  of  a  communicating  spirit,
who,  as  Adele  stated,  died  of  suffocation.  "  Adele  chokes  as  this  man
choked,  and  coughed  as  he  did.  ...  I  was  obliged  to  release  h<
by  passes;  she  suffered  terribly."

I  need  scarcely  say  that  this  suggests  incipient  possession.  There
were  occasional  analogous  instances  in  the  early  trances  of  Mrs.  Piper,
when  Phinuit  was  the  controlling  influence  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R. ,
vol.  viii.  p.  98,  Professor  Barrett  Wendell's  account ;  and  vol.  xiii.  p.  384).
Other  points  of  similarity  between  the  accounts  of  the  entranced  Adele
and  the  utterances  of  Phinuit  will  be  apparent  to  the  student  of  the  recon


939]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       221

938.  The  next  case  to  be  considered,  and  so  far  one  of  the   most
important,  is  that  of  D.  D.  Home.     It  may  seem  a  strange  descent  from
the  celestial  visions    of  Swedenborg  to  the  table-tiltings  and  fragmentary
trance-utterances  of  modern  mediums,  but  for  our  present  purpose  of
finding  an  empirical  basis   upon  which   to   establish  the   existence  of  a
spiritual  world,  these  later  humble  manifestations  are  more  potent  than
all  the  pages  of  the  Arcana  Ccelestia.

But,  although  I  attribute  much  value  to  what  evidence  exists  in  the
case  of  Home,  it  cannot  but  be  deplored  that  the  inestimable  chance
for  experiment  and  record  which  this  case  afforded  was  almost  entirely
thrown  away  by  the  scientific  world.  Unfortunately  the  record  is
especially  inadequate  in  reference  to  Home's  trances  and  the  evidence  for
the  personal  identity  of  the  communicating  spirits.  His  name  is  known
to  the  world  chiefly  in  connection  with  the  telekinetic  phenomena  which
are  said  to  have  occurred  in  his  presence,  and  the  best  accounts  of
which  we  owe  to  Sir  William  Crookes.  It  is  not  my  intention,  as  I
have  already  explained,  to  deal  with  these,  but  it  must  be  understood
that  they  form  an  integral  part  of  the  manifestations  in  this  case,  as  in
the  case  of  Stainton  Moses.  For  detailed  accounts  of  them  the  reader
should  consult  the  history  of  Home's  life  and  experiences,  as  given  in
the  works  enumerated  in  938  A.

In  Home's  case  it  is  especially  important  to  consider  the  question
of  fraud,  since  various  charges  of  fraud  have  been  brought  against  him
— some,  however,  without  any  evidence  at  all,  and  others  on  second-
hand statements  only,  while  the  most  serious  one — that  connected  with
the  famous  Lyon  case — related  rather  to  his  character  than  to  the  real
nature  of  his  powers.  A  detailed  discussion,  by  Professor  Barrett  and
myself,  of  the  question  of  fraud,  was  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.
This  article  also  includes  references  to  the  telekinetic  phenomena,  and
a  brief  summary  (with,  in  some  cases,  additional  evidence)  of  the  most
important  cases  suggesting  personal  communications  from  deceased
friends  of  the  sitters  with  Home,  and  I  give  an  abridgment  of  it  in
938  B.  Such  cases  as  received  even  the  share  of  scattered  and  scanty
record  which  Madame  Home's  books  indicate,  are  probably  but  a  small
portion  of  the  evidential  communications  actually  given  through  Home.

939.  As  to  the  nature  of  Home's  trances,  there  is  not  a  little  obscurity.
Many  of  the  phenomena  described  as  occurring  in  his  presence  took  place
when  he  was  not  in  trance  at  all.     Sometimes  his  body  was  apparently
possessed  by  deceased  friends  of  the  sitters   or  other  discarnate  spirits,
and  at  other  times  it  was  apparently  controlled  by  his  own  spirit  or  sub-
liminal self.     According  to   the   account   of  Viscount  Adare,  now  Lord
Dunraven  (see   Experiences  in  Spiritualism  with  Mr.  D.  D.  Home.     By
Viscount  Adare),  it  was  unusual  for  extraneous  physical  phenomena,  such
as  raps  and  movements  and  levitation  of  objects,  to  occur  while  Home  was
entranced.


222  CHAPTER    IX  [940

On  the  other  hand,  Sir  William  Crookes  states  (Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.
vi.  p.  341)  :  "Certainly  the  two  most  striking  things  I  ever  saw  with
him,  the  fire  test  and  visible  forms,  were  to  be  observed  while  he  was
entranced,  but  it  was  not  always  easy  to  tell  when  he  was  in  that  state,
for  he  spoke  and  moved  about  almost  as  if  he  were  in  his  normal
condition;  the  chief  differences  being  that  his  actions  were  more
deliberate,  and  his  manner  and  expressions  more  solemn,  and  he
always  spoke  of  himself  in  the  third  person,  as  l  Dan.' "  (Compare
934  A,  the  case  of  "X  +  Y  =  Z,"  who  always  spoke  of  his  supraliminal
self  as  "  my  casket.")

The  late  Lord  Dunraven  says,  in  his  introduction  (p.  ix.)  to  the  book
by  Viscount  Adare,  that  the  communications  at  the  stances  described
in  the  book  came  "  through  the  alphabet"  (that  is,  through  raps  or  other
telekinetic  signals  such  as  touches),  or  through  "the  medium  in  a
trance,"  and  he  remarks  :  "  When  Mr.  Home  speaks  in  a  trance  there  is
no  certainty  whether  his  utterances  are  those  of  a  spirit  alone,  or  how  far
they  may  be  mixed  up  with  his  own  ideas  or  principles.  Sometimes  the
communications  are  striking,  at  other  times  vague,  sometimes  trivial.
Messages  through  the  alphabet,  on  the  other  hand,  carry  at  least  a  strong
probability  that  they  convey  the  thoughts  of  a  spirit ;  although  even  they
too  in  some  cases  exhibit  indications  of  being  affected  by  the  medium,
and  are  therefore  not  quite  reliable."

The  impression  produced  seems  to  have  been  very  different  from  this  in
some  cases,  especially  when  Home  was — as  we  may  suppose — directly
possessed  by  a  discarnate  spirit.  See,  for  example,  the  case  of  the
control  by  Adah  Menken  (loc.  tit.,  pp.  35-37),  where  Viscount  Adare
says :  "  I  was,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  actually  conversing  with  the
dead ;  listening,  talking,  answering,  and  receiving  answers  from  Menken.
Home's  individuality  was  quite  gone;  he  spoke  as  Menken,  and  we
both  spoke  of  him  as  a  third  person  at  a  distance  from  us."

940.  In  brief,  the  study  of  such  records  as  are  available  of  Home's
psychical  phenomena  leaves  me  with  the  conviction  that, — apart  altogether
from  the  telekinetic  phenomena  with  which  they  were  associated, — his
trance-utterances  belong  to  the  same  natural  order  as  those,  for  instance,
of  Mr.  Moses  and  Mrs.  Piper.  There  are,  however,  important  differences
between  these  cases, — differences  which  should  be  of  special  instruction
to  us  in  endeavouring  to  comprehend  the  possession  that  completely  ex-
cludes the  subliminal  self,  and  to  appreciate  the  difficulty  of  obtaining
this  complete  possession.

Thus  in  Home's  case  the  subliminal  self  seems,  throughout  the  longest
series  of  seances  of  which  we  have  a  record,  to  have  been  the  spirit
chiefly  controlling  him  during  the  trance  and  acting  as  intermediary
for  other  spirits,  who  occasionally,  however,  took  complete  possession.

In  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  as  we  shall  see,  the  subliminal  self  is  very  little  in
direct  evidence ;  its  manifestations  form  a  fleeting  interlude  between  her


942]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       223

waking  state  and  her  possession  by  a  discarnate  spirit.  In  Mr.  Moses'
case,  the  subliminal  self  was  rarely  in  direct  evidence  at  all  when  he
was  entranced ;  but  we  infer  from  these  other  cases  that  it  was
probably  dominant  at  some  stage  of  his  trance,  even  if  at  other  times
it  was  excluded  or  became  completely  dormant.

And  if,  in  Home's  case,  as  there  seems  reason  to  suppose,  the  sub-
liminal self  may  have  participated  with  discarnate  spirits  in  the  production
of  telekinetic  phenomena,  as  well  as  in  the  communication  of  tests  of
personal  identity,  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  subliminal  self  of  Mr.
Moses  may  also  have  been  actively  concerned  in  both  these  classes  of
phenomena.

941.  To  the   history  of  William  Stain  ton   Moses   I  now  turn.     In
his  case,  as  in  that  of  Home,  the    telekinetic   phenomena   formed    an
integral   part  of  the  general   manifestations,  being   so  interwoven   with
them  as  to  necessitate  in  my  view  acceptance  or  rejection  of  the  whole ;
but   the    evidence   for   the  telekinetic  phenomena   in   the  case  of  Mr.
Moses   is  comparatively  slight,  since  they   occurred   almost   exclusively
in   the   presence   of  a   small   group   of  intimate   personal   friends,   and
were   never    scrutinised   and   examined    by   outside   witnesses    as   were
Home's  manifestations.     On  the  other  hand,  we  have  detailed  records
of  Mr.  Moses'  whole  series  of  experiences,  while  in  the  case  of  Home,
as  I    have  said,   the    record    is  very  imperfect.     As   to   the   telekinetic
phenomena,  Mr.  Moses  himself  regarded  them  as  a  mere  means  to  an
end,  in  accordance  with  the  view  urged  on  him  by  his  "controls," — that
they  were  intended  as  proofs  of  the  power  and  authority  of  these  latter,
while  the  real  message  lay  in  the  religious  teaching  imparted  to  him.

942.  It  was  on  May  pth,  1874,  that  Edmund   Gurney  and  I   met
Stainton    Moses    for    the    first    time,    through    the    kindness    of    Mrs.
Cowper-Temple   (afterwards  Lady    Mount-Temple),   who  knew  that   we
had  become  interested  in  "  psychical "  problems,  and  wished  to  intro-
duce us  to  a  man  of  honour  who  had  recently  experienced  phenomena,
due  wholly  to  some  gift  of  his  own,  which  had  profoundly  changed  his
conception  of  life.  *

That  evening  was  epoch-making  in  Gurney's  life  and  mine.  Standing
as  we  were  in  the  attitude  natural  at  the  commencement  of  such  inquiries,
under  such  conditions  as  were  then  attainable, — an  attitude  of  curiosity
tempered  by  a  vivid  perception  of  difficulty  and  drawback, — we  now  met  a
man  of  University  education,  of  manifest  sanity  and  probity,  who  vouched
to  us  for  a  series  of  phenomena, — occurring  to  himself,  and  with  no
doubtful  or  venal  aid, — which  seemed  at  least  to  prove,  in  confusedly
intermingled  form,  three  main  theses  unknown  to  Science.  These  were
(i)  the  existence  in  the  human  spirit  of  hidden  powers  of  insight  and
of  communication;  (2)  the  personal  survival  and  near  presence  of  the
departed;  and  (3)  interference,  due  to  unknown  agencies,  with  the
ponderable  world.  He  spoke  frankly  and  fully;  he  showed  his  note-


224  CHAPTER    IX  [943

books ;  he  referred  us  to  his  friends ;  he  inspired  a  belief  which  was  at
once  sufficient,  and  which  is  still  sufficient,  to  prompt  to  action.

The  experiences  which  Stainton  Moses  had  undergone  had  changed
his  views,  but  not  his  character.  He  was  already  set  in  the  mould  of  the
hard-working,  conscientious,  dogmatic  clergyman,  with  a  strong  desire  to
do  good,  and  a  strong  belief  in  preaching  as  the  best  way  to  do  it.  For
himself  the  essential  part  of  what  I  have  called  his  "  message  "  lay  in  the
actual  words  automatically  uttered  or  written, — not  in  the  accompanying
phenomena  which  really  gave  their  uniqueness  and  importance  to  the
automatic  processes.  In  a  book  called  Spirit  Teachings  he  collected
what  he  regarded  as  the  real  fruits  of  those  years  of  mysterious  listening
in  the  vestibule  of  a  world  unknown.

And  much  as  we  may  regret  this  too  exclusive  ethical  preoccupation
in  a  region  where  the  establishment  of  actual  fact  is  still  the  one  thing
needful,  it  must  be  admitted  that  at  that  time  the  scientific  importance  of
these  phenomena  had  hardly  dawned  on  any  mind.  Among  all  the
witnesses  of  Home's  marvels  Sir  William  Crookes  was  almost  the  only
man  who  made  any  attempt  to  treat  them  as  reasonable  men  treat  all  the
facts  of  nature.  Most  of  the  witnesses,  though  fully  believing  in  the
genuineness  of  the  wonders,  appear  to  have  regarded  them  as  a  kind  of
uncanny  diversion.  The  more  serious  sought  for  assurance  that  their
beloved  dead  were  still  near  them,  and  straitly  charged  Home  to  tell  no
man  of  the  proofs  which  they  said  had  brought  to  themselves  unspeak-
able joy.  An  attempt  made,  in  1875,  by  Serjeant  Cox  and  a  few  others
(among  whom  were  Stainton  Moses  and  myself)  to  get  these  phenomena
more  seriously  discussed  in  a  "  Psychological  Society,"  languished  for
want  of  suitable  coadjutors,  and  on  the  death  of  Serjeant  Cox  (in  1879)
the  Society  was  dissolved.  During  these  important  years,  therefore,  while
his  experiences  were  fresh  in  Stainton  Moses'  mind,  and  while  they  were
to  some  extent  still  recurring,  he  had  little  encouragement  to  deal  with
them  from  a  scientific  point  of  view.

943.  When,  however,  in  1882,  Professor  Barrett  consulted  him  as  to
the  possibility  of  founding  a  new  society,  under  better  auspices,  he  warmly
welcomed  the  plan.  Edmund  Gurney  and  I  were  asked  to  join,  but  made
it  a  condition  that  the  consent  of  Professor  Sidgwick  (with  whom  we  had
already  been  working)  to  act  as  our  President  should  first  be  obtained.
Under  his  guidance  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  assumed  a  more
cautious  and  critical  attitude  than  was  congenial  to  Stainton  Moses'  warm
heart,  strong  convictions,  and  impulsive  temper,  and  in  1886  he  left  the
Society,  in  consequence  of  the  publication  in  the  Proceedings  of  certain
comments  on  phenomena  occurring  through  the  agency  of  the  so-called
"  medium  "  Eglinton.

From  this  time  he  frankly  confessed  himself  disgusted  with  our
attempts  at  scientific  method,  and  as  main  contributor  to  Light,  and
afterwards  editor  until  his  death,  he  practically  reverted  to  "  Spiritualism


944]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       225

as  a  religion," — as  opposed  to  psychical  research  as  a  scientific  duty.  And
assuredly  the  religious  implications  of  all  these  phenomena  are  worthy  of
any  man's  most  serious  thought.  But  those  who  most  feel  the  importance
of  the  ethical  superstructure  are  at  the  same  time  most  plainly  bound  to
treat  the  establishment  of  the  facts  at  the  foundation  as  no  mere  personal
search  for  a  faith,  to  be  dropped  when  private  conviction  has  been
attained,  but  as  a  serious,  a  continuous,  a  public  duty.  And  the  more
convinced  they  are  that  their  faith  is  sound,  the  more  ready  should
they  be  to  face  distrust  and  aversion, — to  lay  their  account  for  a  long
struggle  with  the  vis  inertia  of  the  human  spirit.

Stainton  Moses  was  ill-fitted  for  this  patient,  uphill  toil.  In  the  first
place  he  lacked, — and  he  readily  and  repeatedly  admitted  to  me  that  he
lacked, — all  vestige  of  scientific,  or  even  of  legal  instinct.  The  very  words
"  first-hand  evidence,"  "  contemporary  record,"  "  corroborative  testimony,"
were  to  him  as  a  weariness  to  the  flesh.  His  attitude  was  that  of  the
preacher  who  is  already  so  thoroughly  persuaded  in  his  own  mind  that  he
treats  any  alleged  fact  which  falls  in  with  his  views  as  the  uncriticised  text
for  fresh  exhortation.  And  in  the  second  place, — though  this  was  a  minor
matter, — his  natural  sensitiveness  was  sometimes  exaggerated  by  gout  and
other  wearing  ailments  into  an  irritability  which  he  scarcely  felt  compelled
to  conceal  in  a  journal  circulating  mainly  among  attached  disciples.

The  reason  for  noticing  these  defects  is  that  they  constitute  the  only
ground  on  which  Stainton  Moses'  trustworthiness  as  a  witness  to  his  own
phenomena  could  possibly  be  impugned.  I  mention  them  in  order  that  I
may  say  that,  having  read,  I  think,  all  that  he  has  printed,  and  having
watched  his  conduct  at  critical  moments,  I  see  much  ground  for  impugning
his  judgment,  but  no  ground  whatever  for  doubting  that  he  has  narrated
with  absolute  good  faith  the  story  of  his  own  experience.  He  allowed  me,
before  he  left  the  Society,  to  examine  almost  the  whole  series  of  his
automatic  writings, — those  especially  which  contain  the  evidence  on  which
Spirit  Identity  is  based  ;  and  in  no  instance  did  I  find  that  the  printed
statement  of  any  case  went  beyond  the  warrant  of  the  manuscript.

My  original  impressions  were  strengthened  by  the  opportunity  which
I  had  of  examining  the  unpublished  MSS.  of  Mr.  Moses  after  his
death  on  September  5th,  1892.  These  consist  of  thirty-one  note-books
— twenty-four  of  automatic  script,  four  of  records  of  physical  pheno-
mena, and  three  of  retrospect  and  summary.  In  addition  to  these,  the
material  available  for  a  knowledge  of  Mr.  Moses'  experiences  consists
of  his  own  printed  works,  and  the  written  and  printed  statements  of  wit-
nesses to  his  phenomena.

Of  this  available  material  a  more  detailed  account  will  be  found  in
,943  A,  together  with  a  brief  record  of  Mr.  Moses'  life.

944.  With  the  even  tenor  of  this  straightforward  and  reputable  life
was  inwoven  a  chain  of  mysteries  which,  as  I  think,  in  what  way  soever
they  be  explained,  make  that  life  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  which
VOL.  ii.  P


226  CHAPTER    IX  [945

our  century  has  seen.  For  its  true  history  lies  in  that  series  of  physical
manifestations  which  began  in  1872  and  lasted  for  some  eight  years,  and
that  series  of  automatic  writings  and  trance-utterances  which  began  in
1873,  received  a  record  for  some  ten  years,  and  did  not,  as  is  believed,
cease  altogether  until  the  earthly  end  was  near.

These  two  series  were  intimately  connected ;  the  physical  phenomena
being  avowedly  designed  to  give  authority  to  the  speeches  and  writings
which  professed  to  emanate  from  the  same  source.  There  is  no  ground
for  separating  the  two  groups,  except  the  obvious  one  that  the  automatic
phenomena  are  less  difficult  of  credence  than  the  physical ;  but,  for
reasons  already  stated,  it  has  seemed  to  me  desirable  to  exclude  the  latter
from  detailed  treatment  in  this  work.  References  to  accounts  of  them
will,  however,  be  found  in  943  A.  They  included  the  apparent  produc-
tion of  such  phenomena  as  intelligent  raps,  movements  of  objects  un-
touched, levitation,  disappearance  and  reappearance  of  objects,  passage
of  matter  through  matter,  direct  writing,  sounds  supernormally  made
on  instruments,  direct  sounds,  scents,  lights,  objects  materialised,  hands
materialised  (touched  or  seen).  Mr.  Moses  was  sometimes,  but  not
always,  entranced  while  these  physical  phenomena  were  occurring.  Some-
times he  was  entranced  and  the  trance-utterance  purported  to  be  that
of  a  discarnate  spirit.  At  other  times,  especially  when  alone,  he  wrote
automatically,  retaining  his  own  ordinary  consciousness  meanwhile,  and
carrying  on  lengthy  discussions  with  the  "  spirit  influence  "  controlling
his  hand  and  answering  his  questions,  &c.  As  a  general  rule  the  same
alleged  spirits  both  manifested  themselves  by  raps,  &c.,  at  Mr.  Moses'
sittings  with  his  friends,  and  also  wrote  through  his  hand  when  he  was
alone.  In  this,  as  in  other  respects,  Mr.  Moses'  two  series  of  writings —
when  alone  and  in  company — were  concordant,  and,  so  to  say,  comple-
mentary ; — explanations  being  given  by  the  writing  of  what  had  happened
at  the  stances.  When  "direct  writing"  was  given  at  the  stances  the
handwriting  of  each  alleged  spirit  was  the  same  as  that  which  the  same
spirit  was  in  the  habit  of  employing  in  the  automatic  script.  The  claim
to  individuality  was  thus  in  all  cases  decisively  made.

945.  Now  the  personages  thus  claiming  to  appear  may  be  divided
roughly  into  three  classes  : —

A. — First  and  most  important  are  a  group  of  persons  recently  deceased,
and  sometimes,  as  will  be  seen,  manifesting  themselves  at  the  stances
before  their  decease  was  known  through  any  ordinary  channel  to  any  of
the  persons  present.  These  spirits  in  many  instances  give  tests  of  identity,
mentioning  facts  connected  with  their  earth-lives  which  are  afterwards
found  to  be  correct.

B. — Next  comes  a  group  of  personages  belonging  to  generations  more
remote,  and  generally  of  some  distinction  in  their  day.  Grocyn,  the  friend
of  Erasmus,  may  be  taken  as  a  type  of  these.  Many  of  these  also  con-
tribute facts  as  a  proof  of  identity,  which  facts  are  sometimes  more  correct


945]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        227

than  the  conscious  or  admitted  knowledge  of  any  of  the  sitters  could
supply.  In  such  cases,  however,  the  difficulty  of  proving  identity  is  in-
creased by  the  fact  that  most  of  the  correct  statements  are  readily  accessible
in  print,  and  may  conceivably  have  either  been  read  and  forgotten  by  Mr.
Moses,  or  have  become  known  to  him  by  some  kind  of  clairvoyance.

C. — A  third  group  consists  of  spirits  who  give  such  names  as  Rector,
Doctor,  Theophilus,  and,  above  all,  Imperator.  These  from  time  to  time
reveal  the  names  which  they  assert  to  have  been  theirs  in  earth-life.
These  concealed  names  are  for  the  most  part  both  more  illustrious,  and
more  remote,  than  the  names  in  Class  B, — and  were  withheld  by  Mr.
Moses  himself,  who  justly  felt  that  the  assumption  of  great  names  is
likely  to  diminish  rather  than  to  increase  the  weight  of  the  communication.
He  felt  this  in  his  own  person ;  and  for  a  long  while  one  of  his  main
stumbling-blocks  lay  in  these  lofty  and  unprovable  claims.  Ultimately
he  came  to  believe  even  in  these  identities,  on  the  general  ground  that
teachers  who  had  given  him  so  many  proofs  both  of  their  power  and  of
their  serious  interest  in  his  welfare  were  not  likely  to  have  deceived  him
on  such  a  point.  But  he  did  not  count  upon  a  similar  belief  in  others,
and  he  expressly  wished  to  avoid  seeming  to  claim  special  authority  for
the  teachings  on  the  ground  of  their  alleged  authorship.  It  must  be
added  also  that  some  of  these  teachings  themselves  asserted  that  when
the  name  of  some  spirit  long  removed  from  earth  was  given,  the  recipient
must  sometimes  take  this  to  imply  a  stream  of  influence  emanating  from
'that  spirit,  rather  than  his  own  presence  in  person.

As  to  the  relation  of  the  spirits  to  the  telekinetic  phenomena,  it  must
be  remembered  that  these  phenomena,  strange  and  grotesque  as  they  often
seem,  cannot  be  called  meaningless.  The  alleged  operators  are  at  pains
throughout  to  describe  what  they  regarded  as  the  end,  and  what  merely
is  the  means  to  that  end.  Their  constantly  avowed  object  was  the
promulgation  through  Mr.  Moses  of  certain  religious  and  philosophical
dews;  and  the  physical  manifestations  are  throughout  described  as
lesigned  merely  as  a  proof  of  power,  and  a  basis  for  the  authority  claimed
or  the  serious  teachings.1

That  they  were  not  produced  fraudulently  by  Dr.  Speer  or  other
itters  I  regard  as  proved  both  by  moral  considerations  and  by  the  fact
Hat  they  are  constantly  reported  as  occurring  when  Mr.  Moses  was
lone.  That  Mr.  Moses  should  have  himself  fraudulently  produced  them
regard  as  both  morally  and  physically  incredible.  That  he  should  have
•repared  and  produced  them  in  a  state  of  trance  I  regard  both  as  physi-
ally  incredible  and  also  as  entirely  inconsistent  with  the  tenor  both  of  his
wn  reports  and  of  those  of  his  friends.  I  therefore  regard  the  reported
"henomena  as  having  actually  occurred  in  a  genuinely  supernormal  manner.

1  Spirit  Teachings,  which  includes  many  of  these  communications,  has  been  re-
ublished  with  a  Life  by  Mr.  Charlton  Speer,  and  most  of  the  remaining  communica-
ons  have  been  published  in  Light  by  Mrs.  Speer  since  Mr.  Moses'  death.


228  CHAPTER    IX  [946

946.  I  now  pass  on  to  consider  briefly  the  nature  of  the  evidence  that
the  alleged  spirits  were  what  they  purported  to  be,  as  described,  in  the  first
place,  in  Mr.  Moses'  books  of  automatic  writing.     The  contents  of  these
books  consist  partly  of  messages  tending  to  prove  the  identity  of  com-
municating spirits ;  partly  of  discussions  or  explanations  of  the  physical
phenomena  ;  and  partly  of  religious  and  moral  disquisitions.

These  automatic  messages  were  almost  wholly  written  by  Mr.  Moses'
own  hand,  while  he  was  in  a  normal  waking  state.  The  exceptions  are  of
two  kinds,  (i)  There  is  one  long  passage,  alleged  by  Mr.  Moses  to  have
been  written  by  himself  while  in  a  state  of  trance.  (2)  There  are,  here
and  there,  a  few  words  alleged  to  be  in  "direct  writing"; — written,  that
is  to  say,  by  invisible  hands,  but  in  Mr.  Moses'  presence ;  as  several  times
described  in  the  notes  of  se'ances  where  other  persons  were  present.

Putting  these  exceptional  instances  aside,  we  find  that  the  writings
generally  take  the  form  of  a  dialogue,  Mr.  Moses  proposing  a  question  in
his  ordinary  thick,  black  handwriting.  An  answer  is  then  generally,
though  not  always,  given  ;  written  also  by  Mr.  Moses,  and  with  the  same
pen,  but  in  some  one  of  various  scripts  which  differ  more  or  less  widely
from  his  own.  Mr.  Moses'  own  description  of  the  process,  as  given  in  the
preface  to  Spirit  Teachings,  may  be  studied  with  advantage.  I  quote
this  in  946  A.

A  prolonged  study  of  the  MS.  books  has  revealed  nothing  inconsistent
with  this  description.  I  have  myself,  of  course,  searched  them  carefully
for  any  sign  of  confusion  or  alteration,  but  without  finding  any ;  and  I
have  shown  parts  of  them  to  various  friends,  who  have  seen  no  points
of  suspicion.  It  seems  plain,  moreover,  that  the  various  entries
were  made  at  or  about  the  dates  to  which  they  are  ascribed.  They
contain  constant  references  to  the  se'ances  which  went  on  concurrently,
and  whose  dates  are  independently  known;  and  in  the  later  books,
records  of  some  of  these  se'ances  are  interspersed  in  their  due  places
amongst  other  matter.  The  MSS.  contain  also  a  number  of  allusions
to  other  contemporaneous  facts,  many  of  which  are  independently  known
to  myself.

I  think,  moreover,  that  no  one  who  had  studied  these  entries  through-
out would  doubt  the  originally  private  and  intimate  character  of  many  of
them.     The  tone  of  the  spirits  towards  Mr.  Moses  himself  is  habitually
courteous   and   respectful.      But   occasionally  they  have  some   criticism
which  pierces  to  the  quick,  and  which  goes  far   to  explain  to  me  Mr.  |
Moses'  unwillingness  to  have  the  books  fully  inspected  during  his  lifetime,  i
He  did,  no  doubt,  contemplate  their  being  at  least  read  by  friends  after
his  death  ;  and  there  are  indications  that  there  may  have  been  a  still  more
private  book,  now  doubtless  destroyed,  to  which  messages  of  an  intimate
character  were  sometimes  consigned.

947.  The  questions  at  issue,  in  short,  as  to  these  messages,  refer  not
so  much  to  their  genuineness  as  to  their  authenticity,  in  the  proper  sense  of


947]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       229

those  words.  That  they  were  written  down  in  good  faith  by  Mr.  Moses
as  proceeding  from  the  personages  whose  names  are  signed  to  them,  there
can  be  little  doubt.  But  as  to  whether  they  did  really  proceed  from  those
personages  or  no  there  may  in  many  cases  be  very  great  doubt ; — a  doubt
which  I,  at  least,  shall  be  quite  unable  to  remove.  By  the  very  condi-
tions of  the  communication  they  cannot  show  commanding  intellect,  or
teach  entirely  new  truths,  since  their  manifestations  are  ex  hypothesi
limited  by  the  capacity — not  by  the  previous  knowledge,  but  by  the  pre-
vious capacity — of  the  medium.  And  if  they  give  facts  not  consciously
known  to  the  medium — facts  however  elaborate — it  may,  of  course,  be  sug-
gested that  these  facts  have  been  subliminally  acquired  by  the  medium
through  some  unconscious  passage  of  the  eye  over  a  printed  page,  or
else  that  they  are  clairvoyantly  learnt,  without  the  agency  of  any  but  the
medium's  own  mind,  though  acting  in  a  supernormal  fashion.

This  is  no  merely  fanciful  hypothesis ;  nor  is  it  a  hypothesis  derogatory
to  Mr.  Moses'  own  probity.  On  the  contrary,  as  will  be  presently  seen,
he  himself  prominently  puts  forth  the  circumstance  (Rector's  copying
from  a  closed  book,  an  account  of  which  I  give  in  947  A),  which  tells
most  strongly  for  the  view  that  the  alleged  remote  identities  may  not
really  be  concerned  at  all.  Nay,  the  guides  themselves  expressly  state —
apropos  of  some  brief  accounts  of  musicians  said  to  be  interested  in  Mr.
Charlton  Speer — that  spirits  can  refer  to  books,  e.  g.  their  own  biographies,
and  refresh  their  memory  thereby.  This  admission  of  course  leaves  us
with  nothing  more  than  the  word  of  Imperator  to  prove  that,  say,  Robert
of  Gloucester,  or  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  (who  merely  give  facts  about
their  own  writings),  were  in  reality  present.  Such  guarantee — sometimes
only  indirectly  implied — was  enough  for  Mr.  Moses  at  the  time ;  especially
since  these  remoter  spirits  came  in  intermixture  with  nearer  spirits,  whose
identity  he  believed  could  be  better  proved.  But  in  a  serious  talk  with
me  on  the  matter  in  1 886  he  withdrew  much  of  this  certainty ; — saying
that  in  the  case  of  some  of  the  musical  spirits  especially  he  had  had  no
inward  sensation  of  a  spirit's  presence, — such  as  he  had  in  some  other
cases  of  "  nearer  "  spirits.  He  repudiated,  however,  the  idea  of  sub-
conscious memory  on  his  part  of  words  actually  seen  by  himself;  feeling
sure  that  some  of  the  facts  automatically  written  had  never  been  beneath
his  eyes.  This  may  very  well  be  the  case ;  as  he  had  not,  I  think,  more
than  a  mere  schoolmaster's  acquaintance  with  English  literature  and
history ;  not,  indeed,  so  much  as  would  nowadays  be  expected  from  an
English  master  in  a  school  as  good  as  that  where  he  held  a  post.  I  judge
this  largely  from  the  "  Notes  by  the  Way,"  which  he  contributed  to  Light
for  many  years,  and  in  which  he  was  certainly  not  minimising  his  actual
store  of  knowledge.  But  be  this  as  it  may,  I  cannot  find  in  these  historical
communications  any  provable  fact  which  might  not  have  been  drawn  from
some  fairly  accessible  printed  source.  There  were  certain  stanzas  from
Lydgate,  written  by  the  alleged  Zachary  Gray  [or  Grey],  which  Mr.


230  CHAPTER    IX  [948

Percival  verified  in  the  British  Museum.  But  these  are  to  be  found  in
Warton's  English  Poetry  /  from  which  they  reproduce  (as  Professor  Skeat
has  kindly  pointed  out  to  me)  a  philological  error  of  Warton's  own.  The
power  of  reading  closed  books  was  expressly  attributed  to  Zachary  Grey ;
and  if  he  really  possessed  it  he  probably  exercised  it  here ;  giving  thereby,
of  course,  no  particular  proof  that  he  was  Zachary  Grey  rather  than  any
other  spirit.

948.  The  evidence  for  identity  obtained  by  Mr.  Moses  in  the  case
of  spirits  recently  departed  seems  at  first  sight  more  satisfactory.     Some
cases   of  this   class   are  given   in   948  A,  and  many  others  are  to  be
found  in  the  records  of  his  experiences.     In  these  cases,  however,  as  in
the  historical  ones,  it  is  often  difficult  to  make  sure  that  the  facts  stated
were  not  within  the  subliminal  knowledge  of  the  automatist.     Sometimes
it  seems  that  they  may  have  been  gathered  from  obituary  notices,  casually
observed  in  glancing  over  newspapers  without  the  cognisance  of  the  supra-
liminal  consciousness  (e.g.  in  the  cases  of  Emily  C.  and  Rosamira  Lancas-
ter) ;  or  similarly  from  tomb-stones  (e.g.  in  the  cases  of  Emily  C.  and
Cecilia  Fielden)  ;  or  names  and  facts  relating  to  persons  known  to  the
sitters,  but  not  to  Mr.  Moses   (e.g.  A.  P.   Kirkland,  Dr.  Speer's  sister,
Cecilia  Fielden  and  Marian  Timmins),  may  perhaps  have  been  mentioned
in  his  hearing  and  subliminally  remembered.     "  Fanny  Westoby,"  again,
reminded  him  of  forgotten  facts  that  had  occurred  during  his  own  child-
hood.    Numerous  details  relating  to  Thomas  Wilson,  Bishop  of  Sodor  and
Man  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  were  given  (see  Proceed-
ings  S.P.R.,  vol.   xi.,    pp.   74-5    and  88),  but  are  to  be  found    in  his
published  "  Life,"  which  Mr.  Moses  may  possibly  have  met  with  during
his  curacy  in  the  Isle  of  Man.1     The  case  of  Helene  Smith   (834-842)
has  shown  us  how  far-reaching  may  be   the    faculties  of  hyperaesthesia
and  hypermnesia  in  the  subliminal  self;  but  in  view  of  the  then  general
ignorance  of  the  scientific  world  on  this  subject,  it  is  not  surprising  that
both  Mr.  Moses  and  his  friends  absolutely  rejected  this  explanation  of  his
phenomena,  and  that  the  evidence  appeared  to  them  more  conclusive  than
it  possibly  can  to  us.     Whether  or  not  the  alleged  spirits  were  concerned,
— as  may  sometimes,  of  course,  have  been  the  case, — we  can  hardly  avoid
thinking  that  the  subliminal  self  of  the  medium  played  at  least  a  consider-
able part  in  the  communications.

949.  In  two  cases  the  announcement  of  a  death  was  made  to  Mr.
Moses,  when  the  news  was  apparently  not  known  to  him  by  any  normal
means.     One    of    these    (the   case    of  President    Garfield)    is   given   in
948  B.     The  other,  which  I  now  proceed  to  recount  (from  my  article
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  96  et  seq.)  is  in  some  ways  the  most
remarkable  of  all,  from  the  series  of  chances  which  have  been  needful  in
order  to  establish  its  veracity.     The  spirit  in  question  is  that  of  a  lady

1  The  evidential  weaknesses  of  these  cases  have  been  analysed  by  Mr.  Podmore,  in
his  Studies  in  Psychical  Research,  pp.  125-133.


949]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       231

known  to  me,  whom  Mr.  Moses  had  met,  I  believe,  once  only,  and  whom
I  shall  call  Blanche  Abercromby.  The  publication  of  the  true  name  was
forbidden  by  the  spirit  herself,  for  a  reason  which  was  at  once  obvious  to
me  when  I  read  the  case,  but  which  was  not,  so  far  as  I  can  tell,  fully
known  to  Mr.  Moses.  The  lady's  son,  whom  I  have  since  consulted,
supports  the  prohibition;  and  I  have  consequently  changed  the  name
and  omitted  the  dates.

This  lady  died  on  a  Sunday  afternoon,  about  twenty-five  years  ago,  at
a  country  house  about  200  miles  from  London.  Her  death,  which  was
regarded  as  an  event  of  public  interest,  was  at  once  telegraphed  to  London,
and  appeared  in  Monday's  Times  ;  but,  of  course,  on  Sunday  evening  no
one  in  London,  save  the  Press  and  perhaps  the  immediate  family,  was
cognisant  of  the  fact.  It  will  be  seen  that  on  that  evening,  near  midnight,
a  communication,  purporting  to  come  from  her,  was  made  to  Mr.  Moses
at  his  secluded  lodgings  in  the  north  of  London.  The  identity  was  some
days  later  corroborated  by  a  few  lines  purporting  to  come  directly  from
her,  and  to  be  in  her  handwriting.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that
Mr.  Moses  had  ever  seen  this  handwriting.  His  one  known  meeting  with
this  lady  and  her  husband  had  been  at  a  seance — not,  of  course,  of  his
own— where  he  had  been  offended  by  the  strongly  expressed  disbelief  of
the  husband  in  the  possibility  of  any  such  phenomena.

On  receiving  these  messages  Mr.  Moses  seems  to  have  mentioned
them  to  no  one,  and  simply  gummed  down  the  pages  in  his  MS.  book,
marking  the  book  outside  "Private  Matter."  The  book  when  placed  in
my  hands  was  still  thus  gummed  down,  although  Mrs.  Speer  was  cognisant
of  the  communication.  I  opened  the  pages  (as  instructed  by  the  executors),
and  was  surprised  to  find  a  brief  letter  which,  though  containing  no  definite
facts,  was  entirely  characteristic  of  the  Blanche  Abercromby  whom  I  had
known.  But  although  I  had  received  letters  from  her  in  life,  I  had  no
recollection  of  her  handwriting.  I  happened  to  know  a  son  of  hers
sufficiently  well  to  be  able  to  ask  his  aid, — aid  which,  I  may  add,  he  would
have  been  most  unlikely  to  afford  to  a  stranger.  He  lent  me  a  letter  for
comparison.  The  strong  resemblance  was  at  once  obvious,  but  the  A.  of
the  surname  was  made  in  the  letter  in  a  way  quite  different  from  that
adopted  in  the  automatic  script.  The  son  then  allowed  me  to  study  a
long  series  of  letters,  reaching  down  till  almost  the  date  of  her  death.
From  these  it  appeared  that  during  the  last  year  of  her  life  she  had  taken
to  writing  the  A  (as  her  husband  had  always  done)  in  the  way  in  which  it
was  written  in  the  automatic  script.

The  resemblance  of  handwriting  appeared  both  to  the  son  and  to
myself  to  be  incontestable  ;  but  as  we  desired  an  experienced  opinion  he
allowed  me  to  submit  the  note-book  and  two  letters  to  Dr.  Hodgson.
Readers  of  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.  (vol.  iii.  pp.  201-401),  may  remember
that  Dr.  Hodgson  succeeded  in  tracing  the  authorship  of  the  "  Koot
Hoomi "  letters  to  Madame  Blavatsky  and  to  Damodar,  by  evidence


232  CHAPTER    IX  [949

based  on  a  minute  analysis  of  handwriting.     As  regards  the  present  matter,
Dr.  Hodgson  reported  as  follows  : —

5  BOYLSTON  PLACE,  BOSTON,  September  \\tht  1893.

I  have  compared  the  writing  numbered  123  in  the  note-book  of  Mr.  Stainton
Moses,  with  epistles  of  January  4th,  18— ,  and  September  i9th,  18— ,  written
by  B.  A.  The  note-book  writing  bears  many  minor  resemblances  to  that  of  the
epistles,  and  there  are  also  several  minor  differences  in  the  formations  of  some
of  the  letters,  judging  at  least  from  the  two  epistles  submitted  to  me ;  but  the
resemblances  are  more  characteristic  than  the  differences.  In  addition,  there
are  several  striking  peculiarities  common  to  the  epistles  and  the  note-book
writing,  which  appear  to  be  especially  emphasised  in  the  latter.  The  note-book
writing  suggests  that  its  author  was  attempting  to  reproduce  the  B.  A.  writing
by  recalling  to  memory  its  chief  peculiarities,  and  not  by  copying  from  specimens
of  the  B.  A.  writing.  The  signature  especially  in  the  note-book  writing  is
characteristically  like  an  imitation  from  memory  of  B.  A.'s  signature.  I  have
no  doubt  whatever  that  the  person  who  wrote  the  note-book  writing  intended
to  reproduce  the  writing  of  B.  A.  RICHARD  HODGSON.

The  chances  necessary  to  secure  a  verification  of  this  case  were  more
complex  than  can  here  be  fully  explained.  This  lady,  who  was  quite  alien  to
these  researches,  had  been  dead  about  twenty  years  when  her  posthumous
letter  was  discovered  in  Mr.  Moses'  private  note-book  by  one  of  the  very
few  surviving  persons  who  had  both  known  her  well  enough  to  recognise
the  characteristic  quality  of  the  message,  and  were  also  sufficiently  inter-
ested in  spirit  identity  to  get  the  handwritings  compared  and  the  case
recorded.

The  entries  in  the  MS.  books  will  now  be  quoted.  The  communica-
tions began  with  some  obscure  drawings,  apparently  representing  the
flight  of  a  bird.

A.  "  It  is  spirit  who  has  but  just  quitted  the  body.  Blanche  Abercromby
in  the  flesh.  I  have  brought  her.  No  more.  M."

Q.   Do  you  mean ?

No  reply.  Sunday  night  about  midnight.  The  information  is  unknown
to  me.

Monday  morning.

Q.  I  wish  for  information  about  last  night.  Is  that  true?  Was  it
Mentor  ?

A.  "Yes,  good  friend,  it  was  Mentor,  who  took  pity  on  a  spirit  that  was
desirous  to  reverse  former  errors.  She  desires  us  to  say  so.  She  was  ever
an  enquiring  spirit,  and  was  called  suddenly  from  your  earth.  She  will  rest
anon.  One  more  proof  has  been  now  given  of  continuity  of  existence.  Be
thankful  and  meditate  with  prayer.  Seek  not  more  now,  but  cease.  We  do
not  wish  you  to  ask  any  questions  now."

"t  I  :  S  :  D.     x  Rector."
[A  week  later.]

Q.    Can  you  write  for  me  now  ?

A.    "Yes,  the  chief  is  here."


949]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       233

Q.    How  was  it  that  spirit  [Blanche  Abercromby's]  came  to  me  ?

A.  "The  mind  was  directed  to  the  subject,  and  being  active,  it  projected
itself  to  you.  Moreover,  we  were  glad  to  be  able  to  afford  you  another  proof
of  our  desire  to  do  what  is  in  our  power  to  bring  home  to  you  evidence  of  the
truth  of  what  we  say."

Q.  Is  it  correct  to  say  that  the  direction  of  thought  causes  the  spirit  to  be
present  ?

A.  "  In  some  cases  it  is  so.  Great  activity  of  spirit,  coupled  with  anxiety
to  discover  truth  and  to  seek  into  the  hidden  causes  of  things,  continue  to
make  it  possible  for  a  spirit  to  manifest.  Moreover,  direction  of  thought
gives  what  you  would  call  direction  or  locality  to  the  thought.  By  that  we
mean  that  the  instinctive  tendency  of  the  desire  or  thought  causes  a
possibility  of  objective  manifestation.  Then  by  the  help  of  those  who,  like
ourselves,  are  skilled  in  managing  the  elements,  manifestation  becomes
possible.  This  would  not  have  been  possible  in  this  case,  only  that  we  took
advantage  of  what  would  have  passed  unnoticed  in  order  to  work  out  another
proof  of  the  reality  of  our  mission.  It  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  com-
bination of  circumstances  before  such  a  manifestation  can  be  possible.  And
that  combination  is  rare.  Hence  the  infrequency  of  such  events,  and  the  diffi-
culty we  have  in  arranging  them:  especially  when  anxiety  enters  into  the
matter,  as  in  the  case  of  a  friend  whose  presence  is  earnestly  desired.  It
might  well  be  that  so  ready  a  proof  as  this  might  not  occur  again."

Q.  Then  a  combination  of  favourable  circumstances  aided  you.  Will  the
spirit  rest,  or  does  it  not  require  it  ?

A.  "  We  do  not  know  the  destiny  of  that  spirit.  It  will  pass  out  of  our
control.  Circumstances  enabled  us  to  use  its  presence  :  but  that  presence
will  not  be  maintained."

Q.  If  direction  of  thought  causes  motion,  I  should  have  thought  it
would  be  so  with  our  friends  and  that  they  would  therefore  be  more  likely  to
come-

A.  "  It  is  not  that  alone.  Nor  is  it  so  with  all.  All  cannot  come  to  earth.
And  not  in  all  cases  does  volition  or  thought  cause  union  of  souls.  Many
other  adjuncts  are  necessary  before  such  can  be.  Material  obstacles  may
prevent,  and  the  guardians  may  oppose.  We  are  not  able  to  pursue  the
subject  now,  seeing  that  we  write  with  difficulty.  At  another  time  we  may
resume.  Cease  for  the  present  and  do  not  seek  further."

t"  I  :  S  :  D.     Rector."

A  few  days  later,  Mr.  Moses  says  : —

Q.    The  spirit  B.  A.  began  by  drawing.     Was  it  herself  ?

A.  "With  assistance.  She  could  not  write.  One  day  if  she  is  able  to
return  again,  she  will  be  more  able  to  express  her  thoughts."

Q.    I  remember  that  poor  man  who  was  killed  by  the  steam-roller  drew.1

A.  "  Do  not  dwell  on  him  lest  you  be  vexed.  He  was  not  able  to  express
himself.  And  even  as  the  undeveloped  human  mind  betakes  itself  to  symbols
to  supplement  defect  of  language :  so  do  spirits  seek  to  illustrate  that  which
they  cannot  utter.  So  the  Holy  Maid  [of  Kent]  drew  when  she  appeared.
She  has  now  progressed,  and  is  progressing,  having  cast  aside  the  weight  that
hindered  her."

i  See  948  A.


234  CHAPTER    IX  [950

Q.    I  am  glad.     Will  she  come  back  ?
A.    "It  may  be,  but  not  now."

[  A  few  days  later.]

A.  "  A  spirit  who  has  before  communicated  will  write  for  you  herself.  She
will  then  leave  you,  having  given  the  evidence  that  is  required."

"  I  should  much  like  to  speak  more  with  you,  but  it  is  not  permitted.  You
have  sacred  truth.  I  know  but  little  yet.  I  have  much,  much  to  learn.

"BLANCHE  ABERCROMBY.

"  It  is  like  my  writing  as  evidence  to  you."

950.  The  leading  personage  in  the  third  and  most  remote  group  of
spirits  is  the  one  known  as  "  Imperator."

This  spirit  claims  responsibility  for  the  whole  series  of  manifestations,
and  should  therefore  be  mentioned  here,  although  there  is  no  proof  of
his  identity  with  the  historical  personage  whom  he  asserts  himself  to
be.  His  character,  however,  claimed  and  obtained  Mr.  Moses'  entire
confidence.  He  answers  for  the  identity  and  veracity  of  spirits  intro-
duced ;  he  explains  the  phenomena,  so  far  as  they  are  explained ;  and  he
throughout  impresses  on  Mr.  Moses  his  own  teaching.

If  such  high  and  sweeping  claims  were  made  by  any  ordinary  writer,
we  should  expect  to  find  much  in  the  course  of  his  writings  which  would
prove  their  extravagance.  If  we  ask  ourselves  how  to  disprove  Imperator's
claims  we  shall  find  no  very  definite  answer.  In  the  teachings  themselves,
however,  it  is  over  and  over  again  emphasised  that  there  must  be  distor-
tion of  the  messages  owing  to  their  passage  through  the  mediumistic
channel,  and  if,  as  is  possible,  there  may  have  been  thus  an  increase  of
accuracy  in  some  cases  where  Mr.  Moses  had  some  definite  subliminal
knowledge,  there  may  also  have  been  many  causes  of  error  due  to  his
theological  and  other  dogmatic  preconceptions.  With  regard  to  the
other  remote  communicators,  these,  according  to  the  explanations  given
by  Imperator,  are  high  spirits,  aiming  at  the  advance  of  knowledge,  and
especially  of  religion,  who  have  been  able  to  discern  Mr.  Moses'  gifts,  and
have  to  some  extent  themselves  trained  him  for  the  purpose  required.
They  have  modified  his  early  life :  for  instance,  by  prompting  him  to  his
period  of  retirement  on  Mount  Athos,  and  by  keeping  him  from  wishing  to
marry.  Some  of  these  spirits,  however,  stand  in  very  distant  relation  to
Mr.  Moses,  and  their  indications  of  presence  or  collaboration  are  of  a
purely  arbitrary  kind.

There  are  a  group  of  spirits,  it  is  said,  belonging  to  various  ages  and
countries,  who  are  united  by  their  desire  to  inform  mankind  of  their
destiny  and  duties.  Each  member  of  this  group  desires  to  show  approval
when  an  attempt  is  made  at  such  communication.  They  cannot  all  take
an  active  share,  but,  while  some  work  actively,  others  express  sympathy
by  choosing  either  a  signature,  or  some  special  physical  manifestation,  to
be  associated  with  their  names,  even  if  not  actually  produced  by  them-


951]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       235

selves.  This  form  of  communication  is  of  course  not  meant  to  be  in
itself  evidential;  it  depends  on  the  confidence  reposed  in  the  "  control  "  in
charge  of  the  manifestations; — much  as  when  letters  of  encouragement
are  read  at  a  public  meeting,  their  genuineness  is  taken  on  trust  from  the
chairman.  Even  when  the  handwriting  produced  (either  automatically
through  the  medium,  or  directly,  without  the  intervention  of  human
hands),  resembles  that  of  the  deceased  person,  this,  as  elsewhere  explained,
does  |not  in  itself  prove  identity.  Well-known  signatures  especially  may
be  copied  by  other  spirits.

As  soon,  however,  as  it  is  understood  that  such  messages  are  not
intended  to  be  evidential,  it  seems  not  unnatural  that  they  should  be
given  thus.  It  needs  no  derogation  from  the  dignity  of  even  the  highest
spirit  to  express  his  sanction  of  any  scheme  designed  to  convey  to  "  men
of  goodwill,"  in  fashion  however  humble  and  unassuming,  some  message
of  their  eternal  fate.

But  where  identity  is  absolutely  unprovable,  as  in  the  case  of  this
group  of  "  men  of  old  time,"  it  would  be  futile  to  discuss  the  probabilities
on  either  side.  I  cannot  blame  Mr.  Moses  for  his  injunction  to  leave
these  spirits — eminent  but  not  Divine — under  the  mask  of  the  symbolic
titles  which  they  chose  to  assume.  His  reverence  for  Imperator  was
of  a  filial  type  which  led  him  to  desire  that  although  there  must  be
discussion  about  the  doctrines,  there  should  be  none  about  the  actual
personality  of  the  teacher  to  whom  he  felt  that  he  owed  all  that  was  best
in  his  own  inner  life.

951.  We  must  now  briefly  go  through  the  points  which  make  such
messages  as  were  received  by  Mr.  Moses  prima  facie  evidential,  which  in-
dicate, that  is  to  say,  that  they  actually  do  come  in  some  way  from  their
alleged  source.  A  brief  recapitulation  of  the  main  stages  of  evidential
quality  in  messages  given  by  automatic  writing  or  by  trance-utterances
is  all  that  will  be  needed  here.

1 i )  Evidentially  lowest  comes  the  class  of  messages  which  is  by  far
the  most  common  ;  messages,  namely,  in  which,  although  some  special
identity  may  be  claimed,  all  the  facts  given  have  been  consciously  known
to  the  automatist.     Here  we  may  well  suppose  that  his  own  personality
alone  is  concerned,  and  that  the  messages  have  a  subliminal,  but  not  an
external  source.

(2)  Next  above  these  come  messages  containing  facts  likely  to  be
known  to  the  alleged  spirit,  and  not  consciously  known  to  the  automatist ;
but  which   facts  may  nevertheless  have  some  time  been  noted  by  the
automatist,  even  unwittingly,  and  may  have  thus  obtained  lodgment  in
his  subliminal  memory.

(3)  Next  come  facts  which  can  be  proved,— with  such  varying  degrees
of  certainty  as  such  negative  proof  allows, — never  to  have  been  in  any  way
known  to  the  automatist ;  but  which  nevertheless  are  easily  to  be  found
in  books ;  so  that  they  may  have  been  learnt  clairvoyantly  by  the  automa-


236  CHAPTER    IX  [952

tist  himself,  or  learnt  and  communicated  to  him  by  some  mind  other  than
that  of  the  alleged  spirit.

(4)  Next  come  facts  which  can  be  proved,  with  similar  varying  degrees
of  certainty  according  to  the  circumstances,  never  to  have  been  known
to  the  automatist,  or  recorded  in  print;  but  which  were  known  to  the
alleged  spirit  and  can  be  verified  by  the  memories  of  living  persons.

(5)  Above  this  again  would  come  that  class  of  experimental  messages,
or  posthumous  letters,  of  which  we  have  as  yet  very  few  good  examples
(see  876)  ;  where  the  departed  person  has  before  death  arranged  some
special  test — some  fact  or  sentence  known  only  to  himself,  which  he  is  to
transmit  after  death,  if  possible,  as  a  token  of  his  return.

952.  (6)  Thus  much  for  the  various  kinds  of  verbal  messages,  which
can  be  kept  and  analysed  at  leisure.  We  must  now  turn  to  evidence  of
a  different  and  not  precisely  comparable  kind.  In  point  of  fact  it  is  not
these  inferences  from  written  matter  which  have  commonly  been  most
efficacious  in  compelling  the  survivor's  belief  in  the  reality  of  the  friend's
return.  Whether  logically  or  no,  it  is  not  so  much  the  written  message
that  he  trusts,  but  some  phantom  of  face  and  voice  that  he  knew  so  well.
It  is  this  familiar  convincing  presence, — CIKTO  Se  fle'cnceAov  dvrw, —  on  which
the  percipient  has  always  insisted,  since  Achilles  strove  in  vain  to  embrace
Patroclus'  shade.

How  far  such  a  phantasm  is  in  fact  a  proof  of  any  real  action  on  the
part  of  the  spirit  thus  recognised  is  a  problem  which  has  been  dealt  with
already  in  Chapter  VII.  The  upshot  of  our  evidence  to  my  mind  is  that
although  the  apparition  of  a  departed  person  cannot  per  se  rank  as
evidence  of  his  presence,  yet  this  is  not  a  shape  which  purely  hal-
lucinatory phantasms  seem  often  to  assume ;  and  if  there  be  any  corro-
borative evidence,  as,  for  instance,  writing  which  claims  to  come  from
the  same  person,  the  chance  that  he  is  really  operative  is  considerable.
In  Mr.  Moses'  case  almost  all  the  figures  which  he  saw  brought  with
them  some  corroboration  by  writing,  trance-utterance,  gesture-messages
(as  where  a  figure  makes  signs  of  assent  or  dissent),  or  raps.

(7)  And  this  brings  us  to  a  class  of  cases  largely  represented  in  Mr.
Moses'  series,  where  writings  professing  to  come  from  a  certain  spirit  are
supported  by  physical  phenomena  of  which  that  spirit  claims  also  to  be
the  author.  Whether  such  a  line  of  proof  can  ever  be  made  logically
complete  or  no,  one  can  imagine  many  cases  where  it  would  be  practically
convincing  to  almost  all  minds.  Materialisations  of  hands,  or  direct
writing  in  the  script  of  the  departed,  have  much  of  actual  cogency;
and  these  methods,  with  others  like  them,  are  employed  by  Mr.  Moses'
"  controls "  in  their  efforts  to  establish  their  own  identities.  Physical
phenomena  in  themselves,  however,  carry  no  proof  of  an  intelligence
outside  that  of  the  sensitive  himself,  and,  as  I  have  said,  may  in  many
cases  be  a  mere  extension  of  his  own  ordinary  muscular  powers,  and  not
due  to  any  external  agency  at  all.


954]       TRANCE,   POSSESSION,   ECSTASY         237

953.  If  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  verbal  messages,  we  find  that
the  cases  most  fully  represented  in  the  records  of  Mr.  Moses  are  limited
to  the  first  three  classes  mentioned  above,  and  those  which  come  under
the  fourth  class — verifiable  facts  of  which  there  is  no  printed  record  and
which  it  is  practically  certain  that  the  medium  could  never  have  known —
are  comparatively  few.     This  may  partly  be  accounted  for  by  the  small
number  of  sitters  with  Mr.  Moses  and  the  fact  that  they  were  his  personal
friends.     The  records  of  Mrs.  Piper,  on  the  other  hand,  to  which  we  now
turn,  are  especially  rich  in  incidents  that  fall  under  the  fourth  heading,
and  the  evidential  value  of  the  verbal  messages  in  this  case  is,  therefore,
much  greater  than  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Moses.     Whereas  for  Mr.  Moses
the  identity  of  many  of  his  communicators  rested  largely  upon  their  being
guaranteed  by  Imperator  and  his  group  of  helpers, — in  the  case  of  Mrs.
Piper  the  spirits  of  some  recently-departed  friends  who  have  given  much
evidence  of  their  identity  appear  to  maintain  the  independent  reality  and
guiding  control  over  Mrs.  Piper  of  these  same  intelligences — Imperator,
Rector,  Doctor,  and  others — that  Mr.  Moses  claimed  as  ruling  in  his  own
experience.     We  shall  then  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper  again  return  to  the
question  of  the  supervision  of  such  alleged  spirits.

954.  The   case    of    Mrs.    Piper   differs    in    two   important   respects
from  that  of  W.   Stainton  Moses  or  D.   D.   Home.     In  the  first  place
no  telekinetic  phenomena  have  occurred  in  connection  with  her  trance-
manifestations  ;  and  in  the  second  place  her  supraliminal  self  shows  no
traces  of  any  supernormal  faculty  whatsoever.     She  presents  an  instance
of  automatism  of  the  extreme  type  where  the  "  possession  "  is  not  merely
local  or  partial,  but  affects,  so  to  say,  the  whole  psychical  area, — where
the  supraliminal  self  is  for  a  time  completely  displaced,  and  the  whole
personality  appears  to  suffer  intermittent  change.     In  other  words,  she
passes  into  a  trance,  during  which  her  organs  of  speech  or  writing  are
"  controlled  "  by  other  personalities  than  the  normal  waking  one.     Oc-
casionally either  just  before  or  just  after  the  trance,  the  subliminal  self
appears  to  take  some  control  of  the  organism  for  a  brief  interval ;  but
with  this  exception  the  personalities  that  speak  or  write  during  her  trance
claim  to  be  discarnate  spirits.

Mrs.  Piper's  trances  may  be  divided  into  three  stages  :  (i)  Where  the
dominant  controlling  personality  was  known  as  "  Dr.  Phinuit  "  and  used
the  vocal  organs  almost  exclusively,  communicating  by  trance-utterance,
1884-91.

(2)  Where  the  communications  were  made  chiefly  by  automatic  writing
in  the  trance  under  the  supervision  more  particularly  of  the  control  known
as  "George  Pelham,"  or  "  G.  P.,"  although  "Dr.  Phinuit"  usually  com-
municated also  by  speech  during  this  period,  1892-96.

(3)  Where  supervision  is  alleged  to  be  exercised  by  Imperator,  Doctor,
Rector,  and  others  already  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  experiences  of
Mr.  Moses,  and  where  the  communications  have  been  mainly  by  writing,


238  CHAPTER    IX  [955

but  occasionally  also  by  speech.     This  last  stage,  which  began  early  in
1897,  still  continues,  and  the  final  outcome  remains  to  be  seen.

955.  I  proceed  now  to  indicate  in  further  detail  the  nature  of  the
evidence  and  the  character  of  the  manifestations  themselves,  and  begin  by
quoting  from  Dr.  Hodgson  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  367-68)  a
brief  statement  of  some  of  the  historical  facts  of  the  case.

Mrs.  Piper  has  been  giving  sittings  for  a  period  extending  over  thirteen
[now,  1901,  seventeen]  years.  Very  early  in  her  trance  history  she  came  under
the  attention  of  Professor  James,  who  sent  many  persons  to  her  as  strangers,
in  most  cases  making  the  appointments  himself,  and  in  no  case  giving  their
names.  She  came  to  some  extent  under  my  own  supervision  in  1887,  and  I
also  sent  many  persons  to  her,  in  many  cases  accompanying  them  and  recording
the  statements  made  at  their  sittings,  and  taking  all  the  care  that  I  could  to
prevent  Mrs.  Piper's  obtaining  any  knowledge  beforehand  of  who  the  sitters
were  to  be.  In  1889-90  Mrs.  Piper  gave  a  series  of  sittings  in  England  under
the  supervision  of  Dr.  Walter  Leaf  and  Mr.  Myers  and  Professor  Lodge,  where
also  the  most  careful  precautions  possible  were  taken  to  ensure  that  the  sitters
went  as  strangers  to  Mrs.  Piper.  Further  sittings  were  supervised  by  myself
in  1890-91  after  Mrs.  Piper's  return  to  America.  Many  persons  who  had  sittings
in  the  course  of  these  earlier  investigations  were  convinced  that  they  were
actually  receiving  communications  from  their  "  deceased "  friends  through
Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  but  although  the  special  investigators  were  satisfied,  from
their  study  of  the  trance-phenomena  themselves  and  a  careful  analysis  of  the
detailed  records  of  the  sittings,  that  some  supernormal  power  was  involved,
there  was  no  definite  agreement  as  to  their  precise  significance.  And  to  myself
it  seemed  that  any  hypothesis  that  was  offered  presented  formidable  difficulties
in  the  way  of  its  acceptance.  In  the  course  of  these  earlier  investigations  the
communications  were  given  almost  entirely  through  the  speech-utterance  of  the
trance-personality  known  as  Phinuit,  and  even  the  best  of  them  were  apt  to
include  much  matter  that  was  irrelevant  and  unlike  the  alleged  communicators,
while  there  were  many  indications  that  Phinuit  himself  was  far  from  being  the
kind  of  person  in  whom  we  should  be  disposed  to  place  implicit  credence.

During  the  years  1892-96  inclusive,  I  exercised  a  yet  closer  supervision  of
Mrs.  Piper's  trances  than  I  had  done  in  previous  years,  continuing  to  take
all  the  precautions  that  I  could  as  regards  the  introduction  of  persons  as
strangers.  This  period  was  marked  by  a  notable  evolution  in  the  quality  of  the
trance  results,  beginning  early  in  1892.  The  character  of  the  manifestations
changed  with  the  development  of  automatic  writing  in  the  trance,  and  with
what  was  alleged  to  be  the  continual  rendering  of  active  assistance  by  the
communicator  whom  I  have  called  G.  P.  [George  Pelham].  As  a  result  of  this
it  appeared  that  communicators  were  able  to  express  their  thoughts  directly
through  the  writing  by  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  instead  of  conveying  them  more
dimly  and  partially  through  Phinuit  as  intermediary;  and  the  advice  and
guidance  which  they,  apparently ,  received  from  G.  P.  enabled  them  to  avoid
much  of  the  confusion  and  irrelevancy  so  characteristic  of  the  earlier  mani-
festations.

956.  I  do  not  propose  here  to  discuss  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  in
this  case,  since  it  has  been  fully  discussed  in  the  articles  referred  to  in


957]       TRANCE,     POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       239

my  Appendices  and  elsewhere,  e.g.  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  Professor  William
James,  Professor  Newbold  of  Pennsylvania  University,  Dr.  Walter  Leaf,
and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  I  merely  quote,  as  a  summary  of  the  argument,
a  few  words  of  Professor  James,  from  The  Psychological  Review,  July,
1898,  pp.  421-22  :—

Dr.  Hodgson  considers  that  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  cannot  be  seriously
maintained.  I  agree  with  him  absolutely.  The  medium  has  been  under
observation,  much  of  the  time  under  close  observation,  as  to  most  of  the
conditions  of  her  life,  by  a  large  number  of  persons,  eager,  many  of  them,  to
pounce  upon  any  suspicious  circumstance  for  [nearly]  fifteen  years.  During
that  time,  not  only  has  there  not  been  one  single  suspicious  circumstance
remarked,  but  not  one  suggestion  has  ever  been  made  from  any  quarter  which
might  tend  positively  to  explain  how  the  medium,  living  the  apparent  life  she
leads,  could  possibly  collect  information  about  so  many  sitters  by  natural
means.  The  scientist  who  is  confident  of  "fraud"  here,  must  remember  that
in  science  as  much  as  in  common  life  a  hypothesis  must  receive  some  positive
specification  and  determination  before  it  can  be  profitably  discussed,  and  a
fraud  which  is  no  assigned  kind  of  fraud,  but  simply  "fraud"  at  large,  fraud
in  abstracto,  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  a  specially  scientific  explanation  of
concrete  facts.

I  give  some  further  statements  and  references  on  this  point  in  956  A
and  B.

957.  Nor  shall  I  discuss  at  any  length  the  character  of  the  Phinuit
personality.  An  excellent  analysis  of  this,  which  I  quote  in  957  A,
was  given  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  According  to  my  own  experience,
during  Mrs.  Piper's  visit  to  England  in  1889-90,  different  trances,  and
different  parts  of  the  same  trance,  varied  greatly  in  quality.  There  were
some  interviews  throughout  which  Phinuit  hardly  asked  any  question,  and
hardly  stated  anything  which  was  not  true.  There  were  others  throughout
which  his  utterances  showed  not  one  glimmer  of  real  knowledge,  but  con-
sisted wholly  of  fishing  questions  and  random  assertions.  The  trances
could  not  always  be  induced  at  pleasure.  A  state  of  quiet  expectancy
would  usually  bring  one  on ;  but  sometimes  the  attempt  altogether  failed.
The  trance  when  induced  usually  lasted  about  an  hour,  and  there  was
often  a  marked  difference  between  the  first  few  minutes  of  a  trance  and
the  remaining  time.  On  such  occasions  almost  all  that  was  of  value
would  be  told  in  the  first  few  minutes ;  and  the  remaining  talk  would
consist  of  vague  generalities  or  mere  repetitions  of  what  had  already  been
given.  Phinuit  always  professed  himself  to  be  a  spirit  communicating
with  spirits ;  and  he  used  to  say  that  he  remembered  their  messages  for  a
few  minutes  after  "  entering  into  the  medium,"  and  then  became  confused.
He  was  not,  however,  apparently  able  to  depart  when  his  budget  of  facts
was  empty.  There  seemed  to  be  some  irresponsible  letting-off  of  energy
which  must  continue  until  the  original  impulse  was  lost  in  incoherence.
My  own  general  conclusion  at  that  time  was  that  Phinuit's  utterances


240  CHAPTER    IX  [958

must  be  judged  as  but  one  item  in  the  long  roll  of  automatic  messages  of
many  kinds  which  were  only  then  beginning  to  be  collected  and  analysed.
I  regarded  it  as  proved  that  these  phenomena  afforded  evidence  of  large
extensions — telepathic  or  clairvoyant — of  the  normal  powers  of  the
human  spirit,  and  thought  it  possible  that  Phinuit's  knowledge  was  thus
derived  from  a  telepathic  or  clairvoyant  faculty,  latent  in  Mrs.  Piper,  and
manifesting  itself  in  ways  with  which  previous  experiment  had  not  made
us  familiar.  On  the  other  hand,  the  automatic  messages  which  we
had  already  studied  included  phenomena  of  very  various  types,  some
of  which  certainly  pointed  primd  facie  to  the  intervention — perhaps  the
very  indirect  intervention — of  the  surviving  personalities  of  the  dead,  and
I  held  that  if  such  instances  of  communication  from  extra-terrene  minds
should  ultimately  find  acceptance  with  science,  then  Phinuit's  messages,
with  all  their  drawbacks  and  all  their  inconsistency,  would  have  fair  claim
to  be  added  to  the  number.

I  need  hardly  say  that  it  is  this  last  hypothesis  which  I  have  since
adopted,  and  although  it  is  obvious  that  the  difficulties  concerning  Phinuit's
identity  have  not  been  solved,  it  seems  possible  to  regard  him  as  an
intelligence  extraneous  to  Mrs.  Piper, — as,  in  fact,  a  discarnate  spirit.  It
must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  he  entirely  failed  in  his  professed
attempts  to  establish  his  personal  identity,  and  could  not  succeed  even  in
substantiating  his  claim  to  be  a  French  doctor.  Unfortunately  we  have
no  contemporary  records  of  what  occurred  during  Mrs.  Piper's  earliest
trances ;  nor  practically  any  information  as  to  the  first  manifestations  of
the  Phinuit  personality.  It  seems  clear  at  least  that  the  name  Phinuit
was  the  result  of  suggestion  at  these  earliest  trances  (see  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  46-58),  and  many  may  think  it  most  probable  that
the  Phinuit  "  control  "  was  nothing  more  than  a  secondary  personality  of
Mrs.  Piper.  But,  according  to  the  statements  (of  which  there  is  of  course
no  evidence)  made  by  "  Imperator,"  Phinuit  was  an  "  earth-bound  "  or
inferior  spirit,  who  had  become  confused  and  bewildered  in  his  first
attempts  at  communication,  and  had,  as  we  say,  "  lost  his  consciousness
of  personal  identity."  That  such  an  occurrence  is  not  uncommon  in  this
life  is  plain  from  the  cases  to  which  I  have  drawn  attention  in  Chapter  II.
of  this  book,  and  we  cannot  prove  it  to  be  impossible  that  profound
memory  disturbances  should  be  produced  in  an  inexperienced  discarnate
spirit  when  first  attempting  to  communicate  with  us  through  a  material
organism.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  Phinuit  personality  has  not  manifested
either  directly  or  indirectly  since  January  1897,  when  "Imperator"
claimed  the  supervision  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trances.

958.  There  were  various  cases  of  alleged  direct  "  control  "  by  spirits
other  than  Phinuit  during  the  first  stage  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  history.
Two  of  these,  the  "  E."  control  and  the  aunt  of  Professor  James,  are
referred  to  in  the  report  by  Professor  James  which  I  have  quoted  in  956  A.
These  and  several  others  are  also  mentioned  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  Proceed-


959]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        241

ings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  28-40 ;  but  even  in  the  most  remarkable  of
these  earlier  cases  of  apparent  "possession"  of  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  by
other  spirits,  the  evidence  available  for  publication  was  scanty,  and  in  one
or  two  cases  there  was  scarcely  anything  to  indicate  that  the  supposed
communicating  personalities  were  not  impersonations  by  Phinuit.

The  most  notable  case  was  that  of  a  lady,  Miss  W.,  who  had  forty-five
sittings,  at  forty-one  of  which  the  control  was  taken  for  at  least  part  of  the
time  by  a  personal  friend,  who  presented  marked  characteristics  of  the
friend  it  purported  to  be ;  showed  specific  knowledge  of  private  matters
known  only  to  that  friend  and  the  sitter ;  showed  a  knowledge  of  facts
of  which  he  was  reminded  by  the  sitter,  and  in  turn  reminded  the  sitter
of  facts  temporarily  forgotten  by  her ;  made  some  mistakes  in  matters
once  known  to  the  friend,  and  remembered  well  by  the  sitter,  and  told
the  sitter  of  facts  not  known  to  her  and  afterwards  verified  (loc.  cit.  43).

Usually,  as  we  have  seen,  Phinuit  acted  as  intermediary,  reproducing
the  communications  made  by  the  "  deceased  "  relatives  or  friends  of  the
sitters,  and  in  a  favourable  series  of  sittings  the  impression  made  was
generally  as  described  in  the  following  case  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  (From
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  455.)

One  of  the  best  sitters  was  my  next-door  neighbour,  Isaac  C.  Thompson,
F.L.S.,  to  whose  name  indeed,  before  he  had  been  in  any  way  introduced,
Phinuit  sent  a  message  purporting  to  come  from  his  father.  Three  generations
of  his  and  of  his  wife's  family  living  and  dead  (small  and  compact  Quaker
families)  were,  in  the  course  of  two  or  three  sittings,  conspicuously  mentioned,
with  identifying  detail ;  the  main  informant  representing  himself  as  his
deceased  brother,  a  young  Edinburgh  doctor,  whose  loss  had  been  mourned
some  twenty  years  ago.  The  familiarity  and  touchingness  of  the  messages
communicated  in  this  particular  instance  were  very  remarkable,  and  can  by  no
means  be  reproduced  in  any  printed  report  of  the  sitting.  Their  case  is  one  in
which  very  few  mistakes  were  made,  the  details  standing  out  vividly  correct,  so
that  in  fact  they  found  it  impossible  not  to  believe  that  their  relatives  were
actually  speaking  to  them.

Such  cases  were  not  usual,  and  on  the  whole,  although  there  seemed
to  be  in  this  first  stage  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  history,  in  1884-91,  abun-
dant proof  of  some  supernormal  faculty  which  demanded  at  least  the
hypothesis  of  thought-transference  from  living  persons  both  near  and
distant,  and  suggested  occasionally  some  power  of  telaesthesia  or  perhaps
even  of  premonition,  yet  the  main  question  with  which  we  are  now
concerned, — whether  Mrs.  Piper's  organism  was  controlled,  directly  or
indirectly,  by  discarnate  spirits  who  could  give  satisfactory  evidence  of
their  identity, — remained  undecided.

959.     More  important,  as  regards  this  question  of  personal  identity,  is

the  series  of  sittings  which    formed  the  second  stage  of  Mrs.    Piper's

trance  history,  in  the  years  1892-96,  of  which  a  detailed  account  is  given

in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  284-582  and  vol.  xiv.  pp.  6-49,  where

VOL.  ii.  Q


242  CHAPTER    IX  [959

the  chief  communicator  or  intermediary  was  G.  P.  This  G.  P.,  whose
name  (although,  of  course,  well  known  to  many  persons)  has  been  altered
for  publication  into  "  George  Pelham,"  was  a  young  man  of  great  ability,
mainly  occupied  in  literary  pursuits.  Although  born  an  American  citizen,
he  was  a  member  of  a  noble  English  family.  I  never  met  him,  but
I  have  the  good  fortune  to  include  a  number  of  his  friends  among  my
own,  and  with  several  of  these  I  have  been  privileged  to  hold  intimate
conversation  on  the  nature  of  the  communications  which  they  received.  I
have  thus  heard  of  many  significant  utterances  of  G.  P.'s,  which  are  held
too  private  for  print ;  and  I  have  myself  been  present  at  sittings  where
G.  P.  manifested.  For  the  full  discussion  of  the  evidence  tending  to
prove  the  identity  of  G.  P.,  I  refer  my  readers  to  the  original  report  in  the
Proceedings  S.P.R.  I  give  in  959  A  and  B  a  detailed  account  of  the
circumstances  of  the  first  communications  of  G.  P.,  and  quote  here
a  general  summary,  given  by  Dr.  Hodgson  several  years  later,  of  the
whole  series  of  his  manifestations.  (From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.
PP-  328-330.)

On  the  first  appearance  of  the  communicating  G.  P.  to  Mr.  Hart  in  March
1892,  he  gave  not  only  his  own  name  and  that  of  the  sitter,  but  also  the  names
of  several  of  their  most  intimate  common  friends,  and  referred  specifically  to
the  most  important  private  matters  connected  with  them.  At  the  same  sitting
reference  was  made  to  other  incidents  unknown  to  the  sitters,  such  as  the
account  of  Mrs.  Pelham's  taking  the  studs  from  the  body  of  G.  P.  and  giving
them  to  Mr.  Pelham  to  be  sent  to  Mr.  Hart,  and  the  reproduction  of  a  notable
remembrance  of  a  conversation  which  G.  P.  living  had  with  Katharine,  the
daughter  of  his  most  intimate  friends,  the  Howards.  These  were  primary  ex-
amples of  two  kinds  of  knowledge  concerning  matters  unknown  to  the  sitters,
of  which  various  other  instances  were  afterwards  given;  knowledge  of  events
connected  with  G.  P.  which  had  occurred  since  his  death,  and  knowledge  of
special  memories  pertaining  to  the  G.  P.  personality  before  death.  A  week
later,  at  the  sitting  of  Mr.  Vance,  he  made  an  appropriate  inquiry  after  the
sitter's  son,  and  in  reply  to  inquiries  rightly  specified  that  the  sitter's  son  had
been  at  college  with  him,  and  further  correctly  gave  a  correct  description  of  the
sitter's  summer  home  as  the  place  of  a  special  visit.  This,  again,  was  paralleled
by  many  later  instances  where  appropriate  inquiries  were  made  and  remem-
brances recalled  concerning  other  personal  friends  of  G.  P.  Nearly  two  weeks
later  came  his  most  intimate  friends,  the  Howards,  and  to  these,  using  the  voice
directly,  he  showed  such  a  fulness  of  private  remembrance  and  specific  know-
ledge and  characteristic  intellectual  and  emotional  quality  pertaining  to  G.  P.
that,  though  they  had  previously  taken  no  interest  in  any  branch  of  psychical
research,  they  were  unable  to  resist  the  conviction  that  they  were  actually  con-
versing with  their  old  friend  G.  P.  And  this  conviction  was  strengthened  by
their  later  experiences.  Not  least  important,  at  that  time,  was  his  anxiety
about  the  disposal  of  a  certain  book  and  about  certain  specified  letters  which
concern  matters  too  private  for  publication.  He  was  particularly  desirous
of  convincing  his  father,  who  lived  in  Washington,  that  it  was  indeed  G.  P.  who
was  communicating,  and  he  soon  afterwards  stated  that  his  father  had  taken
his  photograph  to  be  copied,  as  was  the  case,  though  Mr.  Pelham  had  not


959]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        243

informed  even  his  wife  of  this  fact.  Later  on  he  reproduced  a  series  of
incidents,  unknown  to  the  sitters,  in  which  Mrs.  Howard  had  been  engaged  in
her  own  home.  Later  still,  at  a  sitting  with  his  father  and  mother  in  New
York,  a  further  intimate  knowledge  was  shown  of  private  family  circumstances,
and  at  the  following  sitting,  at  which  his  father  and  mother  were  not  present,
he  gave  the  details  of  certain  private  actions  which  they  had  done  in  the
interim.  At  their  sitting,  and  at  various  sittings  of  the  Howards,  appropriate
comments  were  made  concerning  different  articles  presented  which  had
belonged  to  G.  P.  living,  or  had  been  familiar  to  him  ;  he  inquired  after
other  personal  articles  which  were  not  presented  at  the  sittings,  and  showed
intimate  and  detailed  recollections  of  incidents  in  connection  with  them.  In
points  connected  with  the  recognition  of  articles  with  their  related  associations
of  a  personal  sort,  the  G.  P.  communicating,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  never
failed.  Nor  has  he  failed  in  the  recognition  of  personal  friends.  I  may  say
generally  that  out  of  a  large  number  of  sitters  who  went  as  strangers  to  Mrs.
Piper,  the  communicating  G.  P.  has  picked  out  the  friends  of  G.  P.  living,  pre-
cisely as  the  G.  P.  living  might  have  been  expected  to  do  [thirty  cases  of
recognition  out  of  at  least  one  hundred  and  fifty  persons  who  have  had  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper  since  the  first  appearance  of  G.  P.,  and  no  case  of  false
recognition],  and  has  exhibited  memories  in  connection  with  these  and  other
friends  which  are  such  as  would  naturally  be  associated  as  part  of  the  G.  P.
personality,  which  certainly  do  not  suggest  in  themselves  that  they  originate
otherwise,  and  which  are  accompanied  by  the  emotional  relations  which
were  connected  with  such  friends  in  the  mind  of  G.  P.  living.  At  one  of
his  early  communications  G.  P.  expressly  undertook  the  task  of  rendering
all  the  assistance  in  his  power  towards  establishing  the  continued  existence
of  himself  and  other  communicators,  in  pursuance  of  a  promise  of  which
he  himself  reminded  me,  made  some  two  years  or  more  before  his  death,
that  if  he  died  before  me  and  found  himself  "still  existing,"  he  would
devote  himself  to  prove  the  fact ;  and  in  the  persistence  of  his  endeavour
to  overcome  the  difficulties  in  communicating  ?,s  far  as  possible,  in  his  con-
stant readiness  to  act  as  amanuensis  at  the  sittings,  in  the  effect  which  he
has  produced  by  his  counsels, — to  myself  as  investigator,  and  to  numerous
other  sitters  and  communicators, — he  has,  in  so  far  as  I  can  form  a  judg-
ment in  a  problem  so  complex  and  still  presenting  so  much  obscurity,
displayed  all  the  keenness  and  pertinacity  which  were  eminently  character-
istic of  G.  P.  living.

Finally,  the  manifestations  of  this  G.  P.  communicating  have  not  been  of  a
fitful  and  spasmodic  nature,  they  have  exhibited  the  marks  of  a  continuous
living  and  persistent  personality,  manifesting  itself  through  a  course  of  years,
and  showing  the  same  characteristics  of  an  independent  intelligence  whether
friends  of  G.  P.  were  present  at  the  sittings  or  not.  I  learned  of  various  cases
where  in  my  absence  active  assistance  was  rendered  by  G.  P.  to  sitters  who
had  never  previously  heard  of  him,  and  from  time  to  time  he  would  make  brief
pertinent  reference  to  matters  with  which  G.  P.  living  was  acquainted,  though
I  was  not,  and  sometimes  in  ways  which  indicated  that  he  could  to  some  extent
see  what  was  happening  in  our  world  to  persons  in  whose  welfare  G.  P.  living
would  have  been  specially  interested.

The  sitter  called  Mr.  Hart,  to  whom  G.  P.  first  manifested,  died  at
Naples  three  years  afterwards,  and  communicated,  with  the  help  of  G.  P.,


244  CHAPTER    IX  [960

on  the  second  day   after  his   death.     I   give  an  account   of  his  com-
munications in  959  C.

960.  There  are  numerous  instances  in  the  reports  in  the  Proceedings,
(see  vol.  vi.  pp.  647-50;  vol.  viii.  pp.   15-26;   vol.  xiii.,  passim ;  and
vol.  xvi.  pp.  131-3),  of  the  giving  of  information  unknown  to  the  sitters
and  afterwards  verified.     A  striking  illustration  of  this  occurred  in  the
case  of  the  lady  called  "  Elisa  Manners,"  whose  near  relatives  and  friends
concerned  in  the  communications  were  known  to  myself.     I  give  a  brief
account  of  her  first  communications  in  960  A.     On  the  morning  after  the
death  of  her  uncle,  called  F.  in  the  report,  she  described  an  incident
in  connection  with  the  appearance  of  herself  to  her  uncle  on  his  death-
bed.    I  quote  Dr.  Hodgson's  account  of  this   (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.
xiii.  p.  378.     Foot-note).

The  notice  of  his  [F.'s]  death  was  in  a  Boston  morning  paper,  and  I
happened  to  see  it  on  my  way  to  the  sitting.  The  first  writing  of  the  sitting
came  from  Madame  Elisa,  without  my  expecting  it.  She  wrote  clearly  and
strongly,  explaining  that  F.  was  there  with  her,  but  unable  to  speak  directly,
that  she  wished  to  give  me  an  account  of  how  she  had  helped  F.  to  reach  her.
She  said  that  she  had  been  present  at  his  death-bed,  and  had  spoken  to  him,
and  she  repeated  what  she  had  said,  an  unusual  form  of  expression,  and  in-
dicated that  he  had  heard  and  recognised  her.  This  was  confirmed  in  detail
in  the  only  way  possible  at  that  time,  by  a  very  intimate  friend  of  Madame
Elisa  and  myself,  and  also  of  the  nearest  surviving  relative  of  F.  I  showed  my
friend  the  account  of  the  sitting,  and  to  this  friend,  a  day  or  two  later,  the
relative,  who  was  present  at  the  death-bed,  stated  spontaneously  that  F.  when
dying  said  that  he  saw  Madame  Elisa  who  was  speaking  to  him,  and  he  re-
peated what  she  was  saying.  The  expression  so  repeated,  which  the  relative
quoted  to  my  friend,  was  that  which  I  had  received  from  Madame  Elisa
through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  when  the  death-bed  incident  was  of  course  entirely
unknown  to  me.

Rare  are  the  "  Peak  in  Darien  "  cases  (see  section  718),  but  cases  like
this  are  rarer  still.

961.  As  will  be  seen  from  the  account  of  Elisa  Manners  in  960  A,
some  attempt  was  made  in  her  case  to  speak  and  write  Italian.     In  the
case  which  follows  there  was  an  attempt  to  write  Hawaiian.     (From  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  p.  337.)

This  was  at  a  sitting  arranged  for  by  Mrs.  Howard  in  October  1893.  Mrs.
Howard  made  some  notes  at  the  time  from  which  the  report  was  prepared,  and
I  obtained  some  additional  information  later  from  the  sitter,  Mr.  L.  Vernon
Briggs.  The  original  writing  was  apparently  lost,  and  Mr.  Briggs  never  had
the  opportunity  of  studying  it  after  the  sitting.  The  communication  purported
to  come  from  a  Honolulu  boy  named  Kalua,  who  became  much  attached  to
Mr.  Briggs  during  a  six  months'  stay  of  Mr.  Briggs  in  Honolulu  in  1881,  and
who  followed  Mr.  Briggs  to  Boston  under  somewhat  romantic  circumstances
in  1883.  He  was  soon  sent  back  to  his  native  island,  but  again  returned  to
Boston,  where  he  was  shot  in  1886,  in  a  sailor's  Bethel,  whether  inten-


962]        TRANCE,     POSSESSION,     ECSTASY        245

tionally  or  not  was  unknown.  There  was  some  suspicion  against  a
Swede,  who  was  imprisoned,  but  there  was  no  evidence  against  him,  and
he  was  finally  discharged.  The  Swede  said  that  Kalua  had  accidentally
shot  himself  with  a  revolver,  and  eventually  confessed  that  after  the  ac-
cident he  had  himself  hidden  the  revolver  behind  a  flue,  where,  after  taking
part  of  the  chimney  down,  it  was  found.  Mr.  Briggs  had  taken  a  handker-
chief belonging  to  Kalua  to  the  sitting.  Kalua  had  been  shot  through
the  heart,  and  there  was  some  confusion  apparently  about  the  locality
of  the  suffering,  "stomach"  and  "side"  being  mentioned,  under  what  ap-
peared to  be  the  direct  control  of  the  voice  by  "  Kalua,"  and  Mr.  Briggs
asked  if  it  was  Kalua.  Phinuit  then  spoke  for  "  Kalua,"  who  said  that  he
did  not  kill  himself,  that  he  had  been  gambling  with  the  other  man  who
disputed  with  him  and  shot  him,  but  did  not  mean  to,  and  who  threw  the
revolver  "into  the  hot  box  where  the  pepples  are"  (meaning  "the  furnace"
and  the  "coals"),  and  hid  his  purse  under  the  steps  where  he  was  killed.
"  Kalua  "  also  said  there  was  shrubbery  near  it.  The  cellar  of  the  house  was
examined,  but  no  purse  was  found,  and  there  was  no  shrubbery  in  the  cellar.
"  Kalua  "  tried  to  write  Hawaiian,  but  the  only  "  ordinary  "  words  deciphered
were  "lei "  (meaning  wreaths,  which  he  made  daily  for  Mr.  Briggs)  which  was
written  clearly  and  frequently,  and  an  attempt  at  "  aloha  " — greeting.  Phinuit
tried  to  get  the  answer  to  the  question  where  Kalua's  father  was,  but  could  only
succeed  in  getting  "Hiram."  But  the  writing  gave  the  answer  "  Hawaiin
Islands."  In  reply  to  the  question  which  one,  the  answer  in  writing  was
Kawai,  but  Phinuit  said  Tawai.  The  word  is  spelt  Kawai,  but  is  pronounced
Tawai  by  the  natives  of  the  island  itself  and  in  the  island  where  Kalua  was
born.  The  natives  of  the  other  islands  call  it  Kawai.

962.  Not  least  important  as  regards  the  question  of  identity  are  some
of  the  communications  purporting  to  come  from  young  children.  I  give  in
962  A  a  synopsis  of  the  chief  points  in  connection  with  the  twin  children,
Margaret  and  Ruthie,  of  Dr.  A.  B.  Thaw,  and  quote  here  an  account  of
communications  coming  from  the  child  of  Mrs.  Katherine  Paine  Sutton.
(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  386-9.)

In  the  two  sittings  which  Mrs.  Sutton  had  in  December  1893  (p.  484)^
she  had  articles  which  had  been  used  by  her  recently  deceased  little  girl
Katherine.  One  incident  that  was  characteristic  in  the  case  of  Ruthie,  the
patting  of  her  father's  face,  was  repeated  in  the  case  of  Katherine  when  it  had
no  special  significance.  There  were  only  three  points  that  might  be  described
as  in  part  common  to  the  two  children,  Ruthie  and  Katherine.  Katherine
had  "lovely  curls,"  mentioned  by  Phinuit,  and  also  called  for  the  "tick-tick,"
but  Phinuit  added  correctly  that  she  called  it  "  the  clock,"  and  the  word  babee
was  given  correctly,  as  Ruthie  also  used  to  pronounce  it.  Apparently  the
only  incorrect  statement  purporting  to  come  from  the  child  was  that  she  called
a  lady  (Mrs.  C.,  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Sutton,  who  purported  to  be  present  in  "spirit,"
bringing  the  child,  and  whose  Christian  name  and  surname  were  given  correctly
by  Phinuit)  Auntie.  The  lady  was  not  her  aunt.  The  statements  made  came
through  Phinuit  Concerning  a  silver  medal  it  was  said  that  she  wanted  to  bite
it,  and  concerning  a  string  of  buttons  that  she  wanted  to  put  them  in  her
mouth,  both  correct.  Phinuit  said  that  she  had  no  sore  throat  any  more,  and
1  The  references  in  this  passage  are  to  the  pages  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  Report.


246  CHAPTER    IX  [962

that  she  kept  showing  him  her  tongue.  Katherine  living  had  sore  throat  and
her  tongue  was  paralysed.  She  gave  correctly  the  name  by  which  she  called
herself,  Kakie,  the  name  Dodo  by  which  she  called  her  brother  George,  the
name  Bagie  by  which  she  called  a  living  sister.  Margaret,  and  the  name
Eleanor,  of  another  living  sister  for  whom  she  called  much  in  her  last  illness.
She  also  asked  for  Dinah,  this  being  the  name  of  an  old  rag-doll.  She  said
truly  that  Dodo  used  to  march  with  her,  "  He  put  me  way  up."  She  wanted
to  go  to  "wide  horsey" — as  the  living  Katherine  had  pleaded  all  through
her  illness,  and  to  be  taken  "  to  see  the  mooley-cow/'  the  name  by  which  the
living  Katherine  called  the  cow,  which  she  was  taken  almost  daily  to  see.
She  said  she  had  "the  pretty  white  flowers  you  put  on  me,"  and  Phinuit
described  lilies  of  the  valley,  which  were  the  flowers  that  had  been  placed
in  the  casket  (see  p.  303).  She  said  she  was  happy  with  grandma — Mrs.
Sutton's  mother  had  been  dead  many  years — and  later  on  wanted  to  send
her  love  to  her  grandma  and  also  apparently  to  her  great  grandma  who  was
referred  to  as  Marmie.  She  had  a  grandmother  and  also  a  great -grandmother
then  living,  and  Marmie  was  the  name  by  which  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sutton  spoke
of  the  great-grandmother,  but  Katherine  always  called  her  Grammie.  She
also  referred  to  two  songs  she  used  to  sing :  "  Bye-bye,  O  baby  bye,"  and
"  Row  Row,  my  song."  This  "  Row  Row "  song  was  sung  frequently  by
Katherine  during  her  illness,  and  was  the  last  sung  by  her  when  living,  and
she  asked  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sutton  to  sing  it  at  the  sitting.  They  sang  the  first
four  lines,  and  the  voice — presumably  still  "  controlled  "  by  Phinuit  in  imitation
of  Katherine — sang  with  them.  Phinuit  then  hushed  the  sitters,  and  the  voice
sang  the  remaining  four  lines  [alone].  It  is,  of  course,  a  familiar  child's  song .
(p.  486).  At  the  second  sitting  a  fortnight  later,  the  voice  sang  all  eight  lines
alone,  then  asked  Mrs.  Sutton  to  sing  it  with  her,  as  she  did,  and  then  at
Mrs.  Sutton's  request  also  sang  with  her  the  other  song  "  Bye-bye,"  precisely,
according  to  Mrs.  Sutton,  as  the  living  Katherine  sang  it.  Mr.  Sutton,  who
was  present  at  the  first  sitting,  did  not  attend  the  second  sitting,  and  he  was
asked  for  immediately  after  this  singing,  which  came  at  the  beginning  of  the
sitting.  "  Kakie  wants  papa."  This  was  a  very  characteristic  expression.
There  were  indications  suggesting  a  knowledge  of  what  was  going  on  in
Mrs.  Sutton's  family.  At  the  first  sitting  Katherine  said  she  went  "to  see
horsey"  every  day.  The  sitters  had  been  staying  in  the  country  with  Mr.
Sutton's  parents  and  had  been  driving  frequently.  Margaret,  a  living  sister,
was  still  there,  and  driving  daily.  Mrs.  Sutton,  who  has  had  many  psychical
experiences  herself  in  seeing  the  "  apparitions  "  of  "  deceased  "  persons  (see  p.
484)  had  "seen  Kakie"  during  that  visit  to  Mr.  Sutton's  parents.  At  the
second  sitting  Katherine  said  that  she  saw  Bagie  with  grandma,  and  that
she  played  with  Eleanor  every  day  and  liked  the  little  bed.  A  lady  had
recently  lent  Eleanor  a  doll's  bed,  but  Mrs.  Sutton  had  not  associated  this
with  Kakie.  There  were  incidents  at  both  sittings  which  showed  associations
that  seemed  to  be  in  the  mind  of  the  child,  which  did  not  awaken  the
corresponding  associations  in  the  minds  of  the  sitters  even  when  the  con-
temporary notes  to  the  sittings  were  made.  Thus  in  the  first  sitting  she
asked  for  "  horsey."  Mrs.  Sutton  gave  a  little  toy  horse  with  which  the  child
had  played  during  her  illness.  But  the  child  said  "  big  horsey,  not  this  little
one,"  and  Mrs.  Sutton  surmised  that  she  referred  to  another  toy  cart-horse  that
she  used  to  like.  At  the  second  sitting  came  "  Kakie  wants  the  horse,"  and
the  little  horse  was  again  given.


962]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       247

"  No,  that  is  not  the  one.  The  big  horse — so  big.  [Phinuit  shows  how
large.]  Eleanor's  horse.  Eleanor  used  to  put  it  in  Kakie's  lap.  She  loved
that  horsey."

These  additional  particulars,  which  were  true,  then  reminded  Mrs.  Sutton
of  the  horse  referred  to,  which  was  packed  away  in  another  city,  and  which  had
not  occurred  to  the  mind  of  Mrs.  Sutton  in  connection  with  Kakie.  Similarly
at  the  first  sitting  she  asked  two  or  three  times  for  "  the  little  book."  The  sitter
noted  that  she  liked  a  linen  picture-book.  But  the  remarks  made  at  her  second
sitting  suggest  that  the  little  book  in  the  child's  mind  was  not  this  one.  "  Kakie
wants  the  little  bit  of  a  book  mamma  read  by  her  bedside,  with  the  pretty
bright  things  hanging  from  it — mamma  put  it  in  her  hands — the  last  thing  she
remembers."  Mrs.  Sutton  states  that  this  was  a  little  prayer-book  with  a  cross
and  other  symbols  in  silver  attached  to  ribbons  for  marking  the  places,  and
that  it  was  sent  to  her  by  a  friend  after  Kakie  had  ceased  to  know  any  one
except  perhaps  for  a  passing  moment.  Mrs.  Sutton  read  it  when  Kakie  seemed
unconscious,  and  after  Kakie's  death  l  placed  it  in  her  hands  to  prevent  the
blood  settling  in  the  nails.  She  adds  later  that  Mrs.  Piper's  hands,  when  the
book  was  asked  for  at  the  sitting,  were  put  into  the  same  position  as  Kakie's.

Another  book  was  mentioned  at  the  second  sitting  which  apparently  was
the  one  Mrs.  Sutton  thought  of  at  the  first  sitting.  "  Kakie  wants  the  book
with  red  letters  and  pictures  of  animals."  Correct  description.

At  this  second  sitting  also  Katherine  again  apparently  referred  to  Mrs.  C.,
— who  was  not  a  relative, — as  Auntie,  and  to  her  great-grandmother  as  Marmie.
At  this  sitting  Mrs.  Sutton  twice  saw  the  "  apparition  "  of  Kakie  (and  she  also
saw  the  figure  of  Dr.  Clarke,  another  communicator,  just  as  Phinuit  said :  "  Here
is  an  old  gentleman  who  wants  to  speak  to  you,  Dr.  Clarke."  See  p.  484).
On  one  of  these  occasions  Mrs.  Sutton  "  saw  her  for  a  moment  standing  at  the
table  trying  to  reach  a  spool  "  of  silk,  and  at  the  same  moment  Phinuit  reached
for  it,  saying :  "  She  wants  that,  she  and  Eleanor  used  to  play  with.  She  calls
it  Eleanor's."  This  was  all  true,  but  the  sitter  "  had  not  connected  it  with
Eleanor  in  her  thoughts."  Another  incident  I  quote  here  just  as  it  is  given  in
the  detailed  report  of  the  sitting.

[Kakie  asks  for  her  ball.  I  gave  it  to  Phinuit,  who  tries  to  find  what  she
wants  to  do  with  it.]

"  Bite  it  ?     Toss  it  ?     Roll  it  ?     Throw  it  ?  "

[No,  she  wants  a  string.  Mrs.  H.  gave  him  a  string.  He  tries  to  tie  it
around  the  ball.]  [A  little  red  wooden  ball  with  a  hole  through  it.  The  ball
had  a  string  through  it  when  she  used  to  play  with  it.]

"  No,  that  is  not  right— through  it."

"  There,  there,  be  a  good  little  girl.  Don't  cry.  Don't  be  impatient.  You
want  your  mamma  to  see  how  you  do  it,  so  she  will  know  it  is  you,  don't  you,
dear  ?  Old  man  will  do  it  for  her."

[He  put  the  string  through,  held  it  up,  and  hit  it  with  the  finger,  making  it
swing.]

"  That  is  it,  is  it  not,  darling?     Nice  little  girl  as  ever  was."

[While  she  was  sick  it  was  her  great  delight  to  have  me  hold  the  string  and
let  her  hit  the  little  red  ball  with  her  finger  or  spoon.  She  made  the  motions
as  if  doing  it,  after  she  became  unconscious.]

1  If  the  human  personality  survives  death,  it  may  be  a  difficult  question  to  decide  in
individual  cases  precisely  when  the  consciousness  is  finally  withdrawn  from  the  body.


248  CHAPTER    IX  [963

963.  There  are  numerous  incidents  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Piper's
trances,  which  indicate  not  only  that  articles  which  have  been  worn  by
deceased  persons  may  facilitate  communications  from  such  persons,  but
that  articles  which  have  been  worn  by  persons  still  living  may  afford  clues
to  long  past  events ;  but  how  these  objects  afford  aid  in  the  acquisition
of  knowledge  of  the  past  events  is  still  entirely  obscure.  (See,  e.g.,
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  460 ;  vol.  viii.  pp.  15-27.)  This  faculty  of
what  I  have  called  retrocognitive  telaesthesia,  is,  as  we  have  seen,  some-
times manifested  in  cases  where  there  is  no  reason  to  ascribe  it  to  any
extraneous  spirit.  (See  572,  572  A,  572  B.)

The  alleged  controlling  spirits  sometimes  seem  to  possess  a  super-
normal knowledge  of  the  present  bodily  state  of  living  persons,  with
the  occasional  power  of  foretelling  organic  changes,  including  death,  or
of  foreseeing  the  future  surroundings  of  a  living  person.  Here,  again,
we  have  had  instances  of  similar  supernormal  knowledge  on  the  part  of
the  subliminal  self  (see  565  A,  573  F).  Some  of  the  most  specific
instances  of  predictions  of  deaths  given  through  Mrs.  Piper  are  quoted
in  963  A.  In  one  of  these  cases  a  death  was  predicted  to  occur  "  soon,"
and  it  occurred  a  little  more  than  a  year  later.  But  in  several  other  cases
where  deaths  were  predicted  to  occur  "  soon  "  or  "  before  very  long,"
or  where  similar  expressions  were  used,  the  time  elapsing  before  the
death  has  extended  from  about  two  to  not  less  than  six  years.  There
is  little  evidence  of  any  true  prevision  of  other  events  than  death  through
Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  In  some  cases,  events  seem  to  have  been  partially
foreseen,  but  the  predictions  made  were  not  completely  fulfilled.  (See
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  124,  and  compare  425  C.)

Setting  aside  the  instances  explicable  by  some  telepathic  or  telaes-
thetic  inference,  the  discarnate  spirits  claim  occasionally  to  see  specific
future  scenes  in  connection  with  particular  persons — of  the  origin  of
which  scenes  they  seem  unable  to  offer  any  explanation.  They  do  not
profess  usually  to  be  aware  beforehand  of  the  precise  time  of  death  of  a
dying  person, — except  perhaps  in  cases  where  the  death  is  very  near, —
when  it  is  claimed  that  the  approaching  death  becomes  known  to  the
incarnate  spirit  (not  necessarily  to  the  supraliminal  self)  as  well  as  to  the
discarnate  spirit  of  some  near  relative,  but  the  real  source  of  the  know-
ledge remains,  of  course,  obscure.1

1  On  this  point  see  425  A,  425  B,  425  E,  717,  717  B,  852  A,  865  A  (name  of
distant  dying  person  written),  874  A  and  927  B.  Compare  the  case  of  "  Elisa  Manners"
in  section  960,  the  cases  of  Mrs.  Alger  and  Mrs.  O'Gorman  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  v.  pp.  293-95,  ancl  tne  case  from  Mrs.  Meredith  in  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.
p.  136.  In  the  cases  of  Mrs.  Alger  and  Mrs.  O'Gorman  the  prediction  of  death  seems
to  have  emanated  from  the  incarnate  spirit  of  the  person  who  died,  and  the  precise  date
of  the  death  was  given,  in  the  first  case  four  days  beforehand — though  the  evidence
on  this  point  is  somewhat  doubtful — and  in  the  second  case  a  week  beforehand.  In  the
case  quoted  in  874  A,  the  precise  date  of  death  was  announced  forty  days  beforehand
by  the  tilts  of  a  table,  the  communication  purporting  to  come  from  a  discarnate  spirit.


965]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        249

964.  With  regard  to  the  last  of  the  three  periods  of  Mrs.  Piper's
trance-history  to  which  I  referred  in  section  954,  the  only  detailed  pub-
lished accounts  are  contained  in  Professor  Hyslop's  report  of  his  sittings  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvi.  But  neither  his  records  nor  the  manuscript
records  which  I  have  seen  contain  any  proof  of  the  personal  identity  of
the  alleged  spirits  called  "  Imperator,"  "  Doctor,"  "  Rector,"  &c.,  or  any
proof  of  the  identity  of  these  intelligences  with  those  claimed  by  Mr.
Moses.  (See  945,  950,  and  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  408-9.)
Whether  any  such  proof  will  be  forthcoming  in  the  future  remains  to
be  seen, — or  indeed,  whether  proof  or  disproof  for  us  at  present  is
even  possible.

965.  The  accounts  here  quoted  are  perhaps  sufficient  to  illustrate  that
theory  of  possession  which  seems  especially  to  apply  to  the  case  of  Mrs.
Piper, — according  to  which  her  bodily  organism  is  controlled  by  dis-
carnate  spirits  who  attempt  to  prove  their  identity  by  reproducing
recollections  of  their  earthly  lives.1

In  the  case  of  Mr.  Moses  the  control  of  the  mind  or  body  by  dis-
carnate  spirits  seemed  to  vary  in  degree  at  different  times,  and  the
medium's  own  preconceptions  seemed  to  form  an  important  factor  in  the
communications  he  received, — and  it  is  obvious  that  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case
also  the  control  must  be  limited  by  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  medium.
But  we  must  continually  bear  in  mind  the  impossibility  of  distinguishing
the  different  elements  that  may  enter  into  so  complex  a  phenomenon.
I  have  spoken  of  parallel  series  of  manifestations  indicating  on  the  one
hand  the  powers  of  the  subliminal  self,  which  culminate  in  ecstasy,  and
on  the  other  the  agency  of  discarnate  spirits,  leading  on  to  possession.
But  the  phenomena  are  not,  in  fact,  so  simply  arranged.  It  seems  pro-
bable that  when  a  spirit  can  control  a  sensitive's  organism,  the  sensitive's
own  subliminal  self  may  be  able  to  do  the  same.  The  transparency
which  renders  the  one  possession  possible  facilitates  also  the  other.  This
may  be  one  reason  for  the  admixture  seen  in  most  trance  utterances, — of
elements  which  come  from  the  sensitive's  own  mind  with  elements  inspired
from  without.  To  this  source  of  confusion  must  be  added  the  influence
of  the  sensitive's  supraliminal  self  also,  whose  habits  of  thought  and  turns
of  speech  must  needs  appear  whenever  use  is  made  of  the  brain-centres
which  that  supraliminal  self  habitually  controls.  Further,  we  cannot  draw
a  clear  line  between  the  influence  of  the  organism  itself, — as  already
moulded  by  its  own  indwelling  spirit, — and  the  continuing  influence  of
that  spirit,  not  altogether  separated  from  the  organism.  That  is  to  say,
the  sensitive's  own  previous  ideas  may  go  on  developing  themselves  during

1  Some  ingenious  experiments  designed  to  test  how  living  persons  can  be  identified
on  somewhat  similar  evidence  were  carried  out  by  Professor  Hyslop,  as  described  in
his  report,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  537-623.  In  these  experiments,  series
of  telegraphic  messages  were  sent  from  one  person  to  another,  one  person  knowing  who
the  other  was,  but  not  vice  versd.


250  CHAPTER    IX  [966

the  trance,  which  may  thus  be  incomplete.  The  result  may  be  a  kind  of
mixed  telepathy  between  the  sitter,  the  sensitive's  spirit,  and  the  extraneous
spirit.  I  believe  that  sometimes  during  one  and  the  same  access  of  trance
all  these  elements  are  in  turn  apparent ;  and  a  long  familiarity  with  the
sensitive  will  be  needed  if  we  would  disentangle  the  intermingled  threads.
In  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper  it  may  be  supposeo^  that  in  the  earliest  stages
of  her  trance-history  she  was  not  completely  controlled  by  discarnate
spirits,  but  that  her  subliminal  serf  was  used  as  an  intermediary, — as  a
hypnotised  subject,  so  to  say,  following  the  suggestions  of  discarnate
spirits ;  that  in  the  next  stage  the  control  by  discarnate  spirits  was  of  the
more  direct  and  complete  kind  which  I  have  specially  called  possession  ;
and  that  in  her  last  period  she  has  reverted  once  more  to  the  earlier  stage
where  her  subliminal  self,  or  its  influence,  is  not  completely  excluded.

Whether  this  be  so  or  not,  the  apparent  distinction  between  the
control  by  her  own  subliminal  self  and  that  by  the  alleged  spirits  is  still
not  less  marked  than  in  the  early  stages.  Generally  it  is  even  more
noticeable,  owing  to  the  usual  brief  intervals  of  ecstasy  (after  the  control
by  the  discarnate  spirit  has  ceased),  when  her  own  spirit  or  subliminal  self
resumes  control,  and  appears  to  see  and  occasionally  to  describe  scenes  in
the  spiritual  world,  sometimes  transmitting  messages  of  evidential  value  ;
of  all  which  she  retains  no  recollection  on  her  return  to  the  normal  state.

•There  is  much  additional  evidence  yet  to  be  published  that  has  come
through  Mrs.  Piper  during  the  last  few  years  in  support  of  the  claim  that
recently  deceased  persons  are  communicating,  besides  instances  of  failures
and  confusion  which  we  must  doubtless  continue  to  expect  under  the
conditions  apparently  involved  in  the  communications.  It  seems  from
our  experience  thus  far  that  the  most  valuable  evidence  we  can  hope  to
obtain  of  personal  identity  is  likely  to  come  from  spirits  who  have  recently
passed  over  with  all  their  inexperience  of  that  other  world,  but  it  may  be
that  these  are  aided  in  their  task  by  more  remote  spirits  whose  identity
we  can  neither  prove  nor  disprove.  It  is  perhaps  more  reasonable  to
suppose  that  there  is  such  supervision — if  we  are  in  actual  communication
with  a  spiritual  world  at  all — than  to  think  that  the  great  spirits  of  the
past  take  no  abiding  interest  in  the  communication  of  that  spiritual  world
with  ours.

966.  We  must  now  try  to  form  some  more  definite  idea — based  not
on  preconceived  theories  but  on  our  actual  observation  of  trances — of
the  processes  of  possession ;  though  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the
most  adequate  conception  that  we  can  reach  at  present  must  be  restricted
and  distorted  by  the  limitations  of  our  own  material  existence,  and  can
only  be  expressed  by  the  help  of  crude  analogies.

I  may  say  at  the  outset  that  this  singular  union  between  two  widely
different  human  beings — this  possession  of  the  organism — has  in  it
nothing  whatever  that  is  weird  or  alarming.  In  Mrs.  Piper's  case  the
processes  of  entering  and  leaving  the  trance,  which  used  to  be  accom-


987]        TRANCE,     POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       251

panied,  in  Professor  James'  words,  by  "  a  good  deal  of  respiratory  dis-
turbance and  muscular  twitching,"  are  now  as  tranquil  as  the  acts  of
going  to  sleep  and  awaking;  and  no  result  of  the  trance  upon  her
waking  state  is  evident,  except  a  passing  fatigue  if  the  trance  has  been
too  far  prolonged,  or.  on  the  other  hand,  a  state  of  vague  diffused  hap-
piness such  as  sometimes  follows  the  awaking  from  a  pleasant  dream.
There  has  been  no  harmful  influence  on  health — possibly  a  beneficial
influence.  At  any  rate,  after  serious  injury  from  a  sleigh  accident,  and
consequent  operations,  Mrs.  Piper  is  now  "  a  thoroughly  healthy  woman."
In  character  she  has  always  belonged  to  a  quiet  domestic  New  England
type,  much  occupied  with  her  household  and  her  children.1  In  Dr.
Hodgson's  view,  her  control  by  intelligences  above  her  own  has  in-
creased her  stability  and  serenity.  If  we  look,  in  fact,  at  the  flesh-and-
blood  side  of  this  strange  converse,  we  seem  to  watch  a  process  of  natural
evolution  opening  upon  us  with  unexpected  ease ;  so  that  our  main  duty
is  carefully  to  search  for  and  train  such  other  favoured  individuals  as
already  show  this  form  of  capacity — always  latent,  perhaps,  and  now
gradually  emergent  in  the  human  race.  Die  Geisterwelt  ist  nicht  ver-
schlossen;  these  sensitives  have  but  to  sink  into  a  deep  recueillement,  a
guarded  slumber,  and  that  gate  stands  manifestly  ajar.  It  is  rather  on
the  other  side  of  the  gulf  that  the  difficulties,  the  perplexities,  come
thick  and  fast.

967.  Let  us  try  to  realise  what  kind  of  feat  it  is  which  we  are  ex-
pecting the  disembodied  spirit  to  achieve.  Such  language,  I  know,  again
suggests  the  medicine-man's  wigwam  rather  than  the  study  of  the  white
philosopher.  Yet  can  we  feel  sure  that  the  process  in  our  own  minds
which  has  (as  we  think)  refined  and  spiritualised  man's  early  conceptions
of  an  unseen  world  has  been  based  upon  any  observed  facts  ?

In  dealing  with  matters  which  lie  outside  human  experience,  our  only
clue  is  some  attempt  at  continuity  with  what  we  already  know.  We  can-
not, for  instance,  form  independently  a  reliable  conception  of  life  in  an
unseen  world.  That  conception  has  never  yet  been  fairly  faced  from  the
standpoint  of  our  modern  ideas  of  continuity,  conservation,  evolution.
The  main  notions  that  have  been  framed  of  such  survival  have  been
framed  first  by  savages  and  then  by  a  priori  philosophers.  To  the  man  of
science  the  question  has  never  yet  assumed  enough  of  actuality  to  induce
him  to  consider  it  with  scientific  care.  He  has  contented  himself,  like
the  mass  of  mankind,  with  some  traditional  theory,  some  emotional
preference  for  some  such  picture  as  seems  to  him  satisfying  and  exalted.
Yet  he  knows  well  that  this  subjective  principle  of  choice  has  led  in
history  to  the  acceptance  of  many  a  dogma  which  to  more  civilised  per-
ceptions seems  in  the  last  degree  blasphemous  and  cruel.

The  savage,  I  say,  made  his  own  picture  first.     And  he  at  any  rate

1  She  was  married  in  1881  and  has  two  daughters,  one  seventeen,  the  other  eighteen
years  old.


252  CHAPTER    IX  [968

dimly  felt  after  a  principle  of  continuity;  although  he  applied  it  in
crudest  fashion.  Yet  the  happy  hunting-ground  and  the  faithful  dog
were  conceptions  not  more  arbitrary  and  unscientific  than  that  eternal
and  unimaginable  worship  in  vacua  which  more  accredited  teachers  have
proclaimed.  And,  passing  on  to  modern  philosophic  conceptions,  one
may  say  that  where  the  savage  assumed  too  little  difference  between  the
material  and  the  spiritual  world  the  philosopher  has  assumed  too  much.
He  has  regarded  the  gulf  as  too  unbridgeable ;  he  has  taken  for  granted
too  clean  a  sweep  of  earthly  modes  of  thought.  Trying  to  shake  off  time,
space,  and  definite  form,  he  has  attempted  to  transport  himself  too  magic-
ally to  what  may  be  in  reality  an  immensely  distant  goal.

968.  Have  we  new  philosophical  conceptions  solid  enough  to  with-
stand the  impact  of  even  a  small  mass  of  actual  evidence  ?    Have  our  notions
of  the  dignified  and  undignified  in  nature — the  steady,  circular  motion  of
the  planets,  for  instance,  as  opposed  to  the  irregular  and  elliptical — guided
us  in  the  discovery  of  truth  ?     Would  not  Aristotle,  divinising  the  fixed
stars  by  reason  of  their  very  remoteness,  have  thought  it  undignified  to
suppose  them  compacted  of  the  same  elements  as  the  stones  under  his
feet  ?     May  not  disembodied  souls,  like  stars,  be  of  a  make  rather  closer
to  our  own  than  we  have  been  wont  to  imagine  ?

What,  then,  is  to  be  our  conception  of  identity  prolonged  beyond  the
tomb?  In  earth-life  the  actual  body,  in  itself  but  a  subordinate  element
in  our  thought  of  our  friend,  did  yet  by  its  physical  continuity  override  as
a  symbol  of  identity  all  lapses  of  memory,  all  changes  of  the  character
within.  Yet  it  was  memory  and  character, — the  stored  impressions  upon
which  he  reacted,  and  his  specific  mode  of  reaction, — which  made  our
veritable  friend.  How  much  of  memory,  how  much  of  character,  must  he
preserve  for  our  recognition  ?

Do  we  ask  that  either  he  or  we  should  remember  always,  or  should
remember  all?  Do  we  ask  that  his  memory  should  be  expanded  into
omniscience  and  his  character  elevated  into  divinity?  And,  whatever
heights  he  may  attain,  do  we  demand  that  he  should  reveal  to  us?  Are
the  limitations  of  our  material  world  no  barrier  to  him?

969.  It  is  safest  to  fall  back  for  the  present  upon  the  few  points  which
these  communications  do  seem  to  indicate.     The  spirit,  then,  is  holding
converse  with  a  living  man,  located  in  a  certain  place  at  a  certain  moment,
and  animated  by  certain  thoughts  and  emotions.     The  spirit  (to  which  I
must  give  a  neuter  pronoun  for  greater  clearness)  in  some  cases  can  find
and  follow  the  man  as  it  pleases.     It  is  therefore  in  some  way  cognizant
of  space,  although  not  conditioned  by  space.     Its  mastery  of  space  may
perhaps  bear  somewhat  the  same  relation  to  our  eyesight  as  our  eyesight
bears  to  the  gropings  of  the  blind.     Similarly,  the  spirit  appears  to  be
partly  cognizant  of  our  time,  although  not  wholly  conditioned  thereby.
It  is  apt  to  see  as  present  both  certain  things  which  appear  to  us  as  past
and  certain  things  which  appear  to  us  as  future.


970]        TRANCE,     POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       253

Once  more,  the  spirit  is  at  least  partly  conscious  of  the  thought  and
emotions  of  its  earthly  friend,  so  far  as  directed  towards  itself;  and  this
not  only  when  the  friend  is  in  the  presence  of  the  sensitive,  but  also  (as
G.  P.  has  repeatedly  shown)  when  the  friend  is  at  home  and  living  his
ordinary  life.

Lastly,  it  seems  as  though  the  spirit  had  some  occasional  glimpses  of
material  fact  upon  the  earth  (as  the  contents  of  drawers  and  the  like),  not
manifestly  proceeding  through  any  living  mind.  I  do  not,  however,  recall
any  clear  evidence  of  a  spirit's  perception  of  material  facts  which  provably
have  never  been  known  to  any  incarnate  mind  whatever.

970.  Accepting  this,  then,  for  argument's  sake,  as  the  normal  con-
dition of  a  spirit  in  reference  to  human  things,  what  process  must  it
attempt  if  it  wishes  to  communicate  with  living  men?  That  it  will  wish
to  communicate  seems  probable  enough,  if  it  retains  not  only  memory  of
the  loves  of  earth,  but  actual  fresh  consciousness  of  loving  emotion
directed  towards  it  after  death.

Seeking  then  for  some  open  avenue,  it  discerns  something  which  cor-
responds (in  G.  P.'s  phrase)  to  a  light — a  glimmer  of  translucency  in  the
confused  darkness  of  our  material  world.  This  "light"  indicates  a  sen-
sitive— a  human  organism  so  constituted  that  a  spirit  can  temporarily
inform  or  control  it,  not  necessarily  interrupting  the  stream  of  the  sen-
sitive's ordinary  consciousness ;  perhaps  using  a  hand  only,  or  perhaps,
as  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  using  voice  as  well  as  hand,  and  occupying
all  the  sensitive's  channels  of  self-manifestation.  The  difficulties  which
must  be  inherent  in  such  an  act  of  control  are  thus  described  by  Dr.
Hodgson  : —

"  If,  indeed,  each  one  of  us  is  a  '  spirit '  that  survives  the  death  of  the
fleshly  organism,  there  are  certain  suppositions  that  I  think  we  may  not
unreasonably  make  concerning  the  ability  of  the  discarnate  *  spirit '  to
communicate  with  those  yet  incarnate.  Even  under  the  best  of  conditions
for  communication — which  I  am  supposing  for  the  nonce  to  be  possible
—it  may  well  be  that  the  aptitude  for  communicating  clearly  may  be  as
rare  as  the  gifts  that  make  a  great  artist,  or  a  great  mathematician,  or  a  great
philosopher.  Again,  it  may  well  be  that,  owing  to  the  change  connected
with  death  itself,  the  «  spirit '  may  at  first  be  much  confused,  and  such
confusion  may  last  for  a  long  time;  and  even  after  the  '  spirit '  has
become  accustomed  to  its  new  environment,  it  is  not  an  unreasonable
supposition  that  if  it  came  into  some  such  relation  to  another  living
human  organism  as  it  once  maintained  with  its  own  former  organism,  it
would  find  itself  confused  by  that  relation.  The  state  might  be  like  that
of  awakening  from  a  prolonged  period  of  unconciousness  into  strange
surroundings.  If  my  own  ordinary  body  could  be  preserved  in  its  present
state,  and  I  could  absent  myself  from  it  for  days  or  months  or  years,  and
continue  my  existence  under  another  set  of  conditions  altogether,  and  if  I
could  then  return  to  my  own  body,  it  might  well  be  that  I  should  be  very


254  CHAPTER    IX  [971

confused  and  incoherent  at  first  in  my  manifestations  by  means  of  it.
How  much  more  would  this  be  the  case  were  I  to  return  to  another
human  body.  I  might  be  troubled  with  various  forms  of  aphasia  and
agraphia,  might  be  particularly  liable  to  failures  of  inhibition,  might  find
the  conditions  oppressive  and  exhausting,  and  my  state  of  mind  would
probably  be  of  an  automatic  and  dreamlike  character.  Now,  the  com-
municators through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  exhibit  precisely  the  kind  of
confusion  and  incoherence  which  it  seems  to  me  we  have  some  reason
a  priori  to  expect  if  they  are  actually  what  they  claim  to  be."

971.  At  the  outset  of  this  chapter   I  compared  the  phenomena  of
possession    with   those  of  alternating   personalities,    of  dreams,   and    of
somnambulism.     Now   it   seems   probable    that   the    thesis  of  multiplex
personality — namely,    that   no   known   current   of    man's   consciousness
exhausts    his    whole     consciousness,    and    no   known    self-manifestation
expresses  man's  whole  potential  being — may  hold  good  both  for  embodied
and  for  unembodied   men,  and   this  would    lead   us  to  expect  that  the
manifestations  of  the  departed, — through  the  sensory  automatisms  dealt
with  in  Chapter  VII.,  and  the  motor  automatisms  considered  in  Chapter
VIIL,  up  to  the  completer  form  of  possession  illustrated  in  the  present
chapter, — would    resemble    those   fugitive   and  unstable   communications
between  widely  different  strata  of  personality  of  which  embodied  minds
offer  us  examples.     G.  P.  himself  appears  to  be  well  aware  of  the  dream-
like character  of  the  communications,  which,  indeed,  his  own  style  often
exemplifies.     Thus  he  wrote  on  February  i5th,  1894  : —

"  Remember  we  share  and  always  shall  have  our  friends  in  the  dream-
life,  i.e.  your  life  so  to  speak,  which  will  attract  us  for  ever  and  ever,  and
so  long  as  we  have  any  friends  sleeping  in  the  material  world ;  you  to  us
are  more  like  as  we  understand  sleep,  you  look  shut  up  as  one  in  prison,
and  in  order  for  us  to  get  into  communication  with  you,  we  have  to  enter
into  your  sphere,  as  one  like  yourself,  asleep.  This  is  just  why  we  make
mistakes,  as  you  call  them,  or  get  confused  and  muddled."

972.  Yet  even  this  very  difficulty  and  fragmentariness  of  communica-
tion ought  in  the  end  to  be  for  us  full  of  an  instruction  of  its  own.     We
are  here  actually  witnessing  the  central  mystery  of  human  life,  unrolling
itself  under   novel  conditions,  and  open  to  closer  observation  than  ever
before.     We  are  seeing  a  mind  use  a  brain.     The  human  brain  is  in  its
last  analysis  an  arrangement  of  matter  expressly  adapted  to  being  acted
upon  by  a  spirit ;  but  so  long  as  the  accustomed  spirit  acts  upon  it  the
working  is  generally  too  smooth  to  allow  us  a  glimpse  of  the  mechanism.
Now,    however,    we    can   watch   an    unaccustomed    spirit,    new   to   the
instrument,  installing  itself  and  feeling  its  way.     The  lessons  thus  learnt
are  likely  to  be  more  penetrating  than  any  which  mere  morbid  interrup-
tions of  the  accustomed    spirit's   work  can  teach  us.      In    aphasia,  for
instance,  we  can  watch  with  instruction  special  difficulties  of  utterance,
supervening  on  special  injuries  to  the  brain.     But  in  possession  we  perceive


973]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       255

the  controlling  spirit  actually  engaged  in  overcoming  somewhat  similar
difficulties — writing  or  uttering  the  wrong  word,  and  then  getting  hold  of
the  right  one — and  sometimes  even  finding  power  to  explain  to  us  some-
thing of  the  minute  verbal  mechanism  (so  to  term  it)  through  whose
blocking  or  dislocation  the  mistake  has  arisen.

We  may  hope,  indeed,  that  as  our  investigations  proceed,  and  as  we
on  this  side  of  the  fateful  gulf,  and  the  discarnate  spirits  on  the  other,
learn  more  of  the  conditions  necessary  for  perfect  control  of  the  brain
and  nervous  system  of  intermediaries, — the  communications  will  grow
fuller  and  more  coherent,  and  reach  a  higher  level  of  unitary  consciousness.
Many  the  difficulties  may  be,  but  is  there  to  be  no  difficulty  in  linking
flesh  with  spirit — in  opening  to  man,  from  his  prisoning  planet,  a  first
glimpse  into  cosmic  things?  If  in  such  speech  as  this  there  be  any
reality,  it  is  not  stumblings  or  stammerings  that  should  stop  us.  Nay,
already  on  certain  occasions  there  has  been  no  stumble  or  stammer —
when  some  experienced  communicator  has  poured  out  an  intimate  message
under  strong  emotion.  Such,  for  instance,  was  a  private  message  written
by  G.  P.  to  "  Mr.  Howard,"  who  is,  by  the  way,  a  well-known  and  able
man  of  professorial  status,  and  who  was  a  definite  disbeliever  in  a  future
life  until  G.  P.  convinced  him.  The  "  holding  turn  "  to  that  conviction
was  given  by  the  message  which  Dr.  Hodgson  thus  describes.  It  was
written  in  response  to  a  request  for  some  incident,  which  certainly  no  one
save  G.  P.  and  Mr.  Howard,  his  most  intimate  elder  friend  and  adviser,
could  possibly  have  known.

"  The  transcription  here  of  the  words  written  by  G.  P.  conveys,  of
course,  no  proper  impression  of  the  actual  circumstances.  The  inert  mass
of  the  upper  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  body  turned  away  from  the  right  arm,
and  sagging  down,  as  it  were,  limp  and  lifeless  over  Mrs.  Howard's
shoulder,  but  the  right  arm,  and  especially  hand,  mobile,  intelligent,
deprecatory,  then  impatient  and  fierce  in  the  persistence  of  the  writing
which  followed,  which  contains  too  much  of  the  personal  element  in
G.  P.'s  life  to  be  reproduced  here.  Several  statements  were  read  by  me,
and  assented  to  by  Mr.  Howard,  and  then  was  written  *  private,'  and  the
hand  gently  pushed  me  away.  I  retired  to  the  other  side  of  the  room,
and  Mr.  Howard  took  my  place  close  to  the  hand  where  he  could  read  the
writing.  He  did  not,  of  course,  read  it  aloud,  and  it  was  too  private  for
my  perusal.  The  hand,  as  it  reached  the  end  of  each  sheet,  tore  it  off
from  the  block-book,  and  thrust  it  wildly  at  Mr.  Howard,  and  then
continued  writing.  The  circumstances  narrated,  Mr.  Howard  informed
me,  contained  precisely  the  kind  of  test  for  which  he  had  asked,  and  he
said  that  he  was  *  perfectly  satisfied — perfectly.'  "  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  xiii.,  p.  322.)

973.  In  this  way  we  may  explain  certain  facts  as  to  the  mode  of
communication  which  are  likely  to  be  at  first  misinterpreted,  and  to  create
an  impression  of  pain  or  strangeness  where,  in  my  view,  there  is  nothing


256  CHAPTER    IX  [974

beyond  wholesome  effort  in  the  normal  course  of  evolution  among  both
incarnate  and  discarnate  men.  One  touch  of  pathos,  indeed  —  though  not
of  tragedy  —  stands  out  to  my  recollection  from  the  trances  which  I  have
watched  —  a  kind  of  savage  and  immemorial  emotion  which  takes  one
back  to  many  an  old-world  legend,  and  to  the  Odyssey  of  Homer  above  all.
Odysseus,  at  the  entrance  of  the  under-world,  poured  the  blood  of
victims  into  a  trench,  that  the  dim  spirits  of  the  dead  might  drink  of  it
and  have  force  to  speak  and  hear.  But  it  was  to  learn  from  Teiresias  that
he  came,  and  until  he  had  spoken  with  Teiresias  he  suffered  none  of  the
thronging  spirits  to  draw  anigh.  There  sat  he—  as  Polygnotus'  picture
showed  him  —  on  a  heap  of  stones  in  the  grey  light  beside  the  trench,  his
drawn  sword  laid  betwixt  him  and  his  mother's  soul  ;  since,  "  not  even
thus,  tho'  sick  at  heart,  would  I  suffer  her  to  come  nigh  the  blood,  ere  I
had  heard  the  tale  Teiresias  had  to  tell."


'    Ov8'    Q)S    ftaV    TTpOTfpTJV,    ITVKIVOV    TTfp

aa-ffov  i/iev  irplv  Tetpeo-iao


Even  in  such  fashion,  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trances,  the  thronging
multitude  of  the  departed  press  to  the  glimpse  of  light.  Eager,  but
untrained,  they  interject  their  uncomprehended  cries  ;  vainly  they  call  the
names  which  no  man  answers  ;  like  birds  that  have  beaten  against  a
lighthouse,  they  pass  in  disappointment  away.  At  first  this  confusion
gravely  interfered  with  coherent  messages,  but  through  the  second  and
third  stages  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trances,  under  the  watchful  care  apparently  of
supervising  spirits,  it  has  tended  more  and  more  to  disappear.

All  this  must  needs  be  so  ;  yet  I,  at  least,  had  not  realised  beforehand
that  the  pressure  from  that  side  was  likely  to  be  more  urgent  than  from
this.  Naturally  ;  since  often  on  this  side  something  of  inevitable  doubt
—  nay,  of  shuddering  prejudice  and  causeless  fear  —  curdles  the  stream  of
love  ;  while  for  them  the  imperishable  affection  flows  on  unchecked  and
full.  They  yearn  to  tell  of  their  bliss,  to  promise  their  welcome  at  the
destined  hour.  A  needless  scruple,  indeed,  which  dreads  to  call  or  to
constrain  them  !  We  can  bind  them  by  no  bonds  but  of  love  ;  they  are
more  ready  to  hear  than  we  to  pray  ;  of  their  own  act  and  grace  they
visit  our  spirits  in  prison.

974.  We  must  now  remember  that  this  series  of  incidents  does  not
stand  alone.  This  case  of  Mrs.  Piper  is,  indeed,  one  of  the  most  in-
structive in  our  collection,  on  account  of  its  length  and  complexity  and
the  care  with  which  it  has  been  observed.  But  it  is  led  up  to  by  all  our
previous  evidences,  and  I  will  here  briefly  state  what  facts  they  are  which
our  recorded  apparitions,  intimations,  messages  of  the  departing  and  the
departed,  have,  to  my  mind,  actually  proved.

(a)  In  the  first  place,  they  prove  survival  pure  and  simple  ;  the  per-
sistence of  the  spirit's  life  as  a  structural  law  of  the  universe  ;  the  in-
alienable heritage  of  each  several  soul.


975]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        257

(b)  In  the  second  place,  they  prove  that  between  the  spiritual  and  the
material  worlds  an  avenue  of  communication  does  in  fact  exist;  that
which  we  call  the  despatch  and  the  receipt  of  telepathic  messages,  or
the  utterance  and  the  answer  of  prayer  and  supplication.  (See  p.  309.)

(c}  In  the  third  place,  they  prove  that  the  surviving  spirit  retains,  at
least  in  some  measure,  the  memories  and  the  loves  of  earth.  Without
this  persistence  of  love  and  memory  should  we  be  in  truth  the  same  ?
To  what  extent  has  any  philosophy  or  any  revelation  assured  us  hereof
till  now?

The  above  points,  I  think,  are  certain,  if  the  apparitions  and  messages
proceed  in  reality  from  the  sources  which  they  claim.  On  a  lower  evi-
dential level  comes  the  thesis  drawn  from  the  contents  of  the  longer
messages,  which  contents  may  of  course  be  influenced  in  unknown  degree
by  the  expectation  of  the  recipients  or  by  some  such  infusion  of  dream-
like matter  as  I  have  already  mentioned.  That  thesis  is  as  follows ;  I
offer  it  for  what  it  may  be  worth :  Every  element  of  individual  wisdom,
virtue,  love,  develops  in  infinite  evolution  toward  an  ever-highering  hope  ;
toward  "  Him  who  is  at  once  thine  innermost  Self,  and  thine  ever  un-
attainable Desire."

For  my  own  part,  the  alleged  revelation  in  its  general  character,  so  far
as  yet  coherent,  seems  to  me  so  good  and  right  that  I  mistrust  it  on  that
very  ground,  fearing  lest  it  be  but  the  reflection  of  the  momentary  attitude
of  the  petty  minds  of  men.  Many  of  the  messages,  no  doubt,  have  been
delivered  to  persons  whose  own  preconceptions  were  at  least  partly  hostile
to  the  teaching  given.  But  this  proves  little ;  for  there  may  be  a  kind  of
sub-conscious  consensus  of  opinion — a  Zeit-Geist — in  all  contemporary
minds  beneath  their  superficial  differences  of  Church  or  philosophical
school.  We  need  more  tests  and  more  corroborations,  a  clearer  and  more
continuous  control  of  the  channels  of  utterance,  before  we  can  transmit
with  confidence  anything  beyond  the  barest  provisional  sketch  of  that
Orbis  Ignotus.  Enough,  surely,  and  more  than  man  had  dared  to  hope,
if  now  a  channel  of  communication  is  veritably  opened,  and  if  the  first
message  is  one  of  love.  And  I  believe  that  whatever  of  new  revelation
may  thus  be  coming  to  us  comes  not  to  destroy  but  to  fulfil.  Is  there  not
promise  of  some  fulfilment — of  some  synthesis  of  those  partial  glimpses  of
the  past — even  in  the  few  bald  phrases  in  which  I  have  adumbrated  what
we  are  beginning  to  know?  .If  we  define  Religion  as  "man's  normal
subjective  response  to  the  sum  of  known  cosmic  phenomena,  taken  as  an
intelligible  whole,"  how  different  will  that  response  become  when  we  know
for  certain  that  no  love  can  die ;  when  we  discern  the  bewildering  Sum  of
Things — beyond  all  bounds  of  sect  or  system,  strepitumque  Acherontis
avari — broadening  and  heightening  into  a  moral  Cosmos  such  as  our
race  could  scarcely  even  conceive  till  now  !

975.  There  is,  however,  one  feeling  which  has  done  much  to  deter
inquiry  in  these  directions.  To  many  minds  there  seems  to  be  a  want  of
VOL.  IT.  R


258  CHAPTER    IX  [975

dignity  in  this  mode  of  acquiring  knowledge  of  an  unseen  world.  It  is  felt
that  even  as  there  is  something  grand  and  noble  in  the  object,  there  ought
to  be  something  correspondingly  exalted  in  the  means  employed.  This  has,
it  is  thought,  been  the  case  with  all  former  revelations  which  have  made  any
serious  claim  on  the  attention  of  mankind.  Religions  have  been  supported
by  tradition,  by  miracle,  by  the  deep  personal  emotion  which  they  have
been  able  to  generate.  There  is  something  paltry  or  even  repugnant
in  the  notion  of  establishing  a  new  faith  upon  a  series  of  experiments
dealing  mainly  with  certain  kinds  of  physical  sensibility  which  seem  at
best  to  be  scattered  at  random  among  mankind.

There  is  real  prima  facie  force  in  such  an  objection.  It  is  not  fanciful
to  demand  something  of  manifest  congruity  between  means  and  end;
not  fanciful,  at  any  rate,  to  distrust  any  powers  merely  of  the  flesh  as
explaining  to  us  the  powers  of  the  spirit.

And  yet,  on  a  wider  view,  we  shall  perceive  that  what  is  missing  in
this  new  inquiry  lies  merely  in  such  elements  of  impressiveness  as  befit
the  mere  childhood  of  the  world  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  gaining
for  the  quest  of  spiritual  truth  that  truer  dignity  which  Science  has  given
to  man's  scattered  knowledge  ; — the  dignity  of  universal  cogency  and  of
unarrested  progressiveness.  Science,  as  we  know,  will  not  rest  with  com-
placency in  presence  of  the  exceptional,  the  catastrophic,  the  miraculous.
Such  qualities  constitute  for  her  not  a  claim  to  reverence  but  a  challenge
to  explanation.  She  finds  a  truer  grandeur  in  the  colligation  of  startling
phenomena  under  some  comprehensive  generalisation.  Her  highest  ideal
is  cosmic  law ; — and  she  begins  to  suspect  that  any  law  which  is  truly
cosmic  is  also  in  some  sense  evolutionary.

Now  I  repeat, — and  in  the  present  stage  of  human  thought  it  can
scarcely  be  repeated  too  often, — that  in  the  law  of  telepathy,  developing
into  the  law  of  spiritual  intercommunication  between  incarnate  and  dis-
carnate  spirits,  we  see  dimly  adumbrated  before  our  eyes  the  highest  law
with  which  our  human  science  can  conceivably  have  to  deal.  The
discovery  of  telepathy  opens  before  us  a  potential  communication  between
all  life.

And  if,  as  our  present  evidence  indicates,  this  telepathic  intercourse
can  subsist  between  embodied  and  disembodied  souls,  that  law  must
needs  lie  at  the  very  centre  of  cosmic  evolution.  It  will  be  evolutionary,
as  depending  on  a  faculty  now  in  actual  course  of  development.  It  will
be  cosmic ;  for  it  may — it  almost  must — by  analogy  subsist  not  on  this
planet  only,  but  wherever  in  the  universe  discarnate  and  incarnate  spirits
may  be  intermingled  or  juxtaposed.

This  surely  is  a  generalisation  as  vast,  as  impressive,  as  the  human
mind  can  entertain.  Tradition,  miracle,  personal  emotion; — which  of
these  ancient  buttresses  is  any  longer  needed  for  the  firmer,  the  scientific
faith  ?  And  yet,  if  it  be  a  question  of  tradition,  what  single  religion  can
unite  and  harmonise  oecumenical  tradition  like  this  old-new  creed?  The


976]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        259

legendary  lore  of  all  countries,— the  sacred  books  of  all  religions, — the
Bible  itself  included, — are  full  of  psychical  phenomena  which  thus  only
are  made  coherent  and  intelligible.  If  there  be  question  of  miracle,  what
sacred  history  can  show  such  strange  apparent  contraventions  of  the
physical  order, — such  victories  over  the  grossness  of  matter, — as  our  ob-
servations involve? — or  (better  still)  can  reduce  all  these  so  convincingly
under  the  realm  of  Higher  Law?  While  as  for  personal  emotion; — what
can  there  be  at  once  more  intimate  and  more  exalting  than  the  waking
reality  of  converse  with  beloved  and  enfranchised  souls?  So  shall  a
man  feel  the  ancient  fellow- labour  deepened,  the  old  kinship  closer
still ;  the  earthly  passion  sealed  and  hallowed  by  the  irreversible  judg-
ment of  the  Blest.

976.  Among  the  cases  of  trance  discussed  in  this  chapter,  we  have
found  intimately  interwoven  with  the  phenomena  of  possession  many
instances  of  its  correlative, — ecstasy.  Mrs.  Piper's  fragmentary  utterances
and  visions  during  her  passage  from  trance  to  waking  life, — utterances
and  visions  that  fade  away  and  leave  no  remembrance  in  her  waking  self;
Moses'  occasional  visions,  his  journeys  in  the  "  spirit  world  "  which  he
recorded  on  returning  to  his  ordinary  consciousness ;  Home's  entrance-
ment  and  converse  with  the  various  controls  whose  messages  he  gave ; —
all  these  suggest  actual  excursions  of  the  incarnate  spirit  from  its  organism.
The  theoretical  importance  of  these  spiritual  excursions  is,  of  course,  very
great.  It  is,  indeed,  so  great  that  most  men  will  hesitate  to  accept  a
thesis  which  carries  us  straight  into  the  inmost  sanctuary  of  mysticism ;
which  preaches  "  a  precursory  entrance  into  the  most  holy  place,  as  by
divine  transportation."

Yet  I  think  that  this  belief,  although  extreme,  is  not,  at  the  point  to
which  our  evidence  has  carried  us,  in  any  real  way  improbable.  To  put
the  matter  briefly,  if  a  spirit  from  outside  can  enter  the  organism,  the
spirit  from  inside  can  go  out,  can  change  its  centre  of  perception  and
action,  in  a  way  less  complete  and  irrevocable  than  the  change  of  death.
Ecstasy  would  thus  be  simply  the  complementary  or  correlative  aspect  of
spirit-control.  Such  a  change  need  not  be  a  spatial  change,  any  more
than  there  need  be  any  spatial  change  for  the  spirit  which  invades  the
deserted  organism.  Nay,  further :  if  the  incarnate  spirit  can  in  this
manner  change  its  centre  of  perception  in  response  (so  to  say)  to  a
iiscarnate  spirit's  invasion  of  the  organism,  there  is  no  obvious  reason
vhy  it  should  not  do  so  on  other  occasions  as  well.  We  are  already
amiliar  with  "  travelling  clairvoyance,"  a  spirit's  change  of  centre  of
perception  among  the  scenes  of  the  material  world.  May  there  not  be
in  extension  of  travelling  clairvoyance  to  the  spiritual  world?  a  spon-
aneous  transfer  of  the  centre  of  perception  into  that  region  from
/hence  discarnate  spirits  seem  now  to  be  able,  on  their  side,  to  com-
nunicate  with  growing  freedom?


260  CHAPTER    IX  [977

The  conception  of  ecstasy — at  once  in  its  most  literal  and  in  its  most
lofty  sense — has  thus  developed  itself,  almost  insensibly,  from  several
concurrent  lines  of  actual  modern  evidence.  It  must  still,  of  course,  be
long  before  we  can  at  all  adequately  separate, — I  can  hardly  say  the
objective  from  the  subjective  element  in  the  experience,  for  we  have  got
beyond  the  region  where  the  meaning  of  those  words  is  clear, — but  the
element  in  the  experience  which  is  recognised  and  responded  to  by  spirits
other  than  the  ecstatic's,  from  the  element  which  belongs  to  his  own
spirit  alone.

In  the  meantime,  however,  the  fact  that  this  kind  of  communion  of
ecstasy  has  been,  in  preliminary  fashion,  rendered  probable  is  of  the
highest  importance  for  our  whole  inquiry.  We  thus  come  directly  into
relation  with  the  highest  form  which  the  various  religions  known  to  men
have  assumed  in  the  past.

977.  It  is  hardly  a  paradox  to  say  that  the  evidence  for  ecstasy  is
stronger  than  the  evidence  for  any  other  religious  belief.  Of  all  the
subjective  experiences  of  religion,  ecstasy  is  that  which  has  been  most
urgently,  perhaps  to  the  psychologist  most  convincingly,  asserted ;  and  it
is  not  confined  to  any  one  religion.  From  a  psychological  point  of  view,
one  main  indication  of  the  importance  of  a  subjective  phenomenon  found
in  religious  experience  will  be  the  fact  that  it  is  common  to  all  religions.
I  doubt  whether  there  is  any  phenomenon,  except  ecstasy,  of  which
this  can  be  said.  From  the  medicine-man  of  the  lowest  savages  up  to
St.  John,  St.  Peter,  St.  Paul,  with  Buddha  and  Mahomet  on  the  way,
we  find  records  which,  though  morally  and  intellectually  much  differing,
are  in  psychological  essence  the  same.

At  all  stages  alike  we  find  that  the  spirit  is  conceived  as  quitting  the
body ;  or,  if  not  quitting  it,  at  least  as  greatly  expanding  its  range  of  per-
ception in  some  state  resembling  trance.  Observe,  moreover,  that  on  this
view  all  genuine  recorded  forms  of  ecstasy  are  akin,  and  all  of  them
represent  a  real  fact.

We  thus  show  continuity  and  reality  among  phenomena  which  have
seldom  been  either  correlated  with  each  other  or  even  intelligibly  conceived  I
in  separation.  With  our  new  insight  we  may  correlate  the  highest  and  the
lowest  ecstatic  phenomena  with  no  injury  whatever  to  the  highest.  The
shaman,  the  medicine-man — when  he  is  not  a  mere  impostor — enters  as
truly  into  the  spiritual  world  as  St.  Peter  or  St.  Paul.  Only  he  enters  a
different  region  thereof;  a  confused  and  darkened  picture  terrifies  instead
of  exalting  him.  For  us,  however,  the  very  fact  that  we  believe  in  his
vision  gives  a  new  reality  to  strengthen  and  aid  our  belief  in  the  apostle's
vision  of  "  the  seventh  heaven."

"  Whether  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body,"  whether  the  seer's  spirit
be  severed  for  the  time  from  his  organism  or  no,  such  inlet  and  intro-
gression  does  occur.

It  is  these  subjective  feelings  of  vision  or  inspiration  which  have  to;


977]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       261

many  men  formed  the  most  impressive  and  fruitful  moments  of  life.
While  not  allowing  an  objective  truth  to  their  revelations,  we  shall  now
be  prepared  to  admit  a  reality  in  the  subjective  experience.  There  is
no  special  point  at  which  we  must  assume  a  barrier  interposed  to  the
inward  withdrawal  and  onward  urgency  of  man.

We  need  not  deny  the  transcendental  ecstasy  to  any  of  the  strong
souls  who  have  claimed  to  feel  it ; — to  Elijah  or  to  Isaiah,  to  Plato  or  to
Plotinus,  to  St.  John  or  to  St.  Paul,  to  Buddha  or  Mahomet,  to  Virgil  or
Dante,  to  St.  Theresa  or  to  Joan  of  Arc,  to  Kant  or  to  Swedenborg,  to
Wordsworth  or  to  Tennyson.  Through  many  ages  that  insight  and  that
memory  have  wrought  their  work  in  many  ways.  The  remembrance  of
ecstasy  has  inspired  religions,  has  founded  philosophies,  has  lifted  into
stainless  heroism  a  simple  girl.  Yet  religions  and  philosophies — as  these
have  hitherto  been  known — are  but  balloon-flights  which  have  carried
separate  groups  up  to  the  mountain  summit,  whither  science  at  last  must
make  her  road  for  all  men  clear.  It  is  by  breach  of  continuity,  by  passing
from  one  element  to  another,  that  they  have  been  able  to  soar  so  high.
For  science,  on  the  other  hand,  the  continuity  of  the  Universe  is  in  fact
its  key.  The  task  of  our  race  in  its  maturity  must  be  to  rise  to  those
same  heights  with  that  steady  tramp  as  of  legions  along  a  Roman  road
which  has  already  gathered  in  the  earthly  knowledge  of  earlier  ages
within  the  pomcerium  of  scientific  law.  The  continuity  of  the  universe,
!  that  is  to  say,  so  far  as  by  us  comprehensible,  must  needs  be  a  con-
tinuity of  objective,  and  for  that  very  reason  of  symbolic  manifestation.
All  the  objective  is  symbolic ;  our  daily  bread  is  as  symbolic  as  the
furniture  of  Swedenborg's  heavens  and  hells.  To  our  embodied  souls
the  matter  round  us  seems  real  and  self-existent ;  to  souls  emancipated
it  is  but  the  sign  of  the  degree  which  we  have  reached,  and  thus  the
highest  task  of  science  must  be  to  link  and  co-ordinate  the  symbols
appropriate  to  our  terrene  state  with  the  symbols  appropriate  to  the
state  immediately  above  us.  Nay,  one  might  push  this  truth  to  paradox,
and  maintain  that  of  all  earth's  inspired  spirits  it  has  been  the  least
divinised,  the  least  lovable,  who  has  opened  the  surest  path  for  men.
Religions  have  risen  and  die  again ;  philosophy,  poetry,  heroism,  answer
only  indirectly  the  prime  need  of  men.  Plotinus,  "  the  eagle  soaring
above  the  tomb  of  Plato,"  is  lost  to  sight  in  the  heavens.  Conquering  and
to  conquer,  the  Maid  rides  on  through  other  worlds  than  ours.  Virgil
himself,  "  light  among  the  vanished  ages,  star  that  gildest  yet  this  earthly
shore,"  sustains  our  spirit,  as  I  have  said,  but  indirectly,  by  filling  still
our  fountain  of  purest  intellectual  joy.  But  the  prosaic  Swede, — his
stiff  mind  prickly  with  dogma, — the  opaque  cell-walls  of  his  intelligence
flooded  cloudily  by  the  irradiant  day, — this  man  as  by  the  very  limitations
of  his  faculty,  by  the  practical  humility  of  a  spirit  trained  to  acquire  but
not  to  generate  truth, — has  awkwardly  laid  the  corner-stone,  grotesquely
sketched  the  elevation  of  a  temple  which  our  remotest  posterity  will  be


262  CHAPTER    IX  [978

upbuilding  and  adorning  still.  For  he  dimly  felt  that  man's  true  passage
and  intuition  from  state  to  state  depends  not  upon  individual  ecstasy,
but  upon  comprehensive  law;  while  yet  all  law  is  in  fact  but  symbol;
adaptation  of  truth  timeless  and  infinite  to  intelligences  of  lower  or  higher
range.

978.  In  the  course  of  this  book  I  have  several  times  touched  on
the  difficult  questions  raised  by  the  incidents  which  have  been  classed
as  retrocognitive  and  precognitive,1  and  which  seem  to  suggest  a  power
yet  more  remote  than  telepathy  or  telesesthesia  from  our  ordinary
methods  of  acquiring  knowledge.  The  consideration  of  the  problems
involved  was,  however,  postponed  to  this  chapter,  and  must  now  be
dealt  with  here.

In  a  universe  where  instantaneous  gravitation  operates  unexplained —
where  a  world  of  ether  coexists  with  a  world  of  matter — men's  minds  must
needs  have  a  certain  openness  to  other  mysterious  transmissions ;  must
be  ready  to  conceive  other  invisible  evironments  or  co-existences,  and  in
a  sense  to  sit  loose  to  the  conception  of  Space,  regarded  as  an  obstacle  to
communication  or  cognition.  A  similar  emancipation  from  the  limita-
tions of  Time  is  more  difficult.  We  can,  of  course,  imagine  increased
powers  of  remembering  the  Past,  of  inferring  the  future.  But  we  can
hardly  conceive  the  Past  revived,  save  in  some  mind  which  has  directly
observed  it.  And  to  imagine  the  Future  as  known,  except  by  inference
and  contingently,  to  any  mind  whatever  is  to  induce  at  once  that  iron
collision  between  Free  Will  and  "  Fixed  Fate,  Foreknowledge  absolute,"
from  which  no  sparks  of  light  have  ever  yet  been  struck.  Still  more  un-
welcome is  the  further  view  that  the  so-called  Future  actually  already
exists ;  and  that  apparent  time-progression  is  a  subjective  human  sensa-
tion, and  not  inherent  in  the  universe  as  that  exists  in  an  Infinite  Mind.

Nor  shall  we  in  fact  find  it  necessary  to  insist  upon  any  very  revolu-
tionary line  of  explanation.  There  is  one  analogy  which  will  meet

1  A  more  complete  discussion  of  these  phenomena,  with  numerous  cases  illustrating
apparent  stages  in  their  evolution,  and  a  description  of  the  faculties  they  seem  to
indicate,  summarised  in  a  diagrammatic  scheme,  are  given  in  my  article  on  "  Retro-
cognition  and  Precognition  "  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  334-593.

For  references  to  retrocognitive  cases,  see  sections  572,  663,  733,  859-863,  963,
also  572  A,  572  B.  See  also  the  accounts  of  retrocognitive  scenes  quoted  in  the
record  of  Miss  A.'s  crystal  visions  in  625  C.  For  cases  bearing  on  precognition  see  the
case  of  Anna  Winsor  (237  A),  where  there  were  predictions  concerning  the  course  of
her  disease;  refer  to  541  F  and  564  A,  where  the  difficulty  of  excluding  the  agency
of  self-suggestion  is  considered ;  compare  also  the  cases  given  in  541  H  and  573  F —
where  prognoses  concerning  other  persons  were  made  correctly  by  hypnotised  subjects
— and  the  prediction  of  his  aunt's  death  given  in  Mr.  W.'s  automatic  writing,  in  873.
See  section  425  and  the  Appendices  to  that  section,  also  663  A,  the  cases  in  section
717  and  717  B,  cases  6,  7,  n,  and  12  in  the  experiences  of  Lady  Mabel  Howard,
851  A ;  also  852  A,  874  A,  927  B,  and  section  963  with  its  Appendices.  There  may
have  been  something  of  prevision  also  in  Professor  Thoulet's  case,  in  930.


979]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       263

most  of  our  evidence  (though  not  all),  and  to  which  we  must  repeatedly
recur  as  our  simplest  guide.  As  is  the  memory  and  the  foresight  of  a
child  to  that  of  a  man,  even  such,  I  suggest,  is  the  memory  and  the
foresight  of  the  man's  supraliminal  self  as  compared  to  the  retro-
cognition  and  the  precognition  exercised  by  an  intelligence  unrestrained
by  sensory  limits ; — whether  that  intelligence  belong  to  the  man's  own
subliminal  self,  or  to  an  unembodied  human  spirit,  or  possibly  to  spirits
higher  than  human.  I  maintain  that  in  this  thesis  there  is  nothing  in-
credible ; — nay,  that  it  is  the  necessary  corollary  of  belief  in  the  existence
anywhere  of  any  extension  of  the  powers  which  we  habitually  exercise.

If  there  is  a  transcendental  world  at  all,  there  is  a  transcendental  view
of  Past  and  Future  fuller  and  further-reaching  than  the  empirical ;  and  in
that  view  we  may  ourselves  to  some  extent  participate,  either  directly,  as
being  ourselves  denizens  all  along  of  the  transcendental  world,  or  indirectly,
as  receiving  intimations  from  spirits  from  whom  the  shadow  in  which  our
own  spirits  are  "  half  lost "  has  melted  away.

This  I  believe  to  be  the  central  reflection  to  which  the  study  of  super-
normal knowledge  of  Past  and  Future  at  present  points  us ;  and  I  shall
be  well  satisfied  if  the  evidence  should  persuade  the  reader  that  in  some
undefined  fashion  we  share  at  moments  in  this  transcendental  purview.
As  to  the  precise  manner  in  which  we  share  it,  the  difficulties  are  just
those  which  meet  us  when,  in  any  other  group  of  our  phenomena,  we  try
to  distinguish  between  the  activity  of  the  automatist's  own  spirit,  and  of
other  spirits,  embodied  or  unembodied,  and  perhaps  also  of  a  World-Soul
or  of  Intelligences  finite,  but  above  anthropomorphic  personification.

979.  The  general  characteristic  of  these  occurrences  is  to  show  us
fragments  of  knowledge  coming  to  us  in  obscure  and  often  symbolical
ways,  and  extending  over  a  wider  tract  of  time  than  any  faculty  known  to
us  can  be  stretched  to  cover.  On  the  one  side  there  is  retrocognition,  or
knowledge  of  the  past,  extending  back  beyond  the  reach  of  our  ordinary
memory;  on  the  other  side  there  is  precognition,  or  knowledge  of  the
future,  extending  onwards  beyond  the  scope  of  our  ordinary  inference.

In  each  direction,  indeed,  there  are  certain  landmarks ;  the  regression
and  the  progression  alike  seem  to  develop  gradually,  and  to  follow  lines
which  we  can  learn  to  recognise.  In  the  direction  of  the  Past  we  begin
with  hypermnesia  ; — our  first  step  lies  in  the  conception  that  what  has  once
been  presented  to  our  sensory  field,  although  never  gathered  into  what  we
deem  our  conscious  perception,  may  nevertheless  have  been  perceived
and  retained  by  the  subliminal  self.  It  is  partly  through  dream  and  partly
by  automatic  artifices  that  this  fact  is  realised ;  and  those  same  dreams,
those  same  artifices  of  script  or  vision,  presently  carry  us  a  step  further,
and  reveal  a  knowledge  which  must  have  come  from  the  memories  of
other  living  persons,  or  (as  I  hold)  of  departed  spirits.  Then  in  another
direction  a  less  direct  source  of  knowledge  opens  out ;  living  organisms,
our  own  or  others',  disclose  (in  ways  unknown  to  biology)  the  history


264  CHAPTER    IX  [980

implicate  in  their  structure ;  objects  which  have  been  in  contact  with
organisms  preserve  their  trace ;  and  it  sometimes  seems  as  though  even
inorganic  nature  could  still  be  made,  so  to  say,  luminescent  with  the  age-
long story  of  its  past.  Or  it  may  even  be  that  some  retrocognitive  picture
is  presented  which  we  may  discover  to  be  veracious,  but  with  which  we
can  discern  no  spiritual  or  material  link ;  as  though  a  page  of  the  cosmic
record  had  been  opened  to  us  at  random,  and  had  closed  again  without
sign  or  clue.

980.  And  next  let  us  look  forward  into  the  Future ; — across  that  im-
palpable, almost  imaginary  line  of  the  Present  Moment,  which  for  us  is
the  greatest  reality  of  all.  Naturally  enough,  the  first  time-confusion
which  we  find  is  a  confusion  affecting  that  present  moment  itself;  namely,
that  sensation  of  already  remembering  what  is  happening  or  is  just  about
to  happen  to  which  some  authors  have  applied  the  too  wide  term
paramnesia,  but  for  which  promnesia  seems  a  more  exact  and  distinctive
name.1  Next  we  have  the  wide  range  of  suggestive  phenomena,  where  the
subliminal  self  possesses  knowledge  of  the  future  unshared  by  the  supra-
liminal ;  since  the  subliminal  self  has  in  fact  wound  up  the  organism  to
strike  a  given  note  at  a  given  hour.  Self-suggestion  in  turn  merges  into
organic  prevision;  where  the  subliminal  self  foresees  what  will  happen —
not  in  consequence  of  any  determining  effort  of  its  own,  but  by  virtue  of
its  deeper  knowledge  of  the  organism  and  of  the  changes  which  that
organism  must  by  physiological  laws  undergo.  This  organic  prevision  may
lead  us  far ;  but  as  it  grows  more  distant  and  complex,  involving  more  and
more  of  a  man's  future  environment,  as  well  as  of  his  future  organic  history,
it  merges  into  a  form  of  precognition  which  cannot  depend  on  insight
into  material  bodies  alone.

We  now  proceed,  that  is  to  say,  along  a  line  which  is  an  extension  of
ordinary  intellectual  inference.  First  comes  hypersesthetic  inference ; —
that  enlarged  span  of  anticipation  which  acuter  sensory  impressions
permit ;  as  a  sensitive  patient  will  be  able  to  predict  her  doctor's  visit
when  his  step  is  merely  heard  in  the  street,  although  others  cannot
recognise  that  step  until  it  is  close  to  the  bedroom  door.  Then  comes  an
obscure  point  where  this  hyperaesthesia  seems  to  pass  into  telsesthesia ; —
where  sensory  perception  seems  to  cease,  and  supersensory,  telepathic,  or
clairvoyant  perception  to  begin.

Well  then,  when  we  have  definitely  passed  from  the  sensory  to  the
transcendental  mode  of  perception,  it  is  probable  that  our  power  of  infer-
ence as  to  the  future  will  be  greatly  enlarged.  We  cannot,  indeed,  guess
how  far  this  enlargement  will  extend.  There  is  nothing  absolutely  to
forbid  us  to  regard  all  precognitions  as  the  result  of  this  wider  outlook  of
the  subliminal  self.  (See  980  A.)

1  For  a  discussion  of  this  subject  with  illustrative  cases,  see  pp.  341-347  of  my
article  on  "  The  Subliminal  Self :  Retrocognition  and  Precognition,"  in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.


982]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       265

981.  Nor  shall  I  attempt  to  draw  the  line  at  which  this  telaesthetic  in-
ference ceases.     If  I  do  still  look  further  for  other  sources  of  precognition,
this  is  partly  because  in  some  cases  I  think  that  there  is  actual  evidence
that  the  precognition  comes  from  a  disembodied  intelligence ;  and  partly
also  on  the  wider  ground  that  I  distrust  all  explanations  which  give  to
man,  embodied   or  disembodied,  any   monopoly  of  the   transcendental
world.     The  simplicity   of  our  instinctive  anthropomorphism  is  not   the
simplicity  of  truth ; — it  is  no  more   so,  when  we  are  thus  dealing  with
intelligences  which   may  be  far  above    our  ken,  than  when  the  savage
ascribes  to  a  man-like  demon   the  movements  and  influences  of  gross
inanimate  things.

But  first,  as  I  have  said,  I  ascribe  some  precognitions  to  the  reasoned
foresight  of  disembodied  spirits,  just  as  I  ascribe  some  retrocognitions  to
their  surviving  memory.  I  have  tried  to  show  ground  for  believing  that
some  spirits  have  a  continued  knowledge  of  some  earthly  affairs ;  and  if
they  have  such  knowledge,  and  can  show  us  that  they  have  it,  they  may
presumably  reveal  to  us  also  their  not  infallible  inferences  from  what  they
know.

Thus  far  I  have  been  indicating  roads  along  which  I  fancy  that  believers
in  any  kind  of  transcendental  faculty  will  some  day  be  forced  to  travel.
What  follows  is  a  speculation,  or  suspicion,  which  no  record  or  experi-
ments of  ours  can  prove,  but  which  seems  to  me  to  loom  behind  them
all.  I  suspect,  then,  that  it  is  not  by  wider  purview,  wiser  inference
alone,  that  finite  minds,  in  the  body  or  out  of  it,  have  attained  to
knowledge  of  what  yet  must  be.  I  imagine  that  the  Continuity  of  the
Universe  is  complete ;  and  that  therefore  the  hierarchy  of  intelligences
between  our  minds  and  the  World-Soul  is  infinite  ;  and  that  somewhere
in  that  ascent  a  point  is  reached  where  our  conception  of  time  loses
its  accustomed  meaning.  To  Plato's  "  Spectator  of  all  Time  and  of  all
Existence "  there  may  be  no  barrier  between  Then  and  Now.  The
idea,  of  course,  is  familiar  enough  to  philosophical  speculation.  The
novelty  is  that  this,  with  many  other  ideas  which  have  hitherto  floated
gaseously  inter  apices  philosophic,  like  helium  in  the  atmosphere  of  the
sun,  may  now  conceivably  be  tested  in  earthly  laboratories  and  used
as  a  working  explanation  for  undeniable  facts.

982.  Returning  now  to  the  question  of  retrocognition,  let  us  consider
to  what   extent  our  knowledge  of  the  Past  will    sometimes  open  itself
beyond  the  familiar  bounds.     We  may  begin  by  inquiring  in  what  ways  we
ordinarily  and  normally  acquire  our  knowledge  of  the  Past.     We  acquire
such   knowledge  partly  from   direct   personal    memory,  and  partly  from
retrospective  inference  based  on  what  we  see  or  hear.     We  might,  indeed,
define  memory  as  an  acquisition  of  fresh  potential  changes  of  conscious-
ness concomitant  with  changes  in  our  organism,  which  imply  certain  past
events  as  their  cause.     But  this  definition,  which  sounds  natural  enough
when  applied   to  diffused  or  organic  memories,  such  as  the  cricketer's


266  CHAPTER    IX  [982

memory  of  the  feel  of  the  bat,  would  seem  pedantic  if  applied  to  the
minute  cerebral  changes  which  accompany  the  learning  of  a  new  fact.  In
such  a  case  we  ignore  in  common  speech  the  real  organic  change  which
the  learning  of  any  fact  implies  in  us,  and  we  merely  refer  to  the  specialised
sensory  channel  through  which  the  information  comes  to  us — as  hearing,
reading,  and  so  forth.  In  a  vague  but  quite  intelligible  way,  we  thus  mark
off  organic  memory  from  definite  sensory  or  intellectual  memories.

In  our  inquiry  into  retrocognition  it  will  be  well  to  keep  roughly  to
some  division  of  this  sort,  and  to  begin  by  inquiring  into  the  extensions
which  seem  to  be  given  to  organic  memory.

We  know,  of  course,  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between  our  evocable
memory — that  which  we  can  summon  up  and  use  at  will — and  that  much
ampler  memory  which  we  must  suppose  to  exist,  in  some  potential  form
at  least,  imprinted  upon  our  organism.  The  faint  and  crude  recollections
of  sensations  and  movements,  which  are  all  that  we  can  call  into  ordinary
consciousness,  would  be  far  from  enabling  us  to  recognise  sensations,  or
to  repeat  movements,  as  we  actually  do  recognise  and  repeat  them.  The
study  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  moreover,  has  shown  us  how  these  potential
or  latent  memories  may  be  grasped  and  used.  The  increased  power  over
the  organism  which  the  subject  under  suggestion  shows  necessarily  implies
an  increased  memory  of  the  organism's  past ;  the  hyperboulia,  as  I  have
termed  it,  is  hypermnesia  as  well.  That  wider  will-power,  indeed,  is
probably  no  more  aware  of  the  exact  mechanism  which  it  employs  in  its
control  of  secretions,  &c.,  than  I  am  of  the  exact  mechanism  by  which  I
raise  my  hand  to  my  head.  And,  similarly,  the  hypnotic  memory  is
probably  itself  very  shallow  as  compared  to  what  a  complete  summation  of
all  the  lapsed  memories  of  the  organism  might  be.  But  already  we  find
it  descending  deeply  to  gland  and  blood-vessel,  implicated  as  these  are  in
stigmatisation  and  similar  phenomena,  and  we  can  draw  no  clear  line
below  which  all  organic  consciousness  must  cease,  and  memory  must
become  no  more  than  a  metaphor.

We  cannot  draw  such  a  line,  I  say,  either  on  the  basis  of  smallness  of
magnitude  or  of  remoteness  in  time.  We  cannot  assert  that  organic
memory  may  not  inhere  in  a  single  cell  or  neuron,  or  even  in  a  single
living  molecule.  Neither  can  we  assert  that  organic  memory  cannot  be
prolonged  backwards  before  birth.  Birth,  indeed,  is  but  an  incident  in
each  organism's  history ;  that  organism  has  an  embryonic  life  before  birth,
— and  a  pre-embryonic  life  in  countless  lines  of  ancestry.  Although  we
no  longer  say  with  the  "  traducianist "  schoolmen  that  Adam's  body
included  not  only  his  own  soul  but  the  souls  of  all  his  descendants,  we
still  trace  to  ancestors  more  remote  than  Adam  characteristics  which  even
now  influence  our  psychical  life.

It  is  a  moot  point  how  far  the  life-experiences  of  each  organism  modify
by  what  we  regard  as  purely  physiological  transmission  the  characteristics
of  its  descendants.  The  rude  suggestion  (so  to  term  it)  of  the  amputated


982]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       267

limb,  or  other  injury,  is  commonly  not  accepted  by  the  offspring ;  the
embryo  develops  unaffected  by  the  shock  which  the  parent  has  undergone
previously  to  the  act  of  union.  But  if  that  shock  fall  upon  the  mother
during  the  embryo's  life,  and  if  it  chance — (in  post-natal  suggestions  also
there  seems  much  of  what  we  must  needs  call  chance  in  this) — if  it  chance
to  reach  the  mother's  subliminal  self  in  effective  fashion,  it  may  then
transfer  itself  to  the  embryo,  and  imprint  upon  the  child  the  organic
memory  of  the  mother's  emotion  of  admiration,  disgust,  or  fear.  No  one
doubts  this  form  of  heredity  when  it  is  exhibited  on  a  striking  scale, — as
with  children  born  during  the  alarms  of  a  siege,  or  of  the  Reign  of  Terror
in  France.  And  I  believe  that  there  is  evidence  enough  to  show  that
isolated  and  momentary  suggestions — as  the  sight  of  a  crushed  ankle  or
missing  finger — may  produce  a  definite  localised  effect  on  the  embryo  in
much  the  same  way  as  a  hypnotic  suggestion  may  produce  a  localised
congestion  or  secretion.1

If,  then,  we  thus  find  imprinted  on  the  child's  organism  such  a  con-
spicuous, specialised  memory  of  perhaps  an  almost  instantaneous  emotion
of  the  mother's,  we  must  surely  suspect  that  his  organism  may  contain
also  some  inborn  memories  less  conspicuous  and  more  purely  cerebral
than  such  a  gross  phenomenon  as  a  mark  on  the  face  or  a  deformed  finger.
And  by  this  new  route  we  shall  come  round  again  to  something  like  the
innate  ideas  of  certain  philosophical  systems.  Nor  can  we  absolutely
limit  such  influence  to  the  actual  parent  organism  alone.  For  aught  we
know,  the  "germ-plasm" — whatsoever  may  be  the  continuous  link  of  all
generations — may  be  capable  of  reacting  to  psychical  suggestions  as  sensi-
tively as  the  embryo.  The  shaping  forces  which  have  made  our  bodies
and  our  minds  what  they  are  may  always  have  been  partly  psychical  forces,
— from  the  first  living  slime-speck  to  the  complex  intelligences  of  to-day.

This  view  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  suggestion  which  I  have  made
elsewhere,  that  the  human  spirit's  supernormal  powers  of  telepathy  and
telaesthesia  are  survivals  from  the  powers  which  that  spirit  once  exercised
in  a  transcendental  world.  It  may  well  be  that  the  spirit,  already  modified
by  cosmic  experiences  dating  back  to  infinity,  may  inform  the  body  already
modified  by  terrene  experiences  dating  back  to  the  first  appearance  of  life
on  our  planet.  Both  the  old  traducianist  and  the  old  transmigrationist
view  would  thus  possess  a  share  of  truth  ;  and  the  actual  man  would  be
the  resultant  not  only  of  intermingling  heredities  on  father's  and  mother's
side,  but  of  intermingling  heredities,  one  of  planetary  and  one  of  cosmic
scope.

Passing  on  from  hereditary  or  pre-natal  memories,  through  the  various
other  types, — e.g.  the  organic  memory  of  impressions  received  by  each  man
during  his  own  past  life ;  the  occasional  sudden  revival  of  a  series  of  life-
memories  both  swifter  and  fuller  than  conscious  effort  could  have  supplied  ;
cases  of  ecmnesia,  where  the  recent  impressions  are  suppressed  in  favour
1  See  vol.  i.,  526  and  526  A,  B,  and  C.


268  CHAPTER    IX  [983

of  the  old  j  cases  where  the  hysteric  under  skilful  hypnotic  treatment  can
recall  and  reveal  the  long-forgotten  incident  which  started  her  malady ; —
we  may  place  next  cases  of  clairvoyant  insight  into  the  organic  condition
of  an  absent  person.  Here  we  come  to  a  definitely  supernormal  power ;
and  it  is  a  power  which  claims  to  involve  both  backward  and  forward
knowledge  such  as  actual  medical  examination  of  the  patient  could  not
attain.  There  are  further  cases  in  which  a  definite  fact  in  a  man's  life  has
become  known  supernormally ;  or  sometimes  a  recent  event  unconnected
with  the  percipient  is  revealed  ;  and  there  are,  of  course,  numerous  trance
communications  where  knowledge  of  the  past  is  claimed  to  proceed  from
some  more  or  less  definite  disembodied  intelligence.  Supernormal  retro-
cognition  depends,  it  appears,  on  the  perception  by  us  of  knowledge
contained  in  other  minds,  embodied  or  disembodied,  and  possibly  on  the
absorption  by  us  of  knowledge  afloat,  so  to  say,  in  the  Universe ; — which
may  be  grasped  by  our  spirit's  outreaching,  or  which  may  fall  on  us  like
dew.

983.  Coming  now  to  precognitions,  we  must  first  observe  that  there
are  many  where  what  looks  like  knowledge  of  the  future  can  be  analysed
into  an  enlarged  knowledge  of  what  actually  exists.

There  are,  indeed,  certain  phenomena — "  monitions  "  as  we  may  term
them — which  in  common  parlance  are  often  spoken  of  as  /ranonitions,  and
used  as  a  type  of  knowledge  of  the  future,  where  it  is  nevertheless  plain
that  all  that  is  needed  is  a  somewhat  extended  perception  of  near  facts.

These  monitions — of  which  several  instances  were  given  in  818-825, —
range  from  incidents  so  trivial  and  momentary  that  it  would  seem  absurd
to  ascribe  them  to  anything  more  dignified  than  a  barely  subliminal
stratum  of  the  percipient's  own  consciousness,  up  to  important  warnings
which  claim  the  authority  of  some  departed  but  still  watchful  friend.

At  the  lower  end  of  this  series  come  the  obscure  intimations  which
restrain  us  from  action  on  grounds  which  perhaps  are  only  just  forgotten
and  still  by  effort  recoverable.  The  chess  player,  returning  after  various
trains  of  calculation  to  the  temptation  of  a  specious  move,  will  dimly  feel
a  sense  of  restraint ; — "  I  must  not  do  that,  though  I  cannot  recollect
why''  Sometimes  this  subliminal  warning  presents  itself  as  a  physical
hesitation ; — the  hand  refusing  to  execute  an  order  which  is  really  un-
reasonable ; — and  which  is  felt  to  be  such  so  soon  as  some  trivial  recent
fact  is  remembered.  (See  818  A.)

One  step  further,  and  we  have  an  actual  externalised  hallucination  of
touch  checking  the  inconsiderate  action.  (See  818  B.)

Next  we  come  to  monitions  based  upon  a  fact  apparently  not  forgotten
merely,  but  never  known ;  a  fact  lying  demonstrably  beyond  the  normal
sensory  cognisance  of  the  percipient.

A  fact  beyond  his  normal  sensory  cognisance,  I  say;  but  obviously
before  we  assume  that  he  has  perceived  that  fact  in  a  transcendental  or
telsesthetic  fashion,  we  must  make  the  fullest  allowance  for  hyperses-


983]        TRANCE,    POSSESSION,   ECSTASY        269

thesia, — for  an  extension  of  the  bodily  senses  which  may  include  this
strange  knowledge  within  its  range.  Nay,  more  ;  our  search  for  possible
hypersesthesia  is  bound  to  be  much  wider  than  any  search  which  the
physiologist  is  likely  thus  far  to  have  found  worth  his  pains.  His  interest
has  lain  in  definite  measurable  extensions  of  the  higher  senses,  rather
than  in  obscure  and  novel  sensations  which  led  to  no  clear  end.  It  is
for  these  last,  on  the  other  hand,  that  it  is  our  special  duty  to  search.
We  have  obscure  and  novel  facts  to  explain,  and  before  we  confidently
assign  them  to  psychical  and  transcendental  causes,  we  must  try  and
think  of  everything  which  the  human  body  might  conceivably  discern
or  discover.

I  say  "  the  body  "  rather  than  "  the  senses  "  ;  for  we  must  go  back  in  our
inquiry  (though  of  course  without  expectation  of  immediate  success)  to  an
ancestral  condition  far  anterior  to  any  senses  which  we  now  know.  We
must  go  back  to  the  first  germ  of  life,  and  in  place  of  merely  crediting  it
with  "  irritability,"  which  is  all  the  power  of  reaction  which  it  can  actually
show  us,  we  must  credit  it  with  all  the  potentialities  which  the  history  of
its  descendants  teaches  us  to  infer  as  already  latent  in  it.  We  know  into
how  wide  a  gamut  of  feeling  the  germ's  vague  internal  sensation,  its  vague
external  sensation,  have  diffused  and  specialised  themselves  in  man.  We
dimly  conjecture  into  what  other  rays  the  spectrum  of  that  dim  primal
gleam  of  consciousness  has  been  fanned  out  in  animals  other  than  man.
And  we  may  feel  assured  also,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  that  all  the
known  or  guessed  sensations  of  men  and  animals  are  but  a  small  selection
from  the  range  of  sensations  potentially  educible  from  the  vague  pan<zs-
thesia, — so  to  term  it, — of  the  primal  germ.  Average  experience  within
average  limits — that  is  all  that  our  known  senses  cover.  If  the  stimulus
be  too  weak,  we  are  liable  to  mistake  the  sense  through  which  it  comes  to
us ;  if  it  be  too  strong,  we  are  liable  to  feel  a  mere  distress  or  bewilder-
ment, not  referred  to  any  definite  sense.  It  is  surely  conceivable,  then,
that  all  our  known  sensibilities  may  form  merely  a  kind  of  bull's  eye ; —
the  place  where  outer  and  inner  influences  oftenest  touch  our  central
sensorium ; — while  round  this  bull's-eye  all  kinds  of  unclassified  obscure
sensations  probably  scatter.

It  follows  that  when  we  have  to  explain  very  strange  perceptions  we
must  be  on  the  look-out,  not  only  for  the  hypersesthesia  of  known  senses,
but  also  for  that  more  generalised  form  of  hypersesthesia  which  may  involve
senses  (peripheral  or  central)  as  yet  incipient  and  unrecognised,  although
still  depending  on  the  material  world, — a  wider  selection  from  the  potential
pansesthesia  of  the  primal  germ.  There  may — there  must — be  evolution
still  going  on  in  us  in  relation  to  our  material  as  well  as  to  our  transcen-
dental environment,  and  we  must  not  claim  phenomena  for  the  latter
without  taking  account  of  the  former  as  well.

Once  more,  we  must  remember  that  the  assumed  new  sensitivities,
physical  and  transcendental,  may  be  linked  together  in  ways  quite  unknown


2/0  CHAPTER    IX  [984

to  us.  The  synaesthesiae,  which  have  only  of  late  years  been  noted
between  the  ordinary  senses — of  which  "  coloured  audition,"  or  sound-
seeing,  is  the  accepted  type — may  be  carried  yet  further,  and  may  connect
in  unlooked-for  ways  man's  responses  to  his  physical  and  to  his  trans-
cendental environments.  There  will  be  nothing  to  surprise  us  if  the  same
percipient  should  receive  a  number  of  subliminal  intimations,  of  which
some  are  to  be  referred  to  hyperaesthesia  and  some  to  telaesthesia,  or  to
telepathy  from  the  living  or  from  the  dead.

I  have  said  that  hyperaesthesia  may  be  peripheral  or  central ; — that  is  to
say,  that  it  may  consist  in  the  heightened  perception  of  sensations  coming
from  outside  our  organism,  or  from  within  the  brain.  I  have  already
given  (820-823)  some  cases  of  apparent  telaesthesia,  or  of  apparent  pre-
vision, which  may  possibly,  though  by  no  means  certainly,  be  referable  to
an  extension  of  the  external  senses.

From  these  cases  of  possible  hyperaesthesia  of  the  external  senses  we
may  make  our  transition  to  central  hyperaesthesia,  a  heightening  of  inner
sensations  to  a  point  where  the  future  history  of  the  organisation  can  be
guessed  or  divined  with  unusual  distinctness.  This  is  virtually  but  another
aspect  of  the  knowledge  of  intimate  processes  which  self-suggestion  has  so
often  shown.  If  the  subliminal  self  can  induce  or  arrest  changes  in  the
organism,  it  may  well  be  able  also  to  foresee  such  changes  when  they  are
approaching  through  natural  causes.  In  whatever  direction  we  have  seen
suggestion  operate,  in  that  direction  may  we  expect  to  see  organic  predic-
tion operate  also.  Thus,  for  instance,  suggestion  has  produced  fainting,
and  also  bleeding  at  the  nose,  and  we  have  cases  of  precisely  similar
predictions  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  339 ;  and  vol.  xi.  p.
426),  or  even  predictions  of  death  (see  425  A).

984.  This  seems  to  show  that  a  man's  subliminal  self  may  sometimes
perceive  his  own  approaching  death,  and  may  transmit  this  knowledge  to
the  empirical  self,  sometimes  by  aid  of  a  hallucination.  Now  we  know
that  the  subliminal  self  may  sometimes  communicate  to  other  persons
knowledge  which  it  cannot  or  does  not  communicate  to  its  own  empirical
self.  This  is  familiar  enough  in  hypnotic  experiments,  or  in  spontaneous
automatic  script,  which  script  may  be  (for  instance)  written  in  a  position
turned  away  from  the  automatist,  and  may  remain  unknown  to  him,
although  its  content  must  have  come  from,  or  passed  through,  his  own
deeper  being.  We  know  also  that  an  agent  has  sometimes  succeeded  in
transmitting  a  phantasmal  image  of  himself  to  a  percipient  at  a  distance,
without  knowing  whether  he  has,  in  fact,  been  successful  or  no.

It  is  natural,  therefore,  to  ask  whether  there  is  anything  to  show  that
the  subliminal  self  ever  reveals  the  approach  of  death,  not  to  its  own
empirical  self,  but  to  other  persons ; — showing,  perhaps,  by  a  phantasmal
image,  the  source  from  which  the  information  comes.

To  this  question  we  have  some  ground  for  returning  an  affirmative
answer,  for  my  readers  will  remember  that  there  are  various  cases  where


985]       TRANCE,    POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        271

the  phantom  of  a  person  destined  soon  to  die  has  been  seen  by  a  per-
cipient at  a  distance ;  nor  does  it  seem  that  such  an  apparition  depends
upon  the  decedent's  own  supraliminal  effort.  On  the  contrary,  it  often
appears  while  he  is  asleep  or  in  a  comatose  condition  (see,  e.g.,  cases  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  440-454).

While  there  are  thus  many  precognitions  which  are  in  various  ways
explicable  without  postulating  any  direct  knowledge  of  the  future,  since
they  may  be  due  only  to  some  kind  of  inference  from  a  knowledge  of
existing  facts  wider  than  our  own,  it  is  possible  that  other  cases  may  be
due  to  inference  of  some  supernormal  kind, — some  perception  of  the
future  more  direct  than  any  which  our  ordinary  minds  enjoy.  Such  are
some  of  the  dream-predictions  quoted  in  the  Appendices  to  section  425
(see  vol.  i.  pp.  402-413).  It  is  conceivable  that  predictions  of  these  and
other  types  may  be  communicated  by  disembodied  spirits,  to  whom  may
also  be  attributed  the  cases  that  suggest  an  unseen  guidance  or  protection
(see  824  and  the  cases  given  at  the  end  of  663  A).

985.  Finally,  we  must  admit  the  possibility  of  a  knowledge  which
comes  to  a  man  from  no  individuated,  or  at  least  from  no  human  source ;
which  is  no  longer  inference  but  the  reflection  of  Reality  itself;  of  the
World-Soul  as  the  Future  ;  of  a  pre-existent  Cosmorama  of  infinite  fates.

But  before  turning  to  this  last  line  of  reflection,  I  must  say  a  few
words  as  to  the  relation  of  our  evidence  to  the  problem  of  Free  Will.
Here  I  have  a  suggestion  to  make  which  even  in  this  time-worn  con-
troversy is,  I  think,  absolutely  novel.  It  is  that  we  have  now  a  possibility
of  making  the  question  between  liberty  and  determination  a  matter  of
actual  experiment.

Let  us  put  that  old  question  in  this  specific  form  :  "  Is  there  evidence
that  any  power  can  show  me  a  picture  involving  my  own  (so-called)
voluntary  actions  in  the  future,  which  picture  I  cannot  by  any  effort  in
the  smallest  degree  hinder  from  becoming  actual  fact?  "

For  mere  ordinary  prevision  this  would  of  course  be  impossible.  But
we  have  here  certain  foreshadowings  which  depend  on  no  ordinary  pre-
vision, and  which  are  more  wholly  outside  ourselves  than  any  information
of  equally  definite  character  which  we  can  otherwise  receive.  The  scenes
or  statements  thus  given  in  complete  detail  seem  sometimes  to  be  fulfilled
with  equal  completeness.  But  must  they,  or  must  any  of  them,  inevitably
be  thus  fulfilled?  Here  it  is  that  a  possibility  of  experiment  comes  in.
The  experiment  indeed  cannot  be  conclusive  either  way.  But  suppose
that — as  in  some  folklore  story — we  were  to  make  vigorous  effort  to  avert
some  incident,  and  were  yet  to  find  that  incident  fulfil  itself,  perhaps  by
dint  of  that  very  effort,  exactly  after  the  dreaded  fashion, — should  we  not
then  have  some  reason  to  infer  that  earth-life  was  not  really  modifiable  by
anything  which  we  feel  as  free-will  ?

Assuming  such  a  result  of  our  experiment,  analogy  would  at  once
suggest  a  further  possibility.  For  our  life  on  earth  would  then  be  seen  to


2/2  CHAPTER    IX  [985

resemble  the  experience  of  the  hypnotised  subject,  fulfilling  unwittingly  in
waking  hours  the  suggestions  previously  made  to  him  in  the  trance.  We
should  ask  whether  in  our  own  history  some  epoch  may  have  existed  in
which  a  self-suggestion  may  have  been  given  which  could  similarly  domi-
nate our  earthly  career.  Our  complex  organism,  the  result  of  a  long  pre-
vious history,  is  felt  to  restrict  our  so-called  voluntary  action  within  narrow
limits ;  and  if  we  possess  also  a  soul  independent  of  the  body,  it  is  surely
likely  that  the  soul's  previous  history  also — for  some  previous  history  any
entity  so  highly  specialised  as  a  man's  soul  must  have  had — may  exercise
a  determining  influence,  even  more  profound  than  the  organism's  influ-
ence, upon  the  thoughts  and  actions  of  this  incarnation.  There  may,  in
short,  be  a  kind  of  alternating  personality,  expressing  itself  first  in  an  in-
corporeal and  then  in  a  corporeal  state,  in  such  a  way  that  the  incorporeal
state  is  the  deeper  and  the  more  permanent,  and  that  suggestions  thence
derived  influence  corporeal  life,  although  the  empirical  consciousness
which  governs  that  life  may  never  know  it.

This  idea,  of  course,  is  not  new  to  religion  or  to  philosophy,  in  East
or  West,  and  it  has  long  since  been  suggested  that  our  earthly  exist-
ence may  be  the  inevitable  sequel  of  our  past  eternity ;  a  predestined
pilgrimage  on  which  our  true  soul  looks  with  calm  content,  since  not  one
of  earth's  phantom  sorrows  can  find  her  unwilling  or  strike  her  unaware.
The  soul  foretaught,  the  body  forewrought, — these  will  move  onwards  as
they  must  and  may ;  but  meanwhile  the  problem  of  Liberty  and  Necessity
will  no  longer  be  one  for  earthly  experience  to  discuss ;  it  will  be  lifted
into  a  pre-natal  region,  among  the  secrets  of  the  transcendental  world.

All  this  must  be  conceived  as  possible ;  yet  I  do  not  think  that  our
evidence  thus  far  collected  does  in  fact  make  for  this  view  of  pre-deter-
mined  earthly  fates.  Rather  we  have  seen  that  in  many  cases  monitions
have  averted  incidents  which  would  doubtless  have  occurred  had  the  per-
cipient received  no  warning.  And  where  dangers  have  been  foreshown
and  yet  not  averted,  this  seems  often  to  have  been  because  no  adequate
effort  was  made  to  avert  them.  The  problem  which  our  narratives  more
urgently  suggest  is  how  to  reconcile  so  much  foreknowledge  with  so  much
freedom.  I  have  suggested  elsewhere  that  this  problem  of  free  human
wills  amid  the  predictable  operations  of  unchanging  law  may  resemble  the
problem  of  molecular  motion  amid  molar  calm.  Clear  and  stable  is  for
us  the  diamond ;  the  dewdrop  is  clear  and  still ;  yet  within  their  tranquil
clarity  a  myriad  molecules  jostle  in  narrow  orbits,  or  speed  on  an  uncom-
puted  way.  So  to  "  the  spectator  of  all  Time  and  of  all  Existence "
may  the  Cosmos  be  "  as  one  entire  and  perfect  chrysolite " ;  and  yet
man's  petty  hopes  and  passions  may  make  endless  turmoil  among  its
minutest  elements  and  in  its  infinitesimal  grains.  Those  movements,  too,
must  be  ruled  by  unknown  law ;  yet  on  a  wide  view  they  will  average  out,
and  will  admit  of  predictions  fulfilled  immutably,  and  overriding  the  small
Wills  of  men.


986]        TRANCE,     POSSESSION,    ECSTASY        273

986.  Once  more,  and  from  a  different  standpoint.  Few  men  have
pondered  long  on  these  problems  of  Past  and  Future  without  wondering
whether  Past  or  Future  be  in  very  truth  more  than  a  name — whether
we  may  not  be  apprehending  as  a  stream  of  sequence  that  which  is  an
ocean  of  co-existence,  and  slicing  our  subjective  years  and  centuries
from  timeless  and  absolute  things.  The  precognitions  dealt  with  here,
indeed,  hardly  overpass  the  life  of  the  individual  percipient.  Let  us  keep
to  that  small  span,  and  let  us  imagine  that  a  whole  earth-life  is  in  reality
an  absolutely  instantaneous  although  an  infinitely  complex  phenomenon.
Let  us  suppose  that  my  transcendental  self  discerns  with  equal  directness
and  immediacy  every  element  of  this  phenomenon ;  but  that  my  empirical
self  receives  each  element  mediately  and  through  media  involving  dif-
ferent rates  of  retardation ;  just  as  I  receive  the  lightning  more  quickly
than  the  thunder.  May  not  then  seventy  years  intervene  between  my
perceptions  of  birth  and  death  as  easily  as  seven  seconds  between  my  per-
ceptions of  the  flash  and  peal?  And  may  not  some  inter-communication
of  consciousness  enable  the  wider  self  to  call  to  the  narrower,  the  more
central  to  the  more  external,  "  At  such  an  hour  this  shock  will  reach  you  !
Listen  for  the  nearing  roar  !  "

And  thinking  thus  of  the  Universe  as  no  mere  congeries  of  individual
experiences,  but  as  a  plenum  of  infinite  knowledge  of  which  all  souls  form
part,  we  come  to  count  less  and  less  upon  having  to  deal  exclusively  with
intelligences  individualised  like  our  own.  Our  limitations  of  personality
may  less  and  less  apply  to  spirits  drawing  more  directly  upon  the  essential
reality  of  things.  The  definite  intelligences  which  have  crystallised,  so  to
say,  out  of  the  psychical  vapour  may  even  for  us  become  again  partly  sub-
limated, may  again  be  diffused  for  a  moment  amid  such  knowledge  as  our
organisations  cannot  receive  except  in  ecstasy  and  bewilderment,  or  retain
except  in  vanishing  symbol  and  obscure  and  earthly  sign.

If  then  all  these  phenomena  form  part  of  one  great  effort  by  which
man's  soul  is  striving  to  know  his  spiritual  environment,  and  his  spiritual
environment  is  striving  to  become  known,  how  little  can  it  matter  what
the  special  incident  foretold  or  foreshadowed  may  be  !  What  signifies
it  whether  this  or  that  earthly  peril  be  averted,  or  earthly  benefit  secured,
— whether  through  this  or  that  petty  channel  shall  flow  some  stream  of
mortal  things?  The  prime  need  of  man  is  to  know  more  fully,  that  he
may  obey  more  unhesitatingly,  the  laws  of  the  world  unseen.  And  how
can  this  great  end  be  attained  save  by  the  unfoldment  from  within,  in
whatsoever  fashion  it  may  be  possible,  of  man's  transcendental  faculty;
—by  his  recognition  of  himself  as  a  cosmic  being  and  not  a  planetary,  as
not  a  body  but  a  soul  ?  Surely  even  that  special  premonition  which  is
sometimes  spoken  of  as  a  thing  of  terror, — the  warning  or  the  promise  of
earthly  death, — should  to  the  wise  man  sound  as  a  friendly  summons,  and
as  a  welcome  home.  Let  him  remember  the  Vision  which  came  to  Socrates
in  the  prison-house  ; — then,  and  then  only,  showing  in  an  angel's  simili-
VOL.  ii.  s


274  CHAPTER    IX  [987

tude  the  Providence  which  till  that  hour  had  been  but  as  an  impersonal
and  invisible  Voice  ; — but  now  the  "  fair  and  white-robed  woman,"  while
friends  offered  escape  from  death,  had  already  spoken  of  better  hope  than
this,  and  had  given  to  Achilles'  words  a  more  sacred  meaning, — "  On  the
third  day  hence  thou  comest  to  Phthia's  fertile  shore."

•  ••••••

987.  We  have  reached  at  last  a  position  very  remote  from  that  from
which  we  started.  Yet  it  will  not  be  easy  to  say  exactly  at  what  point  we
could  have  paused  in  our  gradual  sequence  of  evidence.  In  the  first
place,  it  now  seems  clear  that  a  serious  inquiry,  whenever  undertaken,
was  destined  to  afford  ample  proof  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  current
material  synthesis ;  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  faculties  and  opera-
tions which  imply  a  spiritual  environment,  acted  upon  by  a  spirit  in  man.
Telepathy  and  telaesthesia,  as  we  now  see,  indisputably  imply  this  enlarged
conception  of  the  universe  as  intelligible  by  man ;  and  so  soon  as  man  is
steadily  conceived  as  dwelling  in  this  wider  range  of  powers,  his  survival
of  death  becomes  an  almost  inevitable  corollary.  With  this  survival  his
field  of  view  broadens  again.  If  we  once  admit  discarnate  spirits  as
actors  in  human  affairs,  we  must  expect  them  to  act  in  some  ways  with
greater  scope  and  freedom  than  is  possible  to  the  incarnate  spirits  which
we  already  know.

We  cannot  simply  admit  the  existence  of  discarnate  spirits  as  inert  or
subsidiary  phenomena;  we  must  expect  to  have  to  deal  with  them  as
agents  on  their  own  account — agents  in  unexpected  ways,  and  with  novel
capacities.  If  they  are  concerned  with  us  at  all,  the  part  which  they  will
play  is  not  likely  to  be  a  subordinate  one.

We  are  standing  then,  on  this  view,  at  a  crisis  of  enormous  importance
in  the  history  of  life  on  earth.  The  spiritual  world  is  just  beginning  to
act  systematically  upon  the  material  world.  Action  of  the  spiritual  world
upon  our  own  there  must  always  have  been ;  action  both  profound,
universal,  and  so  to  say  automatic,  and  very  probably  also  irregular  action
with  specific  moral  purport,  such  as  has  been  assumed  to  accompany  the
rise  of  religions.

But  a  change  seems  to  be  impending,  and  the  kind  of  action  which
now  seems  likely  to  be  transmitted  from  the  one  world  to  the  other  is  of
a  type  which  in  the  natural  course  of  historic  evolution  has  scarcely  been
likely  to  show  itself  until  now.  For  it  depends,  as  I  conceive,  on  the
attainment  of  a  certain  scientific  level  by  spirits  incarnate  and  excarnate
alike.

A  few  words  will  suffice  to  sum  up  broadly  the  general  situation  as  it
at  present  seems  to  me  to  stand.  The  dwellers  on  this  earth,  themselves
spirits,  are  an  object  of  love  and  care  to  spirits  higher  than  they.  The
most  important  boon  that  can  possibly  be  bestowed  on  them  is  know-
ledge as  to  their  position  in  the  universe,  the  assurance  that  their
existence  is  a  cosmic  and  not  merely  a  planetary,  a  spiritual  and  not


987]       TRANCE,   POSSESSION,   ECSTASY         275

merely  a  corporeal,  phenomenon.  I  conceive  that  this  knowledge
has  in  effect  been  apprehended  from  time  to  time  by  embodied
spirits  of  high  inward  perceptive  power,  and  has  also  been  communi-
cated by  higher  spirits,  either  affecting  individual  minds  or  even  (as
is  believed  especially  of  Jesus  Christ)  voluntarily  incarnating  themselves
on  earth  for  the  purpose  of  teaching  what  they  could  recollect  of  that
spiritual  world  from  which  they  came.  In  those  ages  it  would  have  been
useless  to  attempt  a  scientific  basis  for  such  teaching.  What  could  best
be  done  was  to  enforce  some  few  great  truths — as  the  soul's  long  upward
progress,  or  the  Fatherhood  of  God — in  such  revelations  as  East  and
West  could  understand.  Gradually  Science  arose,  uniting  the  beliefs  of
all  peoples  in  one  scheme  of  organised  truth,  and  suggesting — as  has
been  said — that  religion  must  be  the  spirit's  subjective  reaction  to  all
the  truths  we  know.

But  when  once  this  point  was  reached  it  must  have  become  plain  to
wise  spirits  that  the  communications  from  their  world  which  hitherto  had
had  somewhat  the  character  of  inspirations  of  genius  ought  now  to  be
based  upon  something  of  organised  and  definite  observation, — something
which  would  work  in  with  the  great  structure  of  Truth  which  organised
observation  has  already  established.  Here,  then,  new  difficulties  must
have  arisen,  just  as  they  arise  on  earth  when  we  endeavour  to  reduce  to
rules  practicable  for  the  many  the  results  achieved  by  the  extraordinary
gifts  of  the  few.  Now  it  is  that  we  are  forced  on  both  sides  of  the  gulf  to
recognise  how  rare  and  specific  is  that  capacity  for  intercommunication  on
which  our  messages  must  depend.  Now  it  is  that  we  feel  the  difficulty  of
being  definite  without  being  trivial ;  how  little  of  earthly  memory  persists ;
how  little  of  heavenly  experience  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  earth ;  how
long  and  arduous  must  be  the  way,  how  many  must  be  the  experiments,
and  how  many  the  failures,  before  any  systematised  body  of  new  truth  can
be  established.  But  a  sound  beginning  has  been  made,  and  whatever
may  be  possible  hereafter  need  not  be  wasted  on  a  fresh  start ;  it  may  be
added  to  a  growing  structure  of  extra- terrene  verities  such  as  our  race  has
never  known  till  now.

It  is  not  we  who  are  in  reality  the  discoverers  here.  The  experiments
which  are  being  made  are  not  the  work  of  earthly  skill.  All  that  we  can
contribute  to  the  new  result  is  an  attitude  of  patience,  attention,  care;
an  honest  readiness  to  receive  and  weigh  whatever  may  be  given  into  our
keeping  by  intelligences  beyond  our  own.  Experiments,  I  say,  there  are,
probably  experiments  of  a  complexity  and  difficulty  which  surpass  our
imagination ;  but  they  are  made  from  the  other  side  of  the  gulf,  by  the
efforts  of  spirits  who  discern  pathways  and  possibilities  which  for  us  are
impenetrably  dark.  We  should  not  be  going  beyond  the  truth  if  we
described  our  sensitives  as  merely  the  instruments,  our  researchers  as
merely  the  registrars,  of  a  movement  which  we  neither  initiated  nor  can
in  any  degree  comprehend.


276  CHAPTER    IX  [988

988.  The  true  discoverers,  however,  show  no  wish  to  be  thus  sharply
distinguished  from  ourselves.  Their  aim  is  a  collaboration  with  us  as
close  as  may  be  possible.  Some  of  them  were  on  earth  our  own  familiar
friends ;  we  have  spoken  with  them  in  old  days  of  this  great  enterprise ;
they  have  promised  that  they  would  call  to  us,  if  it  were  possible,  with  the
message  of  their  undying  love.  It  may  be  that  ^he  most  useful  thing  that
some  of  us  have  done  on  earth  has  been  to  interest  in  this  inquiry  some
spirit  more  potent  than  himself,  who  has  passed  into  that  world  of  un-
guessed  adventure,  not  forgetful  of  his  friend.

The  very  faintness  and  incoherence  of  such  a  spirit's  message,  besides
being  a  kind  of  indication  that  we  are  dealing  with  the  imperfections  of
actual  reality  rather  than  with  the  smoothly  finished  products  of  mere
imagination,  does  also  in  itself  constitute  a  strong  appeal  to  our  gratitude
and  reverence.  Not  easily  and  carelessly  do  these  spirits  come  to  us,  but
after  strenuous  preparation,  and  with  difficult  fulfilment  of  desire.  So
came  Tennyson's  Persephone  : —

"  Faint  as  a  climate-changing  bird  that  flies
All  night  across  the  darkness,  and  at  dawn
Falls  on  the  threshold  of  her  native  land,
And  can  no  more.  ..."

They  commune  with  us,  like  Persephone,  willing  and  eager,  but
"dazed  and  dumb  with  passing  through  at  once  from  state  to  state."
They  cannot  satisfy  themselves  with  their  trammelled  utterance ;  they
complain  of  the  strange  brain,  the  alien  voice.  What  they  are  doing,
indeed,  they  desire  to  do — this  is  their  willing  contribution  to  that
universal  scheme  by  which  the  higher  helps  the  lower,  and  the  stronger
the  weaker,  through  all  the  ideal  relationships  of  the  world  of  Life.  But
we  on  our  part  ought  to  remember  that  there  may  be  a  dignity  in  this
very  confusion, — a  proof  of  persistent  strong  affection  in  the  very
hesitancies  and  bewilderments  of  some  well-loved  soul.

"After  the  tempest  a  still  small  voice."  One  may  have  listened
perhaps,  to  the  echoing  pomp  of  some  CEcumenical  Council,  thundering
its  damnations  Urbi  et  Orbi  from  an  Infallible  Chair ;  and  yet  one  may
find  a  more  Christlike  sanctity  in  the  fragmentary  whisper  of  one  true
soul,  descending  painfully  from  unimaginable  brightness  to  bring  strength
and  hope  to  kindred  souls  still  prisoned  in  the  flesh.

Vicit  iter  durum  pietas.  But  here  the  effort  has  been,  so  to  say,  on
the  part  of  Anchises,  not  of  y£neas ;  the  piety  of  heaven  towards  earth
rather  than  of  earth  towards  heaven.  It  is  some  enfranchised  soul — some
soul,  like  George  Eliot's,  filled  to  the  brim  with  loving  pity  for  struggling
lives  on  "the  dark  globe" — which  has  penetrated  the  world-old  secret,
and  has  piloted  the  innavigable  way.

Beyond  us  still  is  mystery ;  but  it  is  mystery  lit  and  mellowed  with  an
infinite  hope.  We  ride  in  darkness  at  the  haven's  mouth  ;  but  sometimes


988]       TRANCE,     POSSESSION,    ECSTASY       277

through  rifted  clouds  we  see  the  desires  and  needs  of  many  generations
floating  and  melting  upwards  into  a  distant  glow,  "  up  through  the  light
of  the  seas  by  the  moon's  long-silvering  ray."

The  high  possibilities  that  lie  before  us,  should  be  grasped  once  for
all,  in  order  that  the  dignity  of  the  quest  may  help  to  carry  the  inquirer
through  many  disappointments,  deceptions,  delays.  But  he  must  re-
member that  this  inquiry  must  be  extended  over  many  generations ;  nor
must  he  allow  himself  to  be  persuaded  that  there  are  byways  to  mastery.
I  will  not  say  that  there  cannot  possibly  be  any  such  thing  as  occult
wisdom,  or  dominion  over  the  secrets  of  nature  ascetically  or  magically
acquired.  But  I  will  say  that  every  claim  of  this  kind  which  my
colleagues  or  I  have  been  able  to  examine  has  proved  deserving  of
complete  mistrust ;  and  that  we  have  no  confidence  here  any  more  than
elsewhere  in  any  methods  except  the  open,  candid,  straightforward
methods  which  the  spirit  of  modern  science  demands.

All  omens  point  towards  the  steady  continuance  of  just  such  labour
as  has  already  taught  us  all  we  know.  Perhaps,  indeed,  in  this  complex
of  interpenetrating  spirits  our  own  effort  is  no  individual,  no  transitory
thing.  That  which  lies  at  the  root  of  each  of  us  lies  at  the  root  of  the
Cosmos  too.  Our  struggle  is  the  struggle  of  the  Universe  itself ;  and  the
very  Godhead  finds  fulfilment  through  our  upward-striving  souls.


[1000


CHAPTER    X

EPILOGUE

*E8oK€t  TI'S   fiOL    yvvr}   irpocreXOoixra  KaA/»)    /cat    euetS^s,    Aev/ca    t/x,ana    e^outra,
/caXecrai  ft€  KCU  ciTm^,  *Q   Sco/c/aares,  "H/xart  KCI/  Tptrara)  <&6ir)v  epi'/JcoAov

tKOtO. IIAaTWVOS    Kp6TCDV.

1000.  The  task  which  I  proposed  to  myself  at  the  beginning  of  this
work  is  now,  after  a  fashion,  accomplished.  Following  the  successive
steps  of  my  programme,  I  have  presented, — not  indeed  all  the  evidence
which  I  possess,  and  which  I  would  willingly  present, — but  enough  at
least  to  illustrate  a  continuous  exposition,  and  as  much  as  can  be  compressed
into  two  volumes,  with  any  hope  that  these  volumes  will  be  read  at  all.
I  have  indicated  also  the  principal  inferences  which  that  evidence
immediately  suggests.  Such  wider  generalisations  as  I  may  now  add
must  needs  be  dangerously  speculative ;  they  must  run  the  risk  of
alienating  still  further  from  this  research  many  of  the  scientific  minds
which  I  am  most  anxious  to  influence.

This  risk,  nevertheless,  I  feel  bound  to  face.  For  two  reasons, — or,
I  should  perhaps  say,  for  one  main  reason  seen  under  two  aspects, — I
cannot  leave  this  obscure  and  unfamiliar  mass  of  observation  and  experi-
ment without  some  words  of  wider  generalisation,  some  epilogue  which
may  place  these  new  discoveries  in  clearer  relation  to  the  existing  schemes
of  civilised  thought  and  belief.

In  the  first  place,  I  feel  that  some  such  attempt  at  synthesis  is  needful
for  the  practical  purpose  of  enlisting  help  in  our  long  inquiry.  As  has
been  hinted  more  than  once,  the  real  drag  upon  its  progress  has  been
not  opposition  but  indifference.  Or  if  indifference  be  too  strong  a  word,
at  any  rate  the  interest  evoked  has  not  been  such  as  to  inspire  to  steady
independent  work  anything  like  the  number  of  coadjutors  who  would
have  responded  to  a  new  departure  in  one  of  the  sciences  which  all  men
have  learnt  to  respect.  The  inquiry  falls  between  the  two  stools  of
religion  and  science ;  it  cannot  claim  support  either  from  the  "  religious
world "  or  from  the  Royal  Society.  Yet  even  apart  from  the  instinct
of  pure  scientific  curiosity  (which  surely  has  seldom  seen  such  a  field
opening  before  it),  the  mighty  issues  depending  on  these  phenomena
ought,  I  think,  to  constitute  in  themselves  a  strong,  an  exceptional  appeal.
I  desire  in  this  book  to  emphasise  that  appeal; — not  only  to  produce

278


1002]  EPILOGUE  279

conviction,  but  also  to  attract  co-operation.  And  actual  converse
with  many  persons  has  led  me  to  believe  that  in  order  to  attract  such
help,  even  from  scientific  men,  some  general  view  of  the  moral  upshot
of  all  the  phenomena  is  needed ; — speculative  and  uncertain  though  such
a  general  view  must  be.

1001.  Again, — and  here  the  practical  reason  already  given  expands
into  a  wider  scope, — it  would  be  unfair  to  the   evidence  itself  were  I  to
close  this  work  without  touching  more  directly  than   hitherto  on  some
of  the  deepest  faiths  of  men.     The  influence  of  the  evidence  set  forth
in  this  book  should  not  be  limited  to  the  conclusions,  however  weighty,
which  that  evidence  may  be  thought   to  establish.     Rather    these  dis-
coveries should  prompt,  as  nothing  else  could  have  prompted,  towards
the  ultimate  achievement  of  that   programme    of  scientific    dominance
which  the  Instauratio  Magna  proclaimed  for  mankind.     Bacon  foresaw
the  gradual  victory  of  observation  and  experiment — the  triumph  of  actual
analysed  fact — in  every  department  of  human  study  ; — in  every  department
save  one.     The  realm  of  "  Divine  things  "  he  left  to  Authority  and  Faith.
I  here  urge  that  that  great  exemption  need  be  no  longer  made.     I  claim
that  there  now  exists  an  incipient  method  of  getting  at  this  Divine  know-
ledge also,  with  the  same  certainty,  the  same  calm  assurance,  with  which
we  make  our  steady  progress  in  the  knowledge  of  terrene  things.     The
authority  of  creeds  and  Churches  will  thus  be  replaced  by  the  authority
of  observation  and  experiment.     The  impulse  of  faith  will  resolve  itself
into  a  reasoned  and  resolute  imagination,  bent  upon  raising  even  higher
than  now  the  highest  ideals  of  man.

Most  readers  of  the  preceding  pages  will  have  been  prepared  for
the  point  of  view  thus  frankly  avowed.  Yet  to  few  readers  can  that  point
of  view  at  first  present  itself  otherwise  than  as  alien  and  repellent.  Philo-
sophy and  orthodoxy  will  alike  resent  it  as  presumptuous ;  nor  will  science
readily  accept  the  unauthorised  transfer  to  herself  of  regions  of  which
she  has  long  been  wont  either  to  deny  the  existence,  or  at  any  rate  to
disclaim  the  rule.  Nevertheless,  I  think  that  it  will  appear  on  reflection
that  some  such  change  of  standpoint  as  this  was  urgently  needed, — nay,
was  ultimately  inevitable.

1002.  I  need  not  here  describe  at  length  the  deep  disquiet  of  our
time.     Never,  perhaps,   did  man's  spiritual   satisfaction   bear  a   smaller
proportion  to  his  needs.     The  old-world  sustenance,  however  earnestly
administered,  is  too  unsubstantial  for  the  modern  cravings.     And  thus
through   our   civilised   societies   two  conflicting  currents   run.      On   the
one  hand  health,  intelligence,  morality, — all  such  boons  as  the  steady
progress  of  planetary  evolution  can  win   for  man, — are  being  achieved
in  increasing   measure.     On  the   other  hand  this  very  sanity,  this  very
prosperity,  do  but  bring  out  in  stronger  relief  the  underlying  Welt-Schmerz,
the  decline  of  any  real  belief  in  the  dignity,  the  meaning,  the  endlessness
of  life.


28o  CHAPTER    X  [1003

There  are  many,  of  course,  who  readily  accept  this  limitation  of  view ;
who  are  willing  to  let  earthly  activities  and  pleasures  gradually  dissipate
and  obscure  the  larger  hope.  But  others  cannot  thus  be  easily  satisfied.
They  rather  resemble  children  who  are  growing  too  old  for  their  games  ;—
whose  amusement  sinks  into  an  indifference  and  discontent  for  which  the
fitting  remedy  is  an  initiation  into  the  serious  work  of  men.

A  similar  crisis  has  passed  over  Europe  once  before.  There  came
a  time  when  the  joyful  naivete,  the  unquestioning  impulse  of  the  early
world  had  passed  away ;  when  the  worship  of  Greeks  no  more  was  beauty,
nor  the  religion  of  Romans  Rome.  Alexandrian  decadence,  Byzantine
despair,  found  utterance  in  many  an  epigram  which  might  have  been
written  to-day.  Then  came  a  great  uprush  or  incursion  from  the  spiritual
world,  and  with  new  races  and  new  ideals  Europe  regained  its  youth.

The  unique  effect  of  that  great  Christian  impulse  begins,  perhaps,
to  wear  away.  But  more  grace  may  yet  be  attainable  from  the  region
whence  that  grace  came.  Our  age's  restlessness,  as  I  believe,  is  the  rest-
lessness not  of  senility  but  of  adolescence ;  it  resembles  the  approach  of
puberty  rather  than  the  approach  of  death.

1003.  What  the  age  needs  is  not  an  abandonment  of  effort,  but  an
increase ;  the  time  is  ripe  for  a  study  of  unseen  things  as  strenuous  and
sincere  as  that  which  Science  has  made  familiar  for  the  problems  of  earth.
For  now  the  scientific  instinct, — so  newly  developed  in  mankind, — seems
likely  to  spread  until  it  becomes  as  dominant  as  was  in  time  past  the
religious ;  and  if  there  be  even  the  narrowest  chink  through  which  man
can  look  forth  from  his  planetary  cage,  our  descendants  will  not  leave
that  chink  neglected  or  unwidened.  The  scheme  of  knowledge  which
can  commend  itself  to  such  seekers  must  be  a  scheme  which,  while  it
transcends  our  present  knowledge,  steadily  continues  it; — a  scheme  not
catastrophic,  but  evolutionary ;  not  promulgated  and  closed  in  a  moment,
but  gradually  unfolding  itself  to  progressive  inquiry.

Must  there  not  also  be  a  continuous  change,  an  unending  advance
in  the  human  ideal  itself?  so  that  Faith  must  shift  her  standpoint  from
the  brief  Past  to  the  endless  Future,  not  so  much  caring  to  supply  the
lacunae  of  tradition  as  to  intensify  the  conviction  that  there  is  still  a  higher
life  to  work  for,  a  holiness  which  may  be  some  day  reached  by  grace  and
effort  as  yet  unknown.

It  may  be  that  for  some  generations  to  come  the  truest  faith  will  lie
in  the  patient  attempt  to  unravel  from  confused  phenomena  some  trace
of  the  supernal  world  ; — to  find  thus  at  last  "  the  substance  of  things  hoped
for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  I  confess,  indeed,  that  I  have
often  felt  as  though  this  present  age  were  even  unduly  favoured ; — as
though  no  future  revelation  and  calm  could  equal  the  joy  of  this  great
struggle  from  doubt  into  certainty ; — from  the  materialism  or  agnosticism
which  accompany  the  first  advance  of  Science  into  the  deeper  scientific
conviction  that  there  is  a  deathless  soul  in  man.  I  can  imagine  no  other


1004]  EPILOGUE  281

crisis  of  such  deep  delight.  But  after  all  this  is  but  like  the  starving
child's  inability  to  imagine  anything  sweeter  than  his  first  bite  at  the  crust.
Give  him  but  that,  and  he  can  hardly  care  for  the  moment  whether
he  is  fated  to  be  Prime  Minister  or  ploughboy.

Equally  transitory,  equally  dependent  on  our  special  place  in  the  story
of  man's  upward  effort,  is  another  shade  of  feeling  which  many  men  have
known.  They  have  felt  that  uncertainty  gave  scope  to  faith  and  courage
in  a  way  which  scientific  assurance  could  never  do.  There  has  been  a
stern  delight  in  the  choice  of  virtue, — even  though  virtue  might  bring  no
reward.  This  joy,  like  the  joy  of  Columbus  sailing  westward  from  Hierro,
can  hardly  recur  in  precisely  the  same  form.  But  neither  (to  descend  to
a  humbler  comparison)  can  we  grown  men  again  give  ourselves  up  to
learning  in  the  same  spirit  of  pure  faith,  without  prefigurement  of  result,
as  when  we  learnt  the  alphabet  at  our  mother's  knees.  Have  we  therefore
relaxed  since  then  our  intellectual  effort?  Have  we  felt  that  there  was
no  longer  need  to  struggle  against  idleness  when  once  we  knew  that
knowledge  brought  a  sure  reward  ?

Endless  are  the  varieties  of  lofty  joy.  In  the  age  of  Thales,  Greece
knew  the  delight  of  the  first  dim  notion  of  cosmic  unity  and  law.  In  the
age  of  Christ,  Europe  felt  the  first  high  authentic  message  from  a  world
beyond  our  own.  In  our  own  age  we  reach  the  perception  that  such
messages  may  become  continuous  and  progressive ; — that  between  seen
and  unseen  there  is  a  channel  and  fairway  which  future  generations  may
learn  to  widen  and  to  clarify.  Our  own  age  may  seem  the  best  to  us ;
so  will  their  mightier  ages  seem  to  them.

"  '  Talia  saecla'  suis  dixerunt  *  currite '  fusis
Concordes  stabili  Fatorum  numine  Parcae."

Spiritual  evolution : — that,  then,  is  our  destiny,  in  this  and  other
worlds; — an  evolution  gradual  with  many  gradations,  and  rising  to  no
assignable  close.  And  the  passion  for  Life  is  no  selfish  weakness,  it  is
a  factor  in  the  universal  energy.  It  should  keep  its  strength  unbroken
even  when  our  weariness  longs  to  fold  the  hands  in  endless  slumber ;  it
should  outlast  and  annihilate  the  "  pangs  that  conquer  trust."  If  to  the
Greeks  it  seemed  a  AtTrora^ta — a  desertion  of  one's  post  in  battle — to
quit  by  suicide  the  life  of  earth,  how  much  more  craven  were  the  desire  to
desert  the  Cosmos, — the  despair,  not  of  this  planet  only,  but  of  the  Sum
of  Things  !

Nay,  in  the  infinite  Universe  man  may  now  feel,  for  the  first  time,  at
home.  The  worst  fear  is  over ;  the  true  security  is  won.  The  worst  fear
was  the  fear  of  spiritual  extinction  or  spiritual  solitude ;  the  true  security
is  in  the  telepathic  law.

1004.     Let  me  draw  out  my  meaning  at  somewhat  greater  length.

As  we  have  dwelt  successively  on  various  aspects  of  telepathy,  we  have
gradually  felt  the  conception  enlarge  and  deepen  under  our  study.  It


282  CHAPTER    X  [1004

began  as  a  quasi-mechanical  transference  of  ideas  and  images  from  one  to
another  brain.  Presently  we  found  it  assuming  a  more  varied  and  potent
form,  as  though  it  were  the  veritable  ingruence  or  invasion  of  a  distant
mind.  Again,  its  action  was  traced  across  a  gulf  greater  than  any  space
of  earth  or  ocean,  and  it  bridged  the  interval  between  spirits  incarnate  and
discarnate,  between  the  visible  and  the  invisible  world.  There  seemed  no
limit  to  the  distance  of  its  operation,  or  to  the  intimacy  of  its  appeal.

€V    OfjpCTW    €V    j3pOTOl<TW    €V    0€OtS    ttJ/O).

This  Love,  then,  which  (as  Sophocles  has  it)  rules  "  beasts  and  men
and  gods"  with  equal  sway,  is  no  matter  of  carnal  impulse  or  of  emotional
caprice.  Rather  it  is  now  possible  to  define  Love  (as  we  have  already
defined  Genius)  in  terms  which  convey  for  us  some  new  meaning  in  con-
nection with  phenomena  described  in  this  work.  Genius,  as  has  been
already  said,  is  a  kind  of  exalted  but  undeveloped  clairvoyance.  The  sub-
liminal uprush  which  inspires  the  poet  or  the  musician,  presents  to  him  a
deep,  but  vague  perception  of  that  world  unseen,  through  which  the  seer
or  the  sensitive  projects  a  narrower  but  an  exacter  gaze.  Somewhat  simi-
larly, Love  is  a  kind  of  exalted,  but  unspecialised  telepathy ; — the  simplest
and  most  universal  expression  of  that  mutual  gravitation  or  kinship  of
spirits  which  is  the  foundation  of  the  telepathic  law.

This  is  the  answer  to  the  ancient  fear ;  the  fear  lest  man's  fellowships
be  the  outward  and  his  solitude  the  inward  thing ;  the  fear  lest  all  close
linking  with  our  fellows  be  the  mere  product  of  the  struggle  for  existence,
— of  the  tribal  need  of  strength  and  cohesion ; — the  fear  that  if  love  and
virtue  thus  arose,  love  and  virtue  may  thus  likewise  perish.  It  is  an
answer  to  the  dread  that  separate  centres  of  conscious  life  must  be  always
strangers,  and  often  foes;  their  leagues  and  fellowships  interested  and
illusory ;  their  love  the  truce  of  a  moment  amid  infinite  inevitable  war.

Such  fears,  I  say,  vanish  when  we  learn  that  it  is  the  soul  in  man
which  links  him  with  other  souls  ;  the  body  which  dissevers  even  while  it
seems  to  unite ;  so  that  "  no  man  liveth  to  himself  nor  dieth  to  himself,"
but  in  a  sense  which  goes  deeper  than  metaphor,  "  We  are  every  one
members  one  of  another."  Like  atoms,  like  suns,  like  galaxies,  our  spirits
are  systems  of  forces  which  vibrate  continually  to  each  other's  attractive
power.

All  this  as  yet  is  dimly  adumbrated ;  it  is  a  first  hint  of  a  scheme  of
thought  which  it  may  well  take  centuries  to  develop.  But  can  we  suppose
that,  when  once  this  conception  of  the  bond  between  all  souls  has  taken
root,  men  will  turn  back  from  it  to  the  old  exclusiveness,  the  old  contro-
versy? Will  they  not  see  that  this  world-widening  knowledge  is  both  old
and  new,  that  die  Geisterwelt  ist  nicht  verschlossen  ?  that  always  have  such
revelations  been  given,  but  develop  now  into  a  mightier  meaning, — with
the  growth  of  wisdom  in  those  who  send  them,  and  in  us  who  receive  ?

Surely  we  have  here  a  conception,  at  once  wider  and  exacter  than  ever


1005]  EPILOGUE  283

before,  of  that  "  religious  education  of  the  world  "  on  which  theologians
have  been  fain  to  dwell.  We  need  assume  no  "  supernatural  interference,"
no  "  plan  of  redemption."  We  need  suppose  only  that  the  same  process
which  we  observe  to-day  has  been  operating  for  ages  between  this  world
and  the  next.

1005.  Let  us  suppose  that  whilst  incarnate  men  have  risen  from
savagery  into  intelligence,  discarnate  men  have  made  on  their  part  a
like  advance.  Let  us  suppose  that  they  have  become  more  eager  and
more  able  to  use,  for  communication  with  earth,  the  standing  laws  of
relation  between  the  spiritual  and  the  material  Universe.

At  first,  on  such  a  hypothesis,  certain  automatic  phenomena  will  occur,
but  will  not  be  purposely  modified  by  spirit  power.  Already  and  always
there  must  have  been  points  of  contact  where  unseen  things  impinged
upon  the  seen.  Always  there  would  be  "  clairvoyant  wanderings,"  where
the  spirit  of  shaman  or  of  medicine-man  discerned  things  distant  upon
earth  by  the  spirit's  excursive  power.  Always  there  would  be  apparitions
at  death, — conscious  or  unconscious  effects  of  the  shock  which  separated
soul  from  body;  and  always  "  hauntings," — where  the  spirit,  already  dis-
carnate, revisited,  as  in  a  dream  perceptible  by  others,  the  scenes  which
once  he  knew.

From  this  groundwork  of  phenomena  developed  (to  take  civilised
Europe  alone)  the  oracular  religion  first,  the  Christian  later.  The  golden
gifts  of  Croesus  to  Delphi  attested  the  clairvoyance  of  the  Pythia  as
strongly,  perhaps,  as  can  be  expected  of  any  tradition  which  comes  to  us
from  the  morning  of  history.

And  furthermore,  do  we  not  better  understand  at  once  the  uniqueness
and  the  reality  of  the  Christian  revelation  itself,  when  we  regard  it  as  a
culmination  rather  than  an  exception, — as  destined  not  to  destroy  the
cosmic  law,  but  to  fulfil  it?  Then  first  in  human  history  came  from  the
unseen  a  message  such  as  the  whole  heart  desired  ; — a  message  adequate
in  its  response  to  fundamental  emotional  needs  not  in  that  age  only,  but
in  all  ages  that  should  follow.  Intellectually  adequate  for  all  coming  ages
that  revelation  could  not  be ; — given  the  laws  of  mind,  incarnate  alike  and
discarnate, — the  evolution,  on  either  side  of  the  gulf  of  death,  of  know-
ledge and  power.

No  one  at  the  date  of  that  revelation  suspected  that  uniformity,  that
continuity  of  the  Universe  which  long  experience  has  now  made  for  us
almost  axiomatic.  No  one  foresaw  the  day  when  the  demand  for  miracle
would  be  merged  in  the  demand  for  higher  law.

This  newer  scientific  temper  is  not  confined,  as  I  believe,  to  the
denizens  of  this  earth  alone.  The  spiritual  world  meets  it,  as  I  think
our  evidence  has  shown,  with  eager  and  strenuous  response.  But  that
response  is  made,  and  must  be  made,  along  the  lines  of  our  normal
evolution.  It  must  rest  upon  the  education,  the  disentanglement,  of  that
within  us  mortals  which  exists  in  the  Invisible,  a  partaker  of  the  undying
world.  And  on  our  side  and  on  theirs  alike,  the  process  must  be  steady


284  CHAPTER    X  [1006

and  continuous.  We  have  no  longer  to  deal  with  some  isolated  series  of
events  in  the  past, — interpretable  this  way  or  that,  but  in  no  way  renew-
able,— but  rather  with  a  world- wide  and  actual  condition  of  things,
recognisable  every  year  in  greater  clearness,  and  changing  in  directions
which  we  can  better  and  better  foresee.  This  new  aspect  of  things  needs
something  of  new  generalisation,  of  new  forecast, — it  points  to  a  pro-
visional synthesis  of  religious  belief  which  may  fitly  conclude  the  present
work.


PROVISIONAL   SKETCH    OF   A   RELIGIOUS   SYNTHESIS.


oX/3io?  oans  idav  eKflva

vno  "\66va  '  oldev  p.ev  /St'ov  K€  Ivos
de  dtoaftoTOv  a^dv.  —  PlNDAR.

1006.  I  see  ground  for  hoping  that  we  are  within  sight  of  a  religious
synthesis,  which,  although  as  yet  provisional  and  rudimentary,  may  in  the
end  meet  more  adequately  than  any  previous   synthesis  the  reasonable
needs  of  men.     Such  a  synthesis  cannot,  I  think,  be  reached  by  a  mere
predominance  of  any  one  existing  creed,  nor  by  any  eclectic  or  syncretic
process.     Its   prerequisite  is   the   actual   acquisition  of  new  knowledge,
whether  by  discovery  or  by  revelation  —  knowledge  discerned  from  without
the  veil  or  from  within  —  yet  so  realised  that  the  main  forms  of  religious
thought,  by  harmonious    expansion   and    development,   shall   find   place
severally  as  elements  in  a  more  comprehensive  whole.     And  enough  of
such  knowledge  has,  I  think,  been  now  attained  to  make  it  desirable  to
submit  to  my  readers  the  religious  results  which  seem  likely  to  follow.

1007.  With  such  a  purpose,   our  conception  of  religion  should  be
both  profound  and  comprehensive.     I  will  use  here  the  definition  already
adopted  of  religion  as  the  sane  and  normal  response  of  the  human  spirit
to  all  that  we  know  of  cosmic  law  ;   that  is,  to  the  known  phenomena  of
the  universe,  regarded  as  an  intelligible  whole.     For  on  the  one  hand  I
cannot  confine  the  term  to  any  single  definite  view  or  tradition  of  things
unseen.     On  the  other  hand,  I  am  not  content  to  define  religion  as  "  mor-
ality tinged  with  emotion,"  lest  morality  per  se  should  seem  to  hang  in  air,
so  that  we  should  be  merely  gilding  the  tortoise  which  supports  the  earth.
Yet  my  definition  needs  some  further  guarding  if  it  is   to  correspond
with  our  habitual  use  of  language.     Most  men's  subjective  response  to
their  environment  falls  below  the  level  of  true  religious  thought.     It  is
scattered  into   cravings,  or   embittered  by  resentment,    or  distorted   by
superstitious  fear.     But  of  such  men  I  do  not  speak  ;  rather  of  men  in
whom  the  great  pageant  has  inspired  at  least  some  vague  out-reaching
toward  the  Source  of  All  ;  men  for  whom  knowledge  has  ripened  into
meditation,  and  has  prompted  high  desire.     I  would  have  Science  first
sublimed  into  Philosophy,  and  then  kindled   by  Religion  into  a  burning
flame.     For,   from  my  point  of  view,  man  cannot  be   too  religious.


1009]  EPILOGUE  285

desire  that  the  environing,  the  interpenetrating  universe,— its  energy,  its
life,  its  love,— should  illume  in  us,  in  our  low  degree,  that  which  we
ascribe  to  the  World-Soul,  saying,  "  God  is  Love,"  "God  is  Light."  The
World-Soul's  infinite  energy  of  omniscient  benevolence  should  become  in
us  an  enthusiasm  of  adoring  co-operation, — an  eager  obedience  to  what-
soever with  our  best  pains  we  can  discern  as  the  justly  ruling  principle —
TO  rjyefjioviKov — without  us  and  within.

1008.  Yet  if  we  form  so  high  an  ideal  of  religion, — raising  it  so  far
above   any  blind  obedience  or   self-seeking  fear   that  its  submission  is
wholly  willing,  and  its  demand  is  for  spiritual  response  alone, — we  are
bound  to  ask  ourselves  whether  it  is  right  and  reasonable  to  be  religious,
to  regard  with   this  full   devotion  a  universe   apparently  imperfect    and
irresponsive,  and  a  Ruling  Principle  which  so  many  men  have  doubted
or  ignored.

The  pessimist  holds  the  view  that  sentient  existence  has  been  a
deplorable  blunder  in  the  scheme  of  things.  The  egotist  at  least  acts
upon  the  view  that  the  universe  has  no  moral  coherence,  and  that  "  each
for  himself"  is  the  only  indisputable  law.  I  am  sanguine  enough  to  think
that  the  answer  to  the  pessimist  and  the  egotist  has  by  our  new  know-
ledge been  made  complete.  There  remains,  indeed,  a  difficulty  of  subtler
type,  but  instinctive  in  generous  souls.  "The  world,"  such  an  one  may
say,  "  is  a  mixed  place,  and  I  am  plainly  bound  to  do  my  best  to  improve
it.  But  am  I  bound  to  feel — can  any  bribe  of  personal  happiness  justify
me  in  feeling — religious  enthusiasm  for  a  universe  in  which  even  one
being  may  have  been  summoned  into  a  sentiency  destined  to  inescapable
pain?"

The  answer  to  this  ethical  scruple  must  be  a  matter  largely  of  faith.
If  indeed  we  knew  that  this  earthly  life  was  all,  or  (far  worse)  that  it  was
followed  for  any  one  soul  by  endless  pain,  we  could  not  without  some
moral  jugglery  ascribe  perfection  of  both  power  and  goodness  to  a  personal
or  impersonal  First  Cause  of  such  a  doom.  But  if  we  believe  that  endless
life  exists  for  all,  with  infinite  possibilities  of  human  redress  and  of  divine
justification,  then  it  seems  right  to  assume  that  the  universe  is  either
already  (in  some  inscrutable  fashion)  wholly  good,  or  is  at  least  in  course
of  becoming  so ;  since  it  may  be  becoming  so  in  part  through  the  very
ardour  of  our  own  faith  and  hope.

I  do  but  mention  these  initial  difficulties ;  I  shall  not  dwell  on  them
here.  I  speak  to  men  who  have  determined,  whether  at  the  bidding  of
instinct  or  of  reason,  that  it  is  well  to  be  religious ;  well  to  approach  in
self-devoted  reverence  an  infinite  Power  and  Love.  Our  desire  is  simply
to  find  the  least  unworthy  way  of  thinking  of  matters  which  inevitably
transcend  and  baffle  our  finite  thought.

1009.  And  here,  for  the  broad  purpose  of  our  present  survey,  we  may
divide  the  best  religious  emotion  of  the  world  in  triple  fashion ;  tracing
three  main  streams  of  thought, — streams  which  on  the  whole  run  parallel,


286  CHAPTER    X  [1009

and  which  all  rise,  as  I  believe,  from  some  source  in  the  reality  of
things.

First,  then,  I  place  that  obscure  consensus  of  independent  thinkers  in
many  ages  and  countries  which,  to  avoid  any  disputable  title,  I  will  here
call  simply  the  Religion  of  the  Ancient  Sage.  Under  that  title  (though
Lao  Tzu  is  hardly  more  than  a  name)  it  has  been  set  forth  to  us  in  brief
summary  by  the  great  sage  and  poet  of  our  own  time ;  and  such  words  as
Natural  Religion,  Pantheism,  Platonism,  Mysticism,  do  but  express  or
intensify  varying  aspects  of  its  main  underlying  conception.  That  con-
ception is  the  co-existence  and  interpenetration  of  a  real  or  spiritual  with
this  material  or  phenomenal  world :  a  belief  driven  home  to  many  minds
by  experiences  both  more  weighty  and  more  concordant  than  the  per-
cipients themselves  have  always  known.  More  weighty,  I  say,  for  they
have  implied  the  veritable  nascency  and  operation  of  a  "  last  and  largest
sense "  ;  a  faculty  for  apprehending,  not  God,  indeed  (for  what  finite
faculty  can  apprehend  the  Infinite?),  but  at  least  some  dim  and  scattered
tokens  and  prefigurements  of  a  true  world  of  Life  and  Love.  More
concordant  also ;  and  this  for  a  reason  which  till  recently  would  have
seemed  a  paradox.  For  the  mutual  corroboration  of  these  signs  and
messages  lies  not  only  in  their  fundamental  agreement  up  to  a  certain
point,  but  in  their  inevitable  divergence  beyond  it ; — as  they  pass  from
things  felt  into  things  imagined  ;  from  actual  experience  into  dogmatic  creed.

The  Religion  of  the  Ancient  Sage  is  of  unknown  antiquity.  Of  un-
known antiquity  also  are  various  Oriental  types  of  religion,  culminating  in
historical  times  in  the  Religion  of  Buddha.  For  Buddhism  all  inter-
penetrating universes  make  the  steps  upon  man's  upward  way;  until
deliverance  from  illusion  leaves  the  spirit  merged  ineffably  in  the  imper-
sonal All.  But  the  teaching  of  Buddha  has  lost  touch  with  reality ;  it
rests  on  no  basis  of  observed  or  of  reproducible  fact.

On  a  basis  of  observed  facts,  on  the  other  hand,  Christianity,  the
youngest  of  the  great  types  of  religion,  does  assuredly  rest.  Assuredly
those  facts,  so  far  as  tradition  has  made  them  known  to  us,  do  tend  to
prove  the  superhuman  character  of  its  Founder,  and  His  triumph  over
death ;  and  thus  the  existence  and  influence  of  a  spiritual  world,  where
men's  true  citizenship  lies.  These  ideas,  by  common  consent,  lay  at  the
origin  of  the  Faith.  Since  those  first  days,  however,  Christianity  has  been
elaborated  into  codes  of  ethic  and  ritual  adapted  to  Western  civilisation ;
— has  gained  (some  think)  as  a  rule  of  life  what  it  has  lost  as  a  simplicity
of  spirit.

From  the  unfettered  standpoint  of  the  Ancient  Sage  the  deep  concord-
ance of  these  and  other  schemes  of  religious  thought  may  well  out-
weigh their  formal  oppositions.  And  yet  I  repeat  that  it  is  not  from
any  mere  welding  of  these  schemes  together,  nor  from  any  choice  of
the  best  points  in  existing  syntheses,  that  the  new  synthesis  for  which
I  hope  must  be  born.  It  must  be  born  from  new-dawning  knowledge ;


1010]  EPILOGUE  287

and  in  that  new  knowledge  I  believe  that  each  great  form  of  religious
thought  will  find  its  indispensable — I  may  almost  say  its  predicted —
development.  Our  race  from  its  very  infancy  has  stumbled  along  a
guarded  way ;  and  now  the  first  lessons  of  its  early  childhood  reveal  the
root  in  reality  of  much  that  it  has  instinctively  believed.

1010.  What  I  think  I  know,  therefore,  I  am  bound  to  tell ;  I  must
give  the  religious  upshot  of  observation  and  experiment  in  such  brief
announcement  as  an  audience  like  this l  has  a  right  to  hear,  even  before
our  discoveries  can  be  laid  in  full  before  the  courts  of  science  for  definite
approval.

The  religious  upshot,  I  repeat : — for  I  cannot  here  reproduce  the  mass
of  evidence  which  has  been  published  in  full  elsewhere.  Its  general
character  is  by  this  time  widely  known.  Observation,  experiment,  infer-
ence, have  led  many  inquirers,  of  whom  I  am  one,  to  a  belief  in  direct  or
telepathic  intercommunication,  not  only  between  the  minds  of  men  still
on  earth,  but  between  minds  or  spirits  still  on  earth  and  spirits  departed.
Such  a  discovery  opens  the  door  also  to  revelation.  By  discovery  and  by
revelation — by  observation  from  without  the  veil,  and  by  utterance  from
within — certain  theses  have  been  provisionally  established  with  regard  to
such  departed  souls  as  we  have  been  able  to  encounter.  First  and  chiefly,
I  at  least  see  ground  to  believe  that  their  state  is  one  of  endless  evolution
in  wisdom  and  in  love.  Their  loves  of  earth  persist ;  and  most  of  all
those  highest  loves  which  seek  their  outlet  in  adoration  and  worship.  We
do  not  find,  indeed,  that  support  is  given  by  souls  in  bliss  to  any  special
scheme  of  terrene  theology.  Thereon  they  know  less  than  we  mortal  men
have  often  fancied  that  we  knew.  Yet  from  their  step  of  vantage-ground
in  the  Universe,  at  least,  they  see  that  it  is  good.  I  do  not  mean  that
they  know  either  of  an  end  or  of  an  explanation  of  evil.  Yet  evil  to
them  seems  less  a  terrible  than  a  slavish  thing.  It  is  embodied  in
no  mighty  Potentate ;  rather  it  forms  an  isolating  madness  from  which
higher  spirits  strive  to  free  the  distorted  soul.  There  needs  no
chastisement  of  fire  ;  self-knowledge  is  man's  punishment  and  his  reward  ;
self-knowledge,  and  the  nearness  or  the  aloofness  of  companion  souls.
For  in  that  world  love  is  actually  self-preservation ;  the  Communion  of
Saints  not  only  adorns  but  constitutes  the  Life  Everlasting.  Nay,  from
the  law  of  telepathy  it  follows  that  that  communion  is  valid  for  us  here
and  now.  Even  now  the  love  of  souls  departed  makes  answer  to  our
invocations.  Even  now  our  loving  memory — love  is  itself  a  prayer —
supports  and  strengthens  those  delivered  spirits  upon  their  upward  way.
No  wonder ;  since  we  are  to  them  but  as  fellow-travellers  shrouded  in  a
mist;  "neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other
creature  "  can  bar  us  from  the  hearth-fire  of  the  universe,  or  hide  for  more
than  a  moment  the  inconceivable  oneness  of  souls.

1  The  Synthetic  Society,  before  which  these  sections  were  first  read  as  a  paper  in
March  1899.— EDITORS.


288  CHAPTER    X  [1011

1011.  And  is  not  this  a  fresh  instalment,  or  a  precursory  adumbration,
of  that  Truth  into  which  the  Paraclete  should  lead?  Has  any  world-
scheme  yet  been  suggested  so  profoundly  corroborative  of  the  very  core  of
the  Christian  revelation?  Jesus  Christ  "brought  life  and  immortality  to
light."  By  His  appearance  after  bodily  death  He  proved  the  deathless-
ness  of  the  spirit.  By  His  character  and  His  teaching  He  testified  to  the
Fatherhood  of  God.  So  far,  then,  as  His  unique  message  admitted  of
evidential  support,  it  is  here  supported.  So  far  as  He  promised  things
improvable,  that  promise  is  here  renewed.

I  venture  now  on  a  bold  saying ;  for  I  predict  that,  in  consequence  of
the  new  evidence,  all  reasonable  men,  a  century  hence,  will  believe  the
Resurrection  of  Christ,  whereas,  in  default  of  the  new  evidence,  no
reasonable  men,  a  century  hence,  would  have  believed  it.  The  ground  of
this  forecast  is  plain  enough.  Our  ever-growing  recognition  of  the  con-
tinuity, the  uniformity  of  cosmic  law  has  gradually  made  of  the  alleged
uniqueness  of  any  incident  its  almost  inevitable  refutation.  Ever  more
clearly  must  our  age  of  science  realise  that  any  relation  between  a  material
and  a  spiritual  world  cannot  be  an  ethical  or  emotional  relation  alone ;
that  it  must  needs  be  a  great  structural  fact  of  the  Universe,  involving
laws  at  least  as  persistent,  as  identical  from  age  to  age,  as  our  known  laws
of  Energy  or  of  Motion.  And  especially  as  to  that  central  claim,  of  the
soul's  life  manifested  after  the  body's  death,  it  is  plain  that  this  can  less
and  less  be  supported  by  remote  tradition  alone ;  that  it  must  more  and
more  be  tested  by  modern  experience  and  inquiry.  Suppose,  for  instance,
that  we  collect  many  such  histories,  recorded  on  first-hand  evidence  in  our
critical  age  ;  and  suppose  that  all  these  narratives  break  down  on  analysis  ;
that  they  can  all  be  traced  to  hallucination,  misdescription,  and  other
persistent  sources  of  error; — can  we  then  expect  reasonable  men  to  believe
that  this  marvellous  phenomenon,  always  vanishing  into  nothingness  when
closely  scrutinised  in  a  modern  English  scene,  must  yet  compel  adoring
credence  when  alleged  to  have  occurred  in  an  Oriental  country,  and  in  a
remote  and  superstitious  age  ?  Had  the  results  (in  short)  of  "  psychical
research  "  been  purely  negative,  would  not  Christian  evidence — I  do  not
say  Christian  emotion,  but  Christian  evidence — have  received  an  over-
whelming blow?

As  a  matter  of  fact, — or,  if  you  prefer  the  phrase,  in  my  own  personal
opinion, — our  research  has  led  us  to  results  of  a  quite  different  type.  They
have  not  been  negative  only,  but  largely  positive.  We  have  shown  that
amid  much  deception  and  self-deception,  fraud  and  illusion,  veritable
manifestations  do  reach  us  from  beyond  the  grave.  The  central  claim
of  Christianity  is  thus  confirmed,  as  never  before.  If  our  own  friends,
men  like  ourselves,  can  sometimes  return  to  tell  us  of  love  and  hope,  a
mightier  Spirit  may  well  have  used  the  eternal  laws  with  a  more  com-
manding power.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  the  reverent  faith  that,
though  we  be  all  "the  Children  of  the  Most  Highest,"  He  came  nearer


1012]  EPILOGUE  289

than  we,  by  some  space  by  us  immeasurable,  to  That  which  is  infinitely
far.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  the  devout  conviction  that  He  of  His
own  act  "  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,"  and  was  made  flesh
for  our  salvation,  foreseeing  the  earthly  travail  and  the  eternal  crown.
"Surely  before  this  descent  into  generation,"  says  Plotinus,1  "we  existed
in  the  intelligible  world ;  being  other  men  than  now  we  are,  and  some  of
us  Gods  ;  clear  souls,  and  minds  immixed  with  all  existence  ;  parts  of  the
Intelligible,  nor  severed  thence  ;  nor  are  we  severed  even  now."

1012.  It  is  not  thus  to  less  of  reverence  that  man  is  summoned,  but
to  more.  Let  him  keep  hold  of  early  sanctities ;  but  let  him  remember
also  that  once  again  "  a  great  sheet  has  been  let  down  out  of  heaven ;  "
and  lo  !  neither  Buddha  nor  Plato  is  found  common  or  unclean.

Nay,  as  to  our  own  soul's  future,  when  that  first  shock  of  death  is
past,  it  is  in  Buddhism  that  we  find  the  more  inspiring,  the  truer  view.
That  Western  conception  of  an  instant  and  unchangeable  bliss  or  woe —
a  bliss  or  woe  determined  largely  by  a  man's  beliefs,  in  this  earthly
ignorance,  on  matters  which  "  the  angels  desire  to  look  into  " — is  the
bequest  of  a  pre-Copernican  era  of  speculative  thought.  In  its
Mahomedan  travesty,  we  see  the  same  scheme  with  outlines  coarsened
into  grotesqueness ; — we  see  it  degrade  the  cosmic  march  and  profluence
into  a  manner  of  children's  play.

Meantime  the  immemorial  musings  of  unnumbered  men  have  dreamt
of  a  consummation  so  far  removed  that  he  who  gazed  has  scarcely  known
whether  it  were  Nothingness  or  Deity.  With  profoundest  fantasy,  the
East  has  pondered  on  the  vastness  of  the  world  that  now  is,  of  the  worlds
that  are  to  be.  What  rest  or  pasture  for  the  mind  in  the  seven  days  of
Creation,  the  four  rivers  of  Paradise,  the  stars  "  made  also  "  ?  The
farther  East  has  reached  blindly  forth  towards  astronomical  epochs,
sidereal  spaces,  galactic  congregations  of  inconceivable  Being.  Pressed
by  the  incumbency  of  ancestral  gods  (as  the  Chinese  legend  tells  us),  it
has  "  created  by  one  sweep  of  the  imagination  a  thousand  Universes,  to
be  the  Buddha's  realm."

The  sacred  tale  of  Buddha,  developed  from  its  earlier  simplicity  by
the  shaping  stress  of  many  generations,  opens  to  us  the  whole  range  and
majesty  of  human  fate.  "The  destined  Buddha  has  desired  to  be  a
Buddha  through  an  almost  unimaginable  series  of  worlds."  No  soul
need  ever  be  without  that  hope.  "The  spirit-worlds  are  even  now
announcing  the  advent  of  future  Buddhas,  in  epochs  too  remote  for
the  computation  of  men."  No  obstacles  without  us  can  arrest  our  way.
"The  rocks  that  were  thrown  at  Buddha  were  changed  into  flowers."
Not  our  own  worst  misdoings  need  beget  despair.  "  Buddha,  too,  had
often  been  to  hell  for  his  sins."  The  vast  complexity  of  the  Sum  of
Things  need  not  appal  us.  "Beneath  the  bottomless  whirlpool  of
existences,  behind  the  illusion  of  Form  and  Name,"  we,  too,  like

1  Enn.  vi.  4,  14.
VOL.  II.  T


2QO  CHAPTER    X  [1013

Buddha,  may  discover  and  reveal  "the  perfection  of  the  Eternal  Law."
Us,  too,  like  Buddha,  the  cosmic  welcome  may  await ;  as  when  "  Earth
itself  and  the  laws  of  all  worlds  "  trembled  with  joy  "  as  Buddha  attained
the  Supreme  Intelligence,  and  entered  into  the  Endless  Calm."

1013.  I  believe  that  some  of  those  who  once  were  near  to  us  are
already  mounting  swiftly  upon  this  heavenly  way.     And  when  from  that
cloud  encompassing  of  unforgetful  souls  some  voice  is   heard, — as  long
ago, — there   needs   no   heroism,   no    sanctity,    to   inspire   the    apostle's
€7rt0u/Ata  ets  TO  di/aXvcrat,  the  desire  to  lift  our  anchor,  and  to  sail  out
beyond  the  bar.     What  fitter  summons  for  man  than  rtie  wish  to  live  in
the  memory  of  the  highest  soul  that  he  has  known,  now  risen  higher ; — to
lift  into  an  immortal  security  the  yearning  passion  of  his  love  ?     "  As  the
soul  hasteneth,"  says  Plotinus,1  "  to  the  things  that  are  above,  she  will
ever  forget  the  more;    unless   all  her  life  on  earth  leave  a   memory  of
things  done  well.     For  even  here  may  man  do  well,  if  he  stand  clear  of
the  cares  of  earth.     And  he  must  stand  clear  of  their  memories  too ;  so
that  one  may  rightly  speak  of  a  noble  soul  as  forgetting  those  things  that
are  behind.     And  the  shade  of  Herakles,  indeed,  may  talk  of  his  own
valour  to  the  shades,  but  the  true  Herakles  in  the  true  world  will  deem
all  that  of  little  worth ;  being  transported  into  a  more  sacred  place,  and
strenuously  engaging,  even  above  his  strength,  in  those  battles  in  which
the  wise  engage."     Can  we  men  now  on  earth  claim  more  of  sustainment
than  lies  in   the  incipient  communion  with   those   enfranchised   souls?
What  day  of  hope,  of  exaltation,  has  dawned  like  this,  since  the  message
of  Pentecost  ?

1014.  Yet  a  durable  religious  synthesis  should  do  more  than  satisfy
man's  immediate   aspiration.     It   should    be   in.  itself   progressive   and
evolutionary ;  it  should  bear  a  promise  of  ever  deeper  holiness,  to  answer
to  the  long  ages  of  heightening  wisdom  during  which  our  race  may  be
destined  to  inhabit  the  earth.     This  condition  has  never  yet  been  met.
No  scheme,  indeed,  could  meet  it  which  was  not  based  upon  recurrent
and  developing  facts.     To  such   facts  we   now  appeal.     We  look,  not
backward  to  fading  tradition,  but  onward  to  dawning  experience.     We
hope  that  the  intercourse,  now  at   last  consciously  begun — although   as
through  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings,  and  in  confused  and  stammer-
ing speech — between  discarnate  and  incarnate  souls,  may  through  long
effort  clarify  into  a  directer  communion,  so  that  they  shall  teach  us  all
they  will.

Science,  then,  need  be  no  longer  fettered  by  the  limitations  of  this
planetary  standpoint ;  nor  ethics  by  the  narrow  experience  of  a  single  life.
Evolution  will  no  longer  appear  as  a  truncated  process,  an  ever-arrested
movement  upon  an  unknown  goal.  Rather  we  may  gain  a  glimpse  of  an
ultimate  incandescence  where  science  and  religion  fuse  in  one ;  a  cosmic
evolution  of  Energy  into  Life,  and  of  Life  into  Love,  which  is  Joy.

1  Enn.  iv.  3,  27.


1015]  EPILOGUE  291

Love,  which  is  Joy  at  once  and  Wisdom  ; — we  can  do  no  more  than  ring
the  changes  on  terms  like  these,  whether  we  imagine  the  transfigurement
and  apotheosis  of  conquering  souls,  or  the  lower,  but  still  sacred,  destiny
which  may  be  some  day  possible  for  souls  still  tarrying  here.  We  picture
the  perfected  soul  as  the  Buddha,  the  Saviour,  the  aurai  simplicis  ignem,
dwelling  on  one  or  other  aspect  of  that  trinal  conception  of  Wisdom,
Love,  and  Joy.  For  souls  not  yet  perfected  but  still  held  on  earth  I  have
foretold  a  growth  in  holiness.  By  this  I  mean  no  unreal  opposition  or
forced  divorcement  of  sacred  and  secular,  of  flesh  and  spirit.  Rather  I
define  holiness  as  the  joy  too  high  as  yet  for  our  enjoyment ;  the  wisdom
just  beyond  our  learning;  the  rapture  of  love  which  we  still  strive  to
attain.  Inevitably,  as  our  link  with  other  spirits  strengthens,  as  the  life
of  the  organism  pours  more  fully  through  the  individual  cell,  we  shall  feel
love  more  ardent,  wider  wisdom,  higher  joy ;  perceiving  that  this  organic
unity  of  Soul,  which  forms  the  inward  aspect  of  the  telepathic  law,  is  in
itself  the  Order  of  the  Cosmos,  the  Summation  of  Things.  And  such
devotion  may  find  its  flower  in  no  vain  self- martyrdom,  no  cloistered
resignation,  but  rather  in  such  pervading  ecstasy  as  already  the  elect  have
known ;  the  Vision  which  dissolves  for  a  moment  the  corporeal  prison-
house  ;  "  the  flight  of  the  One  to  the  One."

"  So  let  the  soul  that  is  not  unworthy  of  that  Vision  contemplate  the
Great  Soul;  freed  from  deceit  and  every  witchery,  and  collected  into
calm.  Calmed  be  the  body  for  her  in  that  hour,  and  the  tumult  of  the
flesh ;  ay,  all  that  is  about  her,  calm  ;  calm  be  the  earth,  the  sea,  the  air,
and  let  Heaven  itself  be  still.  Then  let  her  feel  how  into  that  silent
heaven  the  Great  Soul  floweth  in.  .  .  And  so  may  man's  soul  be  sure  of
Vision,  when  suddenly  she  is  filled  with  light ;  for  this  light  is  from  Him
and  is  He ;  and  then  surely  shall  one  know  His  presence  when,  like  a
god  of  old  time,  He  entered  into  the  house  of  one  that  calleth  Him,  and
maketh  it  full  of  light."  "And  how,"  concludes  Plotinus,  "may  this
thing  be  for  us?  Let  all  else  go."  *

1015.  These  heights,  I  confess,  are  above  the  stature  of  my  spirit.
Yet  for  each  of  us  is  a  fit  ingress  into  the  Unseen ;  and  for  some  lesser
man  the  memory  of  one  vanished  soul  may  be  beatific  as  of  old  for
Plotinus  the  flooding  immensity  of  Heaven.  And  albeit  no  historical
religion  can  persist  as  a  logical  halting-place  upon  the  endless  mounting
way — that  way  which  leads  unbroken  from  the  first  germ  of  love  in  the
heart  to  an  inconceivable  union  with  the  Divine — yet  many  a  creed  in
turn  may  well  be  close  inwrought  and  inwoven  with  our  eternal  hope.
What  wonder,  if  in  the  soul's  long  battle,  some  Captain  of  our  Salvation
shall  sometimes  seem  to  tower  unrivalled  and  alone? — oTos  yap  epvero

1  Enn.  v.  2-3.  The  World-Soul  is  supra  grammaticam  ;  and  Plotinus  sometimes
uses  a  personal,  sometimes  an  impersonal,  locution  to  express  what  is  infinitely  beyond
the  conception  of  personality,  as  it  is  infinitely  beyond  any  human  conception  what-
soever.


292  CHAPTER    X  [App.  A


KTwp.  And  yet  in  no  single  act  or  passion  can  that  salvation
stand;  far  hence,  beyond  Orion  and  Andromeda,  the  cosmic  process
works  and  shall  work  for  ever  through  unbegotten  souls.  And  even  as  it
was  not  in  truth  the  great  ghost  of  Hector  only,  but  the  whole  nascent
race  of  Rome,  which  bore  from  the  Trojan  altar  the  hallowing  fire,  so  is  it
not  one  Saviour  only,  but  the  whole  nascent  race  of  man  —  nay,  all  the
immeasurable  progeny  and  population  of  the  heavens  —  which  issues
continually  from  behind  the  veil  of  Being,  and  forth  from  the  Sanctuary
of  the  Universe  carries  the  ever-burning  flame:  Aeternumque  adytis
effert  penetralibus  ignem.


APPENDIX   A
THE  FUNCTION  OF  A  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

[The  following  formed  originally  a  Presidential  Address  to  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  delivered  in  May,  1900.  Hence  the  allusion  to  the  per-
sonal position  occupied  by  the  author  in  that  Society  during  that  year. —
EDITORS.]

When  I  heard,  in  absence  from  England,  that  the  Council  of  this
Society  had  done  me  the  honour  of  electing  me  as  its  President  for
the  current  year,  I  felt  that  a  certain  definite  stage  in  the  Society's
evolution  had  been  reached  at  an  earlier  date  than  I  should  originally
have  expected.

My  predecessors  in  this  Chair,  I  need  not  say,  have,  without  excep-
tion, been  men  of  the  highest  distinction.  The  list  has  included  men
whose  leadership  would  confer  honour  on  any  body  of  men  whatever  ;—
on  such  bodies,  for  instance,  as  the  British  Association  or  the  House  of
Commons.  We  have  been  grateful  to  these  eminent  persons  for  lending
the  sanction  of  their  names  to  our  early  beginnings.  And  we  have  other
names  in  reserve  of  similar  distinction ; — destined,  I  hope,  some  day  to
adorn  our  list  of  Presidents.  Yet  for  the  current  year  the  Council
have  preferred  to  choose  a  man  who  has  little  claim  to  such  a  dis-
tinction, beyond  the  fact  that  he  has  worked  for  the  objects  which
our  Society  seeks,  from  days  even  before  the  Society's  formation;—
and  that  he  is  determined  to  go  on  thus  working  so  long  as  his
faculties  may  allow.  So  have  our  friends  chosen;  and  if  a  man  may
speak  thus  of  his  own  election,  I  think  that  the  choice  is  appropriate
enough.  For  the  time  has  come  when  we  may  fairly  indicate  to  the
world  that  we  believe  our  Society  can  stand  on  its  own  bottom ;  that
it  carries  on  a  branch  of  scientific  work  which,  although  novel  and
tentative,  is  legitimate  and  honourable;  and  therefore  that  we  do
not  need  to  put  forward  in  its  prominent  positions  only  those  names
which  have  been  made  independently  illustrious  by  good  work  of  other


App.  A]  APPENDIX    A  293

kinds  performed  elsewhere.  As  representing  the  principle  that  the
plain,  unadorned  Psychical  Researcher  is  just  as  respectable  in  his  own
way  as  anybody  else,  I  am  proud  indeed  to  see  my  humbler  name
inscribed  after  the  names  of  Henry  Sidgwick,  Balfour  Stewart,  Arthur
Balfour,  William  James,  and  William  Crookes.

But  here  one  thought  must  rise— must  rise  for  all  who  knew  the
early  days  of  this  research,  but  most  of  all  for  me — Would  that
Edmund  Gurney  were  standing  where  I  stand  now  !  For  us  who  knew
him  best  the  years  since  he  left  us  have  but,  served  to  illustrate  his
uniqueness  and  to  deepen  his  memory ;  have  made  us  feel  how  much
of  the  humorous  adventure,  the  sympathetic  fellowship,  the  deep  delight
of  this  research  of  ours  has  with  him  passed  irrevocably  away.  On
the  lighter  side  of  things,  we  can  never  renew  the  intellectual  enjoy-
ment of  those  years  of  our  small  beginnings  spent  at  his  side ; — watch-
ing how  his  flashing  irony,  his  fearless  dialectic,  dealt  with  the  attacks
which  then  poured  in  from  every  quarter ; — with  the  floundering  plati-
tudes of  obscurantist  orthodoxy,  or  with  the  smug  sneers  of  popular
science,  belittling  what  it  will  not  try  to  understand.  On  the  graver
side,  we  shall  hardly  see  another  example  of  just  that  attitude  of  mind
with  which  Gurney  entered  on  this  research, — and  which  made  for  us
so  deep  an  element  in  his  incomparable  charm.

For  in  that  many-chorded  nature  sympathy  was  the  deepest  strain ; —
sympathy  which  flowed  forth  indeed  to  those  he  loved  in  such  penetrat-
ing and  intimate  tenderness  as  few  mortals  have  had  the  happiness  to
know, — but  which  expended  itself  more  widely  in  a  profound  compas-
sion for  the  multiform  sorrows  of  men.  And  thus,  as  needs  must
happen  in  those  responsive  minds  which  hear,  in  the  Apostle's  words,
the  whole  creation  groaning  and  travailing  until  now,  there  came  to
him  the  conviction  that  the  question  of  life  after  death  was  the  only
test  which  we  could  really  apply  to  the  existence  of  a  Providence; —
nay,  that  it  was  no  mere  articulus  stantis  aut  cadentis  Ecclesice,  but  in
sombre  earnest,  for  all  humankind,  the  articulus  stantis  aut  cadentis
Dei.  Strangely  enough,  it  was  for  others  rather  than  for  himself  that
Gurney  desired  this  great  possibility;  his  own  mournful  and  stoic
temper  dwelt  little  on  any  personal  hope.  But  he  felt  that  if  the  First
Cause  has  summoned  into  life  on  earth,  though  it  were  but  one  single
man  alone,  miserable  amid  all  the  happy ; — one  single  soul  foredoomed  to
eternal  protest  and  inescapable  woe ; — then  that  First  Cause  is  not  a  God
to  whom  a  good  man  can  offer  love,  or  a  just  man  worship.  Alas  !  how
many  theologies  does  this  clear  moral  axiom  shrivel  as  with  burning  fire  !
how  many  philosophies  does  it  scatter  to  the  winds  ! — philosophies  of
men  walking  delicately  on  wordy  bridges  across  the  grim  abyss  of  things,
— satisfied  that  the  world  is  well  enough,  while  round  them  wronged,
degraded  lives  by  millions  are  perishing  in  agony  and  for  ever.  It  was
in  response  to  such  easy  optimism  that  Gurney 's  logic  was  the  most


294  CHAPTER    X  [App.  A

intolerably  trenchant,  his  sombre  silence  the  fullest  of  sad  scorn; —
for  in  truth  this  contented  blindness  of  sealed  spirits  is  in  itself  the
vilest  woe  of  man.  He  could  not  avert  his  eyes,  and  disport  himself
in  a  fool's  Paradise.  He  could  not  weave  a  web  of  words,  and  stifle
in  a  philosopher's  dream.  Suffer  me  to  apply  to  my  friend  for  a
moment  even  those  lofty  lines  in  which  a  great  poet  has  invoked  the
greatest : —

"  Thou  that  seest  universal  Nature  moved  by  universal  Mind  ;
Thou,  majestic  in  thy  sadness  at  the  doubtful  doom  of  humankind."

It  is  well  that  this  noble  figure  should  stand  at  the  entrance  of  our
research; — should  show  how  unselfish  may  be  the  impulse  which  has
prompted  to  eager  labour, — eager  even  beyond  the  limit  which  physical
powers  allowed.  But  assuredly  the  mass  of  us  Psychical  Researchers
have  no  need  whatever  of  heroic  virtue.  We  have  enough  and  to  spare
of  such  motives  as  appeal  to  ordinary  men.  We  have  the  stimulus  of
intellectual  curiosity, — more  richly  satisfied,  I  think,  in  ours  than  in  any
other  quest ; — and  beyond  this  most  of  us,  I  think,  have  the  healthful,
primary  desire  for  the  prolongation — the  endless  prolongation — of  life  and
happiness.  I  know,  indeed,  that  for  various  reasons  some  men  of  strong
and  high  nature,  as  well  as  many  men  of  feebler  nature,  do  fail  to  feel
this  desire ;  but  on  the  whole  one  must  regard  that  form  of  Welt-Schmerz
as  but  a  passing  mood  of  our  race's  immaturity, — as  what  physicians
call  a  neurosis  of  development  -, — one  must  admit  that  usually  when  a  man
cares  little  for  existence  this  is  because  existence  cares  little  for  him,
and  that  it  has  been  doubt  as  to  the  value  of  life  and  love  which  has
made  the  decadence  of  almost  all  civilisations.  Life  is  the  final  aim  of
life;  the  mission  of  the  highest  Teacher  was  that  we  might  have  it
the  more  abundantly ;  and  the  universe  strives  best  towards  its  ulti-
mate purpose  through  the  normal,  vigorous  spirit  to  whom  to  live  itself
is  joy.

The  danger,  then,  for  our  research  will  lie  not  in  lack  but  in  excess  of
motive ;  our  minds  may  be  biassed  in  their  judgment  of  evidence  by  a
deep  instinctive  desire.  For  my  own  part,  I  certainly  cannot  claim  such
impartiality  as  indifference  might  bring.  From  my  earliest  childhood —
from  my  very  first  recollections — the  desire  for  eternal  life  has  immeasur-
ably eclipsed  for  me  every  other  wish  or  hope.  Yet  desire  is  not  neces-
sarily bias;  and  my  personal  history  has  convinced  myself — though  I
cannot  claim  that  it  shall  convince  others  also — that  my  wishes  do  not
strongly  warp  my  judgment, — nay,  that  sometimes  the  very  keenness  of
personal  anxiety  may  make  one  afraid  to  believe,  as  readily  as  other  men,
that  which  one  most  longs  for.

For  when,  after  deriving  much  happiness  from  Christian  faith,  I  felt
myself  forced  by  growing  knowledge  to  recognise  that  the  evidence  for
that  culminant  instance  of  spirit  return  was  not  adequate,  as  standing


App.  A]  APPENDIX    A  295

alone,  to  justify  conviction,  I  did  honestly  surrender  that  great  joy ;  although
its  loss  was  more  grievous  to  me  than  anything  else  which  has  happened
to  me  in  life.

Then  with  little  hope— nay,  almost  with  reluctant  scorn — but  with  the
feeling  that  no  last  and  least  chance  of  the  great  discovery  should  be
thrown  aside,  I  turned  to  such  poor  efforts  at  psychical  research  as  were
at  that  time  possible ;  and  now  it  is  only  after  thirty  years  of  such  study
as  I  have  been  able  to  give  that  I  say  to  myself  at  last,  Habes  tota  quod
mente  petisti — "Thou  hast  what  thine  whole  heart  desired;" — that  I  re-
cognise that  for  me  this  fresh  evidence, — while  raising  that  great  historic
incident  of  the  Resurrection  into  new  credibility, — has  also  filled  me  with
a  sense  of  insight  and  of  thankfulness  such  as  even  my  first  ardent
Christianity  did  not  bestow.

Yet  if  I  thus  find  the  happiness  which  sprang  from  far-reaching
Tradition  and  Intuition  surpassed  by  the  happiness  which  springs  from
a  narrower,  but  a  more  stable  range  of  demonstrated  fact,  I  nevertheless
speak  in  no  spirit  of  reaction  or  of  ingratitude  towards  traditions  and
intuitions  which  must  yet,  for  many  a  century,  be  potent  for  the  salvation
of  men.  I  by  no  means  take  for  granted  that  any  scientific  inquiry,  any
induction  from  empirical  facts,  can  afford  to  man  his  only  or  his  deepest
insight  into  the  meaning  of  the  Universe.  I  have  no  controversy  with
those  who  say  that  contemplation,  revelation,  ecstasy,  may  carry  deep
into  certain  hearts  an  even  profounder  truth.  I  recognise  also  that  our
Science  is  a  conventional  structure ;  that  it  rests  on  assumptions  which
we  cannot  fully  prove  ;  or  which  even  indicate,  by  their  apparent  incon-
sistency, that  they  can  be  at  best  but  narrow  aspects  of  some  underlying
law  imperfectly  discerned.  All  this  we  may  all  admit ;  just  as  we  admit
the  inadequacy,  the  conventionality,  of  human  speech  itself.  Speech
cannot  match  the  meaning  which  looks  in  an  hour  of  emotion  from  the
eyes  of  a  friend.  But  what  we  learn  from  that  gaze  is  indefinable  and  in-
communicable. Our  race  needed  the  spoken  and  written  word,  with  all  its
baldness,  if  they  were  to  understand  each  other  and  to  grow  to  be  men.
So  with  Science  as  opposed  to  Intuition.  Science  forms  a  language
common  to  all  mankind  ;  she  can  explain  herself  when  she  is  misunder-
stood and  right  herself  when  she  goes  wrong ;  nor  has  humanity  yet
found,  at  any  rate,  since  that  great  wedding  between  Reason  and  Experi-
ence, which  immortalises  the  name  of  Galileo, — that  the  methods  of
Science,  intelligently  and  honestly  followed,  have  led  us  in  the  end
astray.

It  is  only  in  the  region  of  inquiry  into  a  spiritual  world — I  mean  a
world  of  immaterial  and  yet  individual  realities — that  these  truisms  are
still  in  danger  of  being  taken  for  paradoxes,  At  once  the  intimate
interest  and  the  extreme  obscurity  of  that  investigation  have  long  pre-
vented it  from  being  kept  fully  and  fairly  in  that  scientific  field  where
man's  attempts  at  all  other  knowledge  are  now  collected  and  appraised.


296  CHAPTER    X  [App.  A  |

In  their  rude  beginnings,  no  doubt,  Religion  and  Science  were  indistin-  j
guishable.     The  savage  observed  such  scanty  facts  as  he  could  get  at,  \
and  tried  to  shape  both  his  practical  and  his  spiritual  life  upon  that  obser-  !
vation.     But  his  need  of  a  theory  of  the  unseen  world  (to  put  his  vague
hopes  and  terrors  into  our  own  phraseology)  went  far  beyond  what  his  i
scraps  of  experience  could  teach  him.     "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "   i
was  a  question  to  which  he  could   not  find,  yet  would  not   wait  for  an  !
answer.     He  fell  into  grotesque  fancies,  which    his  experience  did  not
really  support ;  and  the  divorce  of  Religion  from  Science  at  once  began.

The  spiritual  need  which  thus  acted  on  the  savage  continues  to  act  on
the  civilised  man.  He  too  is  impelled  to  build  his  faith  on  grounds  out-
side his  sphere  of  observation,  to  enlarge  the  safe,  general,  and  permanent
formula  for  religion  in  various  more  or  less  unsafe,  specialised,  and  tran-
sitory ways.  For  it  is — as  already  said — a  safe,  general,  and  permanent
formula  for  religion  if  we  regard  it  as  man's  normal  subjective  response  to
the  sum  of  known  cosmic  phenomena  taken  as  an  intelligible  whole.
Under  the  title  of  Natural  Religion  this  forms  at  least  an  element  in  all
the  higher  forms  of  faith.  Nevertheless  it  is  felt  to  be  inadequate  ;  because
the  observable  phenomena  of  the  Universe,  so  far  at  least  as  they  have  yet
been  observed,  have  not  been  such  as  to  evoke  (save  in  some  few  minds)
the  full  hope,  the  full  devotion  which  our  developed  nature  yearns  to  feel.
To  live  by  Natural  Religion  alone  has  been  like  living  on  turnips  in  the
field.  Most  men  demand  their  spiritual  nutriment  in  a  more  assimilable
form.  The  philosophical  or  the  poetical  contemplation  of  Nature  has  not
satisfied  them  in  the  past ;  nor  can  they  hope  that  the  scientific  contempla-
tion of  Nature  will  satisfy  them  any  better  now.  They  turn  aside  from
the  ambiguous  pageant,  the  circumspect  scrutiny ;  they  specialise  the
name  of  Religion  upon  some  clear,  swift,  extra-scientific  knowledge  as  to
the  dealings  of  unseen  Powers  with  mankind.

On  such  knowledge,  or  supposed  knowledge,  the  peoples  of  East  and
West  have  stayed  in  many  fashions  their  soul's  desire ;  but,  nevertheless,
we  all  know  too  well  that  even  yet  there  is  no  spiritual  food  attainable  in
the  precise  condition  in  which  it  will  meet  all  healthy  needs.  We  are  all
forced  to  feel  that  in  the  present  divided  and  unstable  condition  of  beliefs
there  is  plausibility  in  the  Agnostic's  appeal  to  us  to  halt  and  mark  time ;
in  his  insistence  that  we  have  not  really  evidence,  up  to  modern  standards,
which  can  support  any  definite  creed  in  matters  remote  from  ordinary
methods  of  proof.  Some  men,  indeed,  have  ventured  explicitly  to  reply
that  Christian  Faith  need  not  be  founded  on  the  same  kind  of  demonstra-
tion as  Science  ;  that  Tradition  and  Intuition  can  well  supply  her  outward
form  and  her  inward  glow.  Urged  among  those  who  have  much  of  con-
secrated tradition,  of  noble  intuition  in  common,  this  high  claim  may  seem
convincing  as  the  gaze  of  a  friend.  But  it  has  the  inevitable  weakness
already  indicated.  Introduce  other  persons  of  different  race  but  equally
sincere,  the  Buddhist,  the  Parsee,  the  Jew— nay,  the  saint  of  science,  like


App.  A]  APPENDIX    A  297

Darwin — and  you  can  meet  these  men  no  longer  on  the  ground  of
Christian  Tradition  or  Intuition — you  can  meet  them  on  the  ground  of
Science  alone.  Thus  even  among  spiritually-minded  men  we  seem  forced
back  into  the  view  that  Science  can  be  the  only  world-philosophy  or
world-religion ; — the  only  synthesis  of  the  Universe  which,  however  im-
perfect, is  believed  in  semper,  ubique,  et  ab  omnibus,  by  all  who  can  under-
stand it.

This  conclusion,  however,  as  already  implied,  at  present  satisfies
nobody.  The  Christian  says  that  it  is  mere  mockery  to  pretend  that
Science  can  be  the  base  of  Religion ;  for  it  tells  us  nothing  of  the  spiritual
world.  "  Naturally,"  replies  the  Agnostic,  hardening  into  Materialism ;
"  since  there  is  no  spiritual  world  of  which  to  tell."  "  The  Universe,"
cried  Clifford  triumphantly,  "is  made  of  ether  and  atoms,  and  there  is
no  room  for  ghosts."

So  soon,  however,  as  the  man  of  science  takes  this  tone — so  soon  as
he  passes,  so  to  say,  from  Huxley  to  Clifford — he  loses  his  strong  position,
the  Agnostic's  raison  d'etre.  Clifford  had  not  really  turned  over  his  atoms
thoroughly  enough  to  make  sure  that  no  ghost  was  hidden  among  them.
As  indisputably  as  any  worshipper  of  Mumbo-Jumbo  had  that  eager  truth-
lover  framed  an  emotional  synthesis  which  outran  his  Science.

Is,  then,  the  passivity  of  pure  Agnosticism  the  attitude  with  which  we
ought  to  be  content?  Ignoramus  et  ignorabimus — should  this  be  the
single  clause  of  our  creed  ?  Surely  that  were  too  tame  a  surrender  to  the
Sphinx  and  her  riddle  ;  which,  in  the  old  story,  turned  out  after  all  to  be
rather  easy  to  guess.  Why  should  we  not  simply  try  to  find  out  new  facts
here,  as  we  have  found  out  new  facts  everywhere  else  where  we  have
looked  for  them  ?  Just  here  we  have  not  looked  for  them  yet,  because
neither  the  priests  of  our  religions  nor  their  critics  have  till  now  been  dis-
posed for  the  quest.  The  priests  have  thought  it  safest  to  defend  their
own  traditions,  their  own  intuitions,  without  going  afield  in  search  of
independent  evidence  of  a  spiritual  world.  Their  assailants  have  kept
their  powder  and  shot  for  the  orthodox  ramparts,  ignoring  any  isolated
strongholds  which  formed  no  part  of  the  main  line  of  defence.

This  search  for  new  facts  is  precisely  what  our  Society  undertakes.
Starting  from  various  standpoints,  we  endeavour  to  carry  the  newer,  the
intellectual  virtues  into  regions  where  dispassionate  tranquillity  has
seldom  yet  been  known.  As  compared  with  the  claims  of  Theologians,
we  set  before  ourselves  a  humbler,  yet  a  difficult  task.  We  do  not  seek  to
shape  the  clauses  of  the  great  Act  of  Faith,  but  merely  to  prove  its  pre-
amble. To  prove  the  preamble  of  all  religions ;  to  be  able  to  say  to
theologian  or  to  philosopher :  "  Thus  and  thus  we  demonstrate  that  a
spiritual  world  exists — a  world  of  independent  and  abiding  realities,  not
a  mere  '  epiphenomenon '  or  transitory  effect  of  the  material  world — a
world  of  things,  concrete  and  living,  not  a  mere  system  of  abstract  ideas ;
now,  therefore,  reason  on  that  world  or  feel  towards  it  as  you  will."  This


298  CHAPTER    X  [App.  A

would  indeed,  in  my  view,  be  the  weightiest  service  which  any  research
could  render  to  the  deep  disquiet  of  our  time ; — nay,  to  the  desiderium
orbis  catholici,  the  world-old  and  world-wide  desire.

First,  thjsn,  we  adopt  the  ancient  belief — implied  in  all  monotheistic
religion,  and  conspicuously  confirmed  by  the  progress  of  modern  science
— that  the  world  as  a  whole,  spiritual  and  material  together,  has  in  some
way  a  systematic  unity;  and  on  this  we  base  the  novel  presumption
that  there  should  be  a  unity  of  method  in  the  investigation  of  all  fact.
We  hold  therefore  that  the  attitude,  the  habits  of  mind,  the  methods,  by
aid  of  which  physical  science  has  grown  deep  and  wide,  should  be  applied
also  to  the  spiritual  world.  We  endeavour  to  approach  the  problems  of
that  world  by  careful  collection,  scrutiny,  testing,  of  particular  facts ;  and
we  account  no  unexplained  fact  too  trivial  for  our  attention.  Seeking
knowledge  before  edification,  we  aim  not  at  what  we  should  most  like  to
learn,  but  at  what  we  have  the  best  chance  of  learning ;  we  dabble  among
beggarly  elements ;  we  begin  at  the  beginning.

Into  this  frame  of  mind  the  long  habit  of  our  race  in  matters  religious
has  made  it  difficult  fully  to  enter.  I  have  found  it  helpful  to  imagine
what  would  be  the  procedure  of  some  extraneous  inquirer  into  the  nature
and  fate  of  men — some  inquirer  exempt  from  their  hopes,  their  fears,  their
presuppositions.

Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  "  a  spectator  of  all  time  and  all  existence,"
a  kind  of  minor  Cosmotheorus,  as  Plato  might  call  him,  were  speculating
from  the  standpoint  of  this  planet,  as  to  what  was  likely  to  be  the  true
position  of  the  human  race  in  the  scheme  of  the  Universe.  Such  an
observer  would  be  compelled  to  start  from  the  facts  before  him.  He
would  begin  his  investigation,  therefore,  not  with  God  but  with  man.  He
would  analyse  the  faculties  of  which  he  found  man  possessed,  and  would
infer  in  what  environment  they  were  designed  to  operate ; — of  what  system,
that  is  to  say,  of  cosmic  laws,  expressing  a  special  modification  of  the
ultimate  energy,  the  energy  contained  in  the  human  race  formed  an
integral  element.  His  first  discovery  would  be  that  the  obvious  material
environment,  which  is  all  that  most  men  know,  does  not  exhaust  the
faculties  nor  cover  the  phenomena  of  human  life.  Most  of  man's  senses,
indeed,  he  could  explain  as  concerned  solely  with  matter.  Sight  he  could
not  thus  explain ;  and  the  study  of  light  would  lead  him  to  discover  the
etherial  environment, — a  system  of  laws,  that  is  to  say,  which,  while
fundamentally  continuous  with  the  laws  of  matter,  does  yet  supply  a  new
conception  of  the  Cosmos,  at  once  more  generalised  and  more  profound.
But  still  the  central  problem  of  man's  being  would  remain  unsolved.  Life
and  thought  could  not  be  referred  to  the  working  either  of  aggregated
molecules  or  of  etherial  undulations.  To  explain  Life  by  these  two
environments  would  be  as  impossible  as  it  had  been  to  explain  Light  by
the  material  environment  alone.  Might  there  not  be  yet  another  environ-
ment,— metetherial,  spiritual,  what  you  will?  Was  there  any  way  of


App.  A]  APPENDIX    A  299

reducing  this  vast  and  vague  problem  of  Life  to  manageable  definiteness  ?
Were  there  measurable  traces  of  human  faculty  working  in  apparent  inde-
pendence of  material  or  etherial  law?  Such  traces,  if  he  sought  long
enough,  I  maintain  that  he  would  assuredly  find.  He  would  find  (as  we
have  found)  instances  of  telaesthesia,  or  perception  beyond  the  sensory
range  ;  instances  of  telepathy,  or  direct  communication  from  mind  to
mind; — nay,  telepathic  messages  from  the  so-called  dead; — signs  and
apparitions  by  which  minds  discarnate  impressed  themselves  upon  minds
still  robed  in  flesh.  How  far  the  ether,  in  some  of  its  unknown  properties,
may  be  concerned  in  these  operations,  our  Cosmotheorus  might  be  better
able  to  guess  than  we.  To  him,  perhaps,  no  environment  would  seem
discontinuous  with  any  other  environment.  But,  at  any  rate,  here  would
be  definite  traces  of  a  new  environment  of  Life  and  Thought ;  traces  of
the  mutual  action  of  minds,  embodied  and  unembodied,  in  apparent
independence  of  matter.

I  must  not  here  follow  our  imagined  inquirer  further ;  but  surely  we
leave  him  launched  upon  a  series  of  observations  and  experiments  which
have  no  inherent  flaw  in  their  basis,  and  no  assignable  limit  to  their
scope.

I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  upon  this  line  of  argument,  because  I
think  that,  in  some  form  or  other,  it  is  our  duty  to  have  it  always  forth-
coming, our  duty  to  set  it  before  the  world  in  varying  expression,  until  our
age  is  really  convinced  that  this  great  branch  of  knowledge,  which  deals
with  things  unseen,  can  form  no  exception  to  those  rules  by  which
experience  shows  us  that  all  valid  knowledge  has  hitherto  been  won.  So
confident,  indeed,  do  I  feel  in  this  gradual  but  certain  method  of  approach
—in  this  open,  unfrequented  way — that  even  if  it  had  thus  far  failed  to
lead  us  to  any  discovery,  I  should  feel  bound  to  pursue  it  still.  But  it
has  not  failed.  This  persistent  analysis  of  unexplored  faculty  has  revealed
to  us  already  far  more  than  I,  for  one,  had  ever  dared  to  hope.  I  may
surely  say  with  no  more  than  the  licensed  exaggeration  of  epigram,  that
our  method  has  revealed  to  us  a  hidden  world  within  us,  and  that  this
hidden  world  within  us  has  revealed  to  us  an  invisible  world  without.

Within  each  man,  I  say,  there  is  a  world  of  thought  and  of  perception
which  lies  outside  the  margin,  beneath  the  threshold,  deeper  than  the
surface-tension  of  his  conscious  being.

"  We  were  the  first  that  ever  burst
Into  that  silent  sea."

We  at  any  rate  were  among  the  earliest  to  attempt  to  explore  and  map
out  that  strange,  submerged  region — half  lumber-room  and  half  king's-
treasury — where  amid  things  outworn  lie  things  unborn,  and  possibilities
of  our  unimaginable  Future  lurk  among  the  exuviae  of  our  immemorable
Past.  And  yet  in  this  confusion  all  is  implicitly  congruous  and  con-
secutive ;  each  trace  of  faculty,  whether  it  lie  behind  our  actual  stage  of


300  CHAPTER    X  [App.  A

progress  or  before,  belongs  to  a  series  of  developments  of  personality
whose  terms  have  no  assignable  limit ;— a  series  which  carries  us  onward
without  a  break,  from  dream  and  hallucination  and  bewilderment,  up  to
the  utterances  of  discarnate  spirits  and  the  visions  of  ecstasy.

For,  in  truth,  from  the  mind's  inward  vision  we  may  learn  more  than
from  the  seeing  of  the  eye;  from  inward  audition  more  than  from  the
hearing  of  the  ear.  The  automatisms  which  steal  their  way  upward  from
hidden  depths  to  manifestation  amid  man's  sensory  perceptions  and
voluntary  acts  are  found  on  analysis  to  contain  elements  of  knowledge  not
attainable  in  any  normal  fashion.  Such  knowledge  is  shown  in  telepathic
messages  between  living  men,  and  in  apparitions  which  tell  of  men  dying,
and  in  evidential  messages  from  men  whom  we  call  dead.  All  this — in
Phantasms  of  the  Living  and  in  fourteen  volumes  of  Proceedings — I  claim
that  we  have  adequately  shown.  And  of  late  years  we  have  advanced
and  consolidated  these  fragmentary  and  fugitive  indications  of  the  spirit's
survival  by  certain  records  of  trance-phenomena  and  spirit-possession ; —
records  as  yet  inchoate  and  imperfect,  yet  which  must  needs  be  faced  and
dealt  with  by  all  serious  men.

But  here  I  must  needs  stay  a  moment  to  prevent  any  misunder-
standing. Throughout  this  address,  of  course,  I  am  speaking  for  myself
alone.  I  am  not  giving  utterance  to  any  collective  view,  but  to  my
own  view  of  the  general  drift  and  result  of  our  collective  action.  But  at
this  point  I  know  that  most  even  of  those  who  may  have  gone  with  me
thus  far  will — and  quite  justifiably — suspend  their  adhesion.  Few  even
of  my  own  colleagues  have  had  full  reason  to  believe  that  matter  of  real
importance  has  yet  been  received  from  behind  the  veil,  and  in  the  world
at  large  the  general  impression  that  even  those  messages  which  look
evidentially  as  though  they  had  come  from  discarnate  spirits  are  yet
practically  futile  and  incoherent  is  strongly  and  naturally  operative  in
checking  public  interest  in  what  seems  so  strangely  baffling  a  research.

I  will  not  now  protest,  as  I  might  protest,  against  the  accuracy  of  this
general  impression  of  the  actual  facts.  Accepting  it  for  the  sake  of  argu-
ment, I  will  confine  myself  to  one  simple  line  of  a  priori  reasoning,  which
seems  to  me  sufficient  to  show  what,  in  the  supposed  case,  is  our  plain,
scientific  duty.  I  say,  then,  that  if  once  it  be  admitted, — as  we  are  now
assuming,  for  argument's  sake,  that  it  is  admitted, — that  it  is  evidentially
probable  that  some  of  these  messages  do  indeed,  in  however  indirect  or
confused  a  manner,  emanate  from  an  unseen  world, — then  it  is  a
blasphemy  against  the  faith  of  Science  to  doubt  that  they  must  ulti-
mately prove  to  be  of  serious,  of  supreme  importance.

The  faith  to  which  Science  is  sworn  is  a  faith  in  the  uniformity,  the
coherence,  the  intelligibility  of,  at  any  rate,  the  material  universe.
Science  herself  is  but  the  practical  development  of  this  mighty  postulate.
And  if  any  phenomenon  on  which  she  chances  on  her  onward  way  seems
arbitrary,  or  incoherent,  or  unintelligible,  she  does  not  therefore  suppose


App.  A]  APPENDIX    A  301

that  she  has  come  upon  an  unravelled  end  in  the  texture  of  things ;  but
rather  takes  for  granted  that  a  rational  answer  to  the  new  problem  must
somewhere  exist ; — an  answer  which  will  be  all  the  more  instructive
because  it  will  involve  facts  of  which  that  first  question  must  have
failed  to  take  due  account.

This  faith  in  the  uniformity  of  material  Nature  formulates  itself  in  two
great  dogmas, — for  such  they  are ; — the  dogma  of  the  Conservation  of
Matter,  and  the  dogma  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy.  Of  the  Con-
servation of  Matter,  within  earthly  limits,  we  are  fairly  well  assured ;
but  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy  the  proof  is  far  less  complete,  simply
because  Energy  is  a  conception  which  does  not  belong  to  the  material
world  alone.  Life  is  to  us  the  most  important  of  all  forms  of  activity  ;—
of  energy,  I  would  say, — except  that  we  cannot  transform  other  energies
into  Life,  nor  measure  in  foot-pounds  that  directive  force  which  has
changed  the  face  of  the  world.  Life  comes  we  know  not  whence ;  it
vanishes  we  know  not  whither ;  it  is  interlocked  with  a  moving  system
vaster  than  that  we  know.  To  grasp  the  whole  of  its  manifestation  we
should  have  to  follow  it  into  an  unseen  world.  Yet  scientific  faith  bids  us
believe  that  there,  too,  there  is  continuity ;  and  that  the  past  and  the  future
of  that  force  which  we  discern  for  a  moment  are  still  subject  to  universal
Law.

Believing,  then,  that  the  whole  Cosmos  is  such  as  to  satisfy  the  claims
of  human  Reason,  we  are  irresistibly  led  to  ask  whether  it  satisfies  other
claims  of  our  nature  which  are  as  imperious  as  Reason  itself.  Infinite
Intelligence  would  see  the  Cosmos  as  infinitely  intelligent ;  but  would
infinite  Goodness  also  see  it  as  infinitely  good  ?

We  know  too  well  the  standing  difficulties  in  the  way  of  such  an
assumption.  They  are  that  which  we  call  Evil,  and  that  which  we  see
as  Death.  Now  as  to  Evil, — which  for  us  here  and  now  seems  so  inefface-
able a  blot  on  the  idea  of  Omnipotence, — we  can  perhaps  nevertheless  just
conceive  that  for  the  Cosmotheorus  all  these  defects  and  incompatibilities
of  human  impulse  and  sensibility  may  seem  as  relatively  infinitesimal  in
the  unimaginable  Sum  of  Things,  as  for  us  are  the  whirl  and  clashing  of
molecules  in  the  dewdrop,  which  cannot  mar  for  our  vision  its  crystalline
calm.

But  death,  as  it  presents  itself  to  us,  cannot  be  similarly  explained
away.  If  it  be  really,  as  it  seems,  a  sheer  truncation  of  moral  progress,
absolute  alike  for  the  individual  and  for  the  race, — then  any  human
conception  of  a  moral  universe  must  simply  be  given  up.  We  are  shut  in
land-locked  pools  ;  why  speak  to  us  of  an  infinite  sea  ?

What,  then,  should  be  the  impulse,  what  the  faith  of  Science,  if  she
finds  even  the  least  reason  to  suspect  that  this  truncation  is  in  fact
illusory ;  that  on  the  moral  side  also  there  is  conservation  and  persist-
ence ; — conservation  not  only  of  such  ether-vortices  as  we  assume  to
underlie  our  visible  matter,  but  of  the  spiritual  systems  or  syntheses


302  CHAPTERX  [App.  A

which  underlie  the  personalities  of  men? — persistence  not  only  of  crude
transformable  energies,  but  of  those  specific  non-transformable  energies
which  inform  a  Plato  or  a  Newton,  and  which  seem  the  only  commen-
surate object  towards  which  the  whole  process  of  evolution  can  tend?
Surely  in  such  a  case,  whatever  dreaminess  or  confusion  may  mark  the
opening  of  intercourse  with  worlds  indefinitely  remote,  Science  should
summon  all  her  fundamental  trust  in  the  coherence,  the  intelligibility  of
things,  to  assure  her  that  the  dreaminess  must  pass  and  the,  confusion
clear,  and  that  the  veriest  rudiment  of  communication  between  world  and
world  bears  yet  the  promise  of  completing  and  consummating  her  own
mighty  dogmas, — of  effecting  a  unification  of  the  universe  such  as  she  has
never  ventured  to  hope  till  now  ?  What  are  our  petty  human  preconcep-
tions worth  in  such  a  case  as  this  ?  If  it  was  absurd  to  refuse  to  listen  to
Kepler,  because  he  bade  the  planets  move  in  no  perfect  circles,  but  in
undignified  ellipses ; — because  he  hastened  and  slackened  from  hour  to
hour  what  ought  to  be  a  heavenly  body's  ideal  and  unwavering  speed ; —
is  it  not  absurder  still  to  refuse  to  listen  to  these  voices  from  afar,  because
they  come  stammering  and  wandering  as  in  a  dream  confusedly,  instead
of  with  a  trumpet's  call  ?  because  spirits  that  bend  nigh  to  earth  may
undergo,  perhaps,  an  earthly  bewilderment,  and  suffer  unknown  limita-
tions, and  half  remember  us  and  half  forget  ?

Nay  !  in  the  end  it  is  not  for  us  to  choose ; — we  needs  must  join  in
this  communion  with  what  grace  we  may.  We  cannot,  if  we  would,
transform  ourselves  into  the  mere  cynical  spectators  of  an  irrational
universe.  We  are  part  and  parcel  of  these  incredible  phenomena ;  our
own  souls  shall  soon  be  feeling  the  same  attraction,  the  same  hesitancy,
upon  the  further  shore.

"  I  am  the  doubter  and  the  doubt,
And  I  the  song  the  Brahman  sings."

Let  us  do  what  we  can,  then,  to  dignify  the  situation.  Let  us  try,
then,  whether  a  more  serious  response  on  our  part  may  enable  the  senders
of  the  messages  to  speak  with  clearer  voice.  To  whose  care  indeed  has
such  response  been  hitherto  for  the  most  part  left?  May  not  the  in-
stances where  adequate  precautions  have  been  taken,  adequate  record
made,  be  counted  on  the  fingers  of  one  hand  ?  Might  not  our  unseen
correspondents  turn  the  tables  on  us  when  we  complain  of  their  incapacity,
and  ask  whether  it  was  worth  while  to  do  better  for  the  "  domestic  muffs "
of  Mme.  Blavatsky's  far-famed  c'enacle,  or  for  the  sitters  at  the  "  materiali-
sation stances  "  of  the  "  Vampires  of  Onset  "?

Assuredly  we  modern  men  have  taken,  in  other  quarters,  more  trouble
than  here  is  needed,  with  far  less  hope  of  reward.  What  has  given  its
worth  to  the  study  of  comparative  religions  except  our  steady  effort  to
comprehend  and  to  co-ordinate  such  childish  and  stammering  utterances
as  have  marked  the  rise  in  one  nation  after  another  of  those  spiritual  needs


App.  A]  APPENDIX    A  303

and  conceptions  which  make  in  the  end  the  truest  unity  of  the  race  of
man  ?  What  should  we  have  learnt  from  the  Vedas,  from  the  Book  of  the
Dead— nay,  from  the  Christian  records  themselves — had  we  approached
those  sacred  texts  in  the  spirit  alternately  of  Simple  Simon  and  of
Voltaire  ?

The  time,  I  think,  is  ripe  for  a  generalisation  wider  than  any  which
those  ancient  books  contain.  For  just  as  a  kind  of  spiritual  fusion  of
Europe  under  Roman  sway  prepared  the  way  for  Christianity  to  become
the  European  religion,  so  now  also  it  seems  to  me  that  a  growing  concep-
tion of  the  unity,  the  solidarity,  of  the  human  race  is  preparing  the  way
for  a  world- religion  which  expresses  and  rests  upon  that  solidarity; —
which  conceives  it  in  a  fuller,  more  vital  fashion  than  either  Positivist  or
Catholic  had  ever  dreamed.  For  the  new  conception  is  neither  of  bene-
factors dead  and  done  for,  inspiring  us  automatically  from  their  dates  in
an  almanac,  nor,  of  shadowy  saints  imagined  to  intercede  for  us  at
Tribunals  more  shadowy  still ; — but  rather  of  a  human  unity, — close-linked
beneath  an  unknown  Sway, — wherein  every  man  who  hath  been  or  now
is  makes  a  living  element ; — inalienably  incorporate,  and  imperishably  co-
operant,  and  joint-inheritor  of  one  infinite  Hope.

Of  course,  I  am  not  here  supposing  that  any  human  gaze  can  pierce
deeply  into  the  world  unseen.  Such  communion  as  we  may  hold  with
spirits  in  any  degree  comparable  with  ourselves  must  needs  be  on  a  level
far  beneath  the  lowest  of  "Thrones,  Dominations,  Princedoms,  Virtues,
Powers  " ; — nay,  must  be  in  the  very  vestibule  and  antechamber  of  the
outermost  of  the  courts  of  Heaven.  These  souls  of  ours  are  but  infantum
animcz  flentes  in  limine  primo; — the  first  and  humblest  conscious  links  in
a  wonderful  order  ; — trembling  still  and  half-bewildered  at  a  future  vaster
than  we  know.  I  do  not  presume  to  forecast  what  we  may  come  in  time
to  learn;  I  only  say  that  for  the  present  hour  there  will  be  enough  of
motive  to  urge  us  to  utmost  effort  to  rise  in  the  scale  of  being,  if  we  can
once  be  certain  that  such  noble  spirits  as  we  have  known  by  earthly  inter-
course or  earthly  record  do  still  concern  themselves  with  our  progress,  and
still  from  their  higher  vantage-ground  call  to  us  that  all  is  well.

Men  objected  of  old  to  Copernicus  that  if  our  earth  really  swept
/ound  the  sun  in  so  vast  an  orbit,  there  should  be  an  apparent  displace-
ment— a  parallax — in  the  position  of  the  fixed  stars.  Such  parallax  was
long  sought  in  vain ;  till  at  last  advancing  skill  detected  it  in  some  few
stars  nearer  than  the  rest ;  and  our  relation  to  these  near  luminaries  proved
to  us  our  veritable  voyage  through  the  star-strewn  deep.  Perhaps  in  the
spiritual  world  as  well  we  have  strained  our  gaze  too  exclusively  on
luminaries  that  are  beyond  the  parallactic  limit ;  and  eyes  turned  steadily
on  some  nearer  brightness  may  teach  us  at  last  our  kinship  and  community
in  the  firmament  of  souls.

Not,  then,  with  tears  and  lamentations  should  we  think  of  the  blessed
dead.  Rather  we  should  rejoice  with  them  in  their  enfranchisement,  and


304  CHAPTER    X  [App.  A

know  that  they  are  still  minded  to  keep  us  as  sharers  in  their  joy.  It  is
they,  not  we,  who  are  working  now ;  they  are  more  ready  to  hear  than  we
to  pray;  they  guide  us  as  with  a  cloudy  pillar,  but  it  is  kindling  into
steadfast  fire.

Nay,  it  may  be  that  our  response,  our  devotion,  is  a  needful  element
in  their  ascending  joy ;  and  God  may  have  provided  some  better  thing  for
us,  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect ; — ut  non  sine  nobis
consummarentur.

To  most  of  my  hearers  I  doubt  not  that  this  forecast  of  a
coming  co-operation  between  incarnate  and  discarnate  spirits  will  have
seemed  speculative  and  premature.  My  defence  is  that  I  believe  that
upon  our  own  attitude  towards  these  nascent  communications  their
progress  and  development  depend,  so  that  we  cannot  too  soon  direct
serious  attention  to  the  high  responsibilities  opening  on  our  view.  And
now  yet  another  practical  question  is  ready,  I  think,  for  immediate
discussion.  All  great  changes  in  speculative  belief  must  modify  in  some
way  man's  immediate  duty.  In  what  way  must  our  idea  of  duty  be
modified,  be  expanded,  if  a  religion  is  offered  to  us  which  no  longer
depends  on  tradition  and  intuition  only,  but  on  reason  also  and  on  experi-
ment; which  is  not  locked  away  in  an  emotional  compartment  of  our
being,  nor  adapted  to  the  genius  of  special  races  alone,  but  is  oecumenical
as  Science  is  oecumenical,  is  evolutionary  as  Science  is  evolutionary,  and
rests  on  a  permanent  and  provable  relationship  of  the  whole  spiritual  to
the  whole  material  world?

No  full  answer  to  such  a  question  can  as  yet  be  attempted  or  divined.
But  one  point  is  clear ; — and  on  that  point  it  is  already  urgently  necessary
to  insist.  We  must  maintain,  in  old  theological  language,  that  the  intel-
lectual virtues  have  now  become  necessary  to  salvation.  Curiosity,  candour,
care ; — these  are  the  intellectual  virtues ; — disinterested  curiosity,  unselfish
candour,  unremitting  care.  These  virtues  have  grown  up  outside  the
ecclesiastical  pale ;  Science,  not  Religion,  has  fostered  them  ; — nay,
Religion  has  held  them  scarcely  consistent  with  that  pious  spirit  which
hopes  to  learn  by  humility  and  obedience  the  secrets  of  an  unseen  world.
Here  surely  our  new  ideals  suggest  not  opposition  but  fusion.  To  us  as
truly  as  to  monk  or  anchorite  the  spiritual  world  is  an  intimate,  an  inter-
penetrating reality.  But  its  very  reality  suggests  the  need  of  analysis,  the
risk  of  misinterpretation ;  the  very  fact  that  we  have  outgrown  our  sacer-
dotal swaddling-clothes  bids  us  learn  to  walk  warily  among  pitfalls  which
call  for  all  the  precautions  that  systematic  reason  can  devise.

Upon  a  new  scheme  of  beliefs,  attractive  to  the  popular  mind  as  the
scheme  which  I  prefigure,  a  swarm  of  follies  and  credulities  must  inevit-
ably perch  and  settle.  Yet  let  those  who  mock  at  the  weaknesses  of
"  modern  Spiritualism  "  ask  themselves  to  what  extent  either  orthodox
religion  or  official  science  has  been  at  pains  to  guard  the  popular  mind
against  losing  balance  upon  contact  with  new  facts,  profoundly  but


App.  A]  APPENDIX    A  305

obscurely  significant.  Have  the  people's  religious  instructors  trained
them  to  investigate  for  themselves  ?  Have  their  scientific  instructors  con-
descended to  investigate  for  them  ?  Who  should  teach  them  to  apply  to
their  "  inspirational  speakers  "  any  test  more  searching  than  they  have
been  accustomed  to  apply  to  the  sermons  of  priest  or  bishop?  What
scientific  manual  has  told  them  enough  of  the  hidden  powers  within  them
to  prevent  them  from  ascribing  to  spiritual  agency  whatever  mental  action
their  ordinary  consciousness  may  fail  to  recognise  as  its  own?

The  rank  and  file  of  Spiritists  have  simply  transferred  to  certain  new
dogmas — for  most  of  which  they  at  least  have  some  comprehensible
evidence — the  uncritical  faith  which  they  were  actually  commended  for
bestowing  on  certain  old  dogmas, — for  many  of  which  the  evidence  was
at  least  beyond  their  comprehension.  In  such  a  case  ridicule  is  no
remedy.  The  remedy  lies,  as  I  have  said,  in  inculcating  the  intellectual
virtues ; — in  teaching  the  mass  of  mankind  that  the  maxims  of  the  modern
savant  are  at  least  as  necessary  to  salvation  as  the  maxims  of  the  mediaeval
saint.

Now  here,  I  take  it,  lies  the  special,  the  characteristic  duty  of  the
Society  for  Psychical  Research.  It  is  a  duty  far  wider  than  the  mere
exposure  of  fraud ;  far  wider  than  the  mere  production  of  specimens  of
patient  and  intelligent  investigation.  Our  duty  is  not  the  founding  of  a
new  sect,  nor  even  the  establishment  of  a  new  science,  but  is  rather  the
expansion  of  Science  herself  until  she  can  satisfy  those  questions  which
the  human  heart  will  rightly  ask,  but  to  which  Religion  alone  has  thus  far
attempted  an  answer.  Or  rather,  this  is  the  duty,  the  mission,  of  the
coming  century's  leaders  of  spiritual  thought.  Our  own  more  special
duty  is  to  offer  through  an  age  of  transition  more  momentous  than  man-
kind has  ever  known,  that  help  in  steadying  and  stimulating  psychical
research  all  over  the  world  which  our  collective  experience  should  enable
us  richly  to  bestow.  Such  function  ought,  I  say,  to  be  ours  indeed.  We
alone  have  taken  the  first  steps  to  deserve  it.  I  see  our  original  pro-
gramme completely  justified.  I  see  our  raison  d'etre  indisputably  estab-
lished. I  see  all  things  coming  to  pass  as  we  foresaw.  What  I  do  not
see,  alas  !  is  an  energy  and  capacity  of  our  own,  sufficient  for  our  widening
duty ; — enough  of  labourers  for  the  vineyard  so  ripe  for  harvest.  Speaking,
if  so  I  may,  for  the  remnant  of  that  small  company  of  labourers  of  the
first  hour  of  the  day,  I  must  confess  that  our  strength,  at  least,  cannot
suffice  for  the  expanding  task ; — nay,  could  not  so  suffice,  even  if  Edmund
Gurney  were  with  us  still ; — non,  si  ipse  meus  nunc  adforet  Hector.  Other
workers,  good  men  and  true,  have  joined  themselves  to  us ; — but  we  have
need  of  many  more.  We  invite  them  from  each  department  of  science,
from  every  school  of  thought.  With  equal  confidence  we  appeal  for
co-operation  to  savant  and  to  saint.

To  the  savant  we  point  out  that  we  are  not  trying  to  pick  holes  in
the  order  of  Nature,  but  rather,  by  the  scrutiny  of  residual  phenomena,
VOL.  n.  u


306  CHAPTER    X  [App.  A

to  get  nearer  to  the  origin  and  operation  of  Nature's  central  mystery  of
Life.  Men  who  realise  that  the  etherial  environment  was  discovered
yesterday,  need  not  deem  it  impossible  that  a  metetherial  environment —
yet  another  omnipresent  system  of  cosmic  law — should  be  discovered
to-morrow.  The  only  valid  a  priori  presumption  in  the  matter  is  the
presumption  that  the  Universe  is  infinite  in  an  infinite  number  of  ways.

To  the  Christian  we  can  speak  with  a  still  more  direct  appeal.  "  You
believe,"  I  would  say,  "  that  a  spiritual  world  exists,  and  that  it  acted  on
the  material  world  two  thousand  years  ago.  Surely  it  is  so  acting  still !
Nay,  you  believe  that  it  is  so  acting  still ;  for  you  believe  that  prayer  is
heard  and  answered.  To  believe  that  prayer  is  heard  is  to  believe  in
telepathy, — in  the  direct  influence  of  mind  on  mind.  To  believe  that
prayer  is  answered  is  to  believe  that  unembodied  spirit  does  actually
modify  (even  if  not  storm-cloud  or  plague-germ)  at  least  the  minds,  and
therefore  the  brains,  of  living  men.  From  that  belief  the  most  advanced
'  psychical '  theories  are  easy  corollaries.  You  may  reply,  indeed,  that  the
Church  or  the  Bible  has  told  men  all  of  the  unseen  world  that  they  need
to  know,  and  that  whatsoever  is  more  than  this  cometh  of  evil.  What
say  you  to  this  argument  when  it  is  retorted  on  you  by  Omar  with  his
Koran?"

But  let  us  cease  to  speak  as  though  the  infinite  Unseen  World  were  a
mere  preserve  or  battleground  of  theologies.  If  every  dogma  ever  pro-
mulgated from  the  Vatican  were  literal  truth,  Science  would  still  affirm
that  scarcely  anything  of  that  world  was  known.  If  Religion  be  more
than  "  the  guess  of  a  worm  in  the  dust,  and  the  shadow  of  its  desire,"  it
must  be  (I  say  once  more)  the  spirit's  normal  answer  to  objective  fact.
The  Cosmos  is  what  it  is,  and  Revelation  can  do  no  more  than  reveal  it.
Holiness  itself  must  be  the  reflection  of  a  reality  behind  the  veil.  If  this
be  so,  then  Science  has  come  not  to  destroy  but  to  fulfil ;  Religion  must
needs  evolve  into  Knowledge ;  for  Religion  can  in  no  age  admit  an  aim
narrower  than  the  prayer  of  Cleanthes, — the  willing  response  of  the  soul
to  all  she  knows  of  cosmic  law.

Out  of  the  long  Stone  Age  our  race  is  awakening  into  consciousness
of  itself.  We  stand  in  the  dawn  of  history.  Behind  us  lies  a  vast  and
unrecorded  waste — the  mighty  struggle  humanam  condere  gentem.  Since
the  times  of  that  ignorance  we  have  not  yet  gone  far ;  a  few  thousand
years,  a  few  hundred  thinkers,  have  barely  started  the  human  mind  upon
the  great  aeons  of  its  onward  way.  It  is  not  yet  the  hour  to  sit  down  in
our  studies  and  try  to  eke  out  Tradition  with  Intuition — as  one  might  be
forced  to  do  in  a  planet's  senility,  by  the  glimmer  of  a  fading  sun.
Daphni,  quid  antiques  signorum  suspicis  ortus  ?  The  traditions,  the  in-
tuitions of  our  race  are  themselves  in  their  infancy;  and  before  we
abandon  ourselves  to  brooding  over  them  let  us  at  least  first  try  the
upshot  of  a  systematic  search  for  actual  facts.  For  what  should  hinder?
If  our  inquiry  lead  us  first  through  a  jungle  of  fraud  and  folly,  need  that


App.  B]  APPENDIX    B  307


alarm  us?  As  well  might  Columbus  have  yielded  to  the  sailors'  panic,
when  he  was  entangled  in  the  Sargasso  Sea.  If  our  first  clear  facts  about
the  Unseen  World  seem  small  and  trivial,  should  that  deter  us  from  the
quest  ?  As  well  might  Columbus  have  sailed  home  again,  with  America
in  the  offing,  on  the  ground  that  it  was  not  worth  while  to  discover  a
continent  which  manifested  itself  only  by  dead  logs.

One  final  word  to  each  main  division  of  our  critics ; — to  those  first  who
have  been  disappointed  so  often  that  they  refuse  to  listen  to  any  further
promise  of  news  from  the  Unseen ; — and  then  to  those  who,  relying  on
some  grander  revelation, — whether,  received  from  without  them  or  from
within, — disdain  our  slow,  collective  process  and  comminuted  fragments
of  truth.  I  would  remind  the  Agnostic  that  a  pike  was  once  kept  in  the
same  tank  with  a  perch.  There  was  at  first  a  sheet  of  glass  between  them,
and  the  pike  bruised  his  nose  so  often  in  snapping  at  the  perch,  that  in
time  he  gave  up  that  endeavour, — as  the  Agnostic  his  endeavour  after
proof  of  a  spiritual  world, — with  a  sigh  or  a  sneer.  Then  silently  the
transparent  screen  was  removed ;  but  now  the  pike  was  so  convinced  that
his  prey  was  unreachable,  that, — like  the  Agnostic  in  presence  of  our  new
evidence, — he  continued  simply  to  let  the  perch  alone.

For  those  other  men  I  will  resort  to  a  bold  metonymy,  and  will  speak
of  that  great  incurrent  truth  to  which  each  man  severally  holds  under  the
figure  of  the  great  stone  at  Ephesus  which  fell  down  from  Jupiter.  The
faithful  who  proclaimed  that  wondrous  fall  were  essentially  in  the  right, —
were  far  more  in  the  right  than  the  freethinkers  who  derided  it.  But
whence  and  why  that  stone  had  truly  fallen, — how  vast  the  significance  of
.that  cosmic  trajectory  and  rushing  flame, — this  could  be  known  only  when
humble  labourers  had  catalogued  many  a  lesser  congener  of  the  mighty
mass ;  and  had  gathered  the  meteoric  dust  from  the  ocean's  floor ;  and
had  learnt  that  no  field  of  heaven  had  been  found  so  desolate  as  not  to
carry  still  the  impress  of  ultimate  energy  and  universal  law.


APPENDIX   B
THE  DECLINE  OF  DOGMATISM

For  many  minds  this  last  century  of  triumphant  Science,  of  warring
Theology,  has  acted  as  a  kind  of  proof  and  purgation  of  the  human  spirit.
It  is  strange  to  look  back  and  to  observe  with  how  much  of  dogmatic
rubbish  even  the  strongest  minds  of  earlier  centuries  were  cumbered  both
in  their  belief  and  in  their  negation.  For  it  was  not  only  the  so-called
orthodox  who  suffered ;  but  those  also  who,  revolting  against  arbitrary
doctrine,  were  yet  unable  to  dissociate  such  doctrine  from  any  conception
which  they  could  form  of  a  spiritual  world.  Such  men  would  still  speak
as  though  the  spiritual  world,  if  it  existed,  must  needs  be  a  world  ruled  by
caprice,  and  overshadowed  by  fear.


308  CHAPTER    X  [App.  B

But  now  in  the  virtual  abeyance  of  formal  creeds  the  reactions
monks  and  schoolmen  have  had  time  to  dissolve  and  disappear.     Vestigh
beliefs  which  still  encumbered  the  spirit  have  had  time  to  atrophy.

The  prospect  on  which  Science  gazed  has  been  by  comparison
narrow  one ;  but  Science  at  least  has  "  seen  it  steadily  and  seen
whole."  The  material  world  has  taught  us  lessons  of  which  our  con-
ception of  the  spiritual  world  stood  in  no  less  urgent  need.  The  study
of  visible  Nature  has  taught  us  Uniformity,  Conservation,  Evolution  ;  and
these  transform  themselves  in  their  spiritual  aspect  into  an  absolute
Catholicity,  an  inescapable  Justice,  an  ever-ascending  Ideal.  These
great  conceptions,  I  say,  were  achieved  by  Science,  with  her  outlook
temporarily  narrowed  to  planetary  life.  And  now  that  Science  herself
begins  to  teach  us  to  expand  once  more  the  planetary  into  the  cosmic
view,  we  find  that  principles  built  up  by  minute  and  persistent  observation
of  material  law  will  expand  and  exalt  themselves  also  to  spiritual  operation,
and  will  give  to  the  soul's  future  the  stability  of  their  own  infinitude,  the
buoyancy  of  their  own  limitless  march  and  assumption  into  realms  higher
and  hopes  unknown.

On  one  great  matter  the  departed  spirits  utter,  not  indeed  a  halting  or
a  dubious,  but  yet  a  somewhat  indefinite  reply.  One  and  all,  so  far  as  I
know  them,  they  affirm  that  the  Universe  is  good  :  that  there  is  a  supreme
Power  to  whom  all  spirits  bow,  and  who  orders  all  things  well.  But
beyond  that  they  can  give  no  fresh  sanction  to  the  tenets  of  any  earthly
creed.  Rather  they  seem  for  a  time  perhaps  to  express  their  new
convictions  in  their  accustomed  formulae,  but  soon  to  lose  all  thought
of  creed  or  formulae  in  the  deep  assurance  of  endless  and  ever-growing
Love.  This  avowed  limitation  of  their  knowledge  has  caused  some  dis-
appointment, and  they  have  sometimes  been  fruitlessly  pressed  to  declare
themselves  in  clearer  support  of  some  earthly  Church.

Yet  must  not  any  elevation  of  our  being  imply  for  us  less  of  claim  to
formal  knowledge,  more  of  participation  in  an  immanent  Spirit  ?

The  idea  of  Divinity  among  the  human  race  has  risen  and  widened
from  the  Fetish  of  a  family  to  the  Champion  of  a  tribe,  and  from  the
Champion  of  a  tribe  to  the  Father  of  a  planet.  Must  even  that  be  the
fixed  and  final  conception  of  the  Infinite  God  ?  Nay,  surely  that  con-
ception should  expand  so  as  not  to  lose  but  to  transcend  Person-
ality ; — retaining  for  us  the  Love  and  Mercy  which  bring  the  Divine  into
fellowship  with  man,  but  outgrowing  all  limiting  analogies,  all  pretence  at
human  comprehension  of  the  Inconceivable  Cause  of  All.

It  is  noticeable  how  with  each  onward  step  in  our  theoretical  know-
ledge some  false  and  outworn  conception  of  practical  duty  tends  to  melt
away.  We  now  know  (to  Swedenborg  belongs  the  credit  of  the  first  em-
phatic announcement)  that  this  life  and  the  next  are  morally  con-
tinuous,— with  no  mere  general  dependence  of  the  future  life  upon  t
present, — but  continuous  as  though  our  earthly  age  melted  into  the  hues


App.  C]  APPENDIX    C  309

of  a  happier  youth.  It  follows  that  the  earthly  life  must  ethically  de-
velop all  its  faculties  in  preparation  for  the  heavenly.  There  must  be
no  arbitrary  narrowing  of  earth's  experience  under  the  guise  of  sanctity ;
no  pretence  that  something  is  gained  in  the  next  world  by  refusal  of  any
of  the  normal  duties  of  this.

There  is  no  place  for  monasticism  in  such  a  scheme  as  this.  There
is  no  place  for  the  puritanical,  the  ascetic  spirit ;  for  any  belief  in  merit
attaching  to  suffering  or  privation  as  such.  The  aim  of  all  will  be  spiritual,
moral,  intellectual  efficiency;  self- preparation  for  those  higher  duties
which  shall  follow  on  the  accomplishment  of  lower  duties  as  the  just  and
inseparable  reward.

How  far  there  shall  still  be  place  for  the  priest,  for  the  minister  of
religion,  it  were  premature  to  discuss.  Sacerdotalism  must  disappear;
no  body  of  men  will  any  longer  persuade  mankind  of  their  exclusive  right
to  promulgate  or  to  interpret  that  catholic  truth  which  is  bestowed  im-
partially upon  all.

And  note  that  if  such  a  claim  were  afterwards  to  be  put  forth,  not  by
priests  but  by  sensitives, — by  intermediaries  of  the  new  revelation  who
might  claim  to  be  its  guardians  also, — that  claim  would  promptly  carry
with  it  its  own  refutation.  We  should  not  long  believe  in  the  authority
of  communicating  spirits  who  might  base  their  appeal  to  us  on  authority,
instead  of  on  evidence  and  on  reason.  Communicators  and  intermediaries
alike  are  subject  to  an  ordering  wiser  than  our  own.  By  their  fruits  we
shall  know  them.

APPENDIX   C
PRAYER  AND  SUPPLICATION

The  question  now  arises  :  What  ought  to  be  our  own  attitude  towards
the  spirits  with  whom  we  enter  into  communication?

To  begin  with,  it  goes  without  saying  that  our  attitude  should  be
at  once  responsive  and  serious ; — that  there  should  be  no  frivolity,  no
credulity,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  no  perverse  or  stubborn  refusal  to
recognise  the  proofs  which  they  offer.

But  here  a  larger  question  opens  out.  What  ought  we  to  ask  from
them?  In  what  way  should  we  ask  it?  What  does  experience  thus  far
show  us  that  we  may  expect  to  receive?  It  is  plain  that  such  inquiries
bring  us  to  the  threshold  of  the  wider  and  deeper  problem  of  Prayer  and
Supplication  generally  ; — of  our  whole  appeal  to  the  Unseen.

Approaching  Prayer  in  this  generalised  manner,  we  feel  the  need  of  a
definition  which  shall  be  in  some  sense  spiritual  without  being  definitely
theological.  Or  let  us  leave  to  the  solemn  word  Prayer  its  highest  mean-
ings ; — let  us  confine  it  to  our  attempts  at  communion — uttered  or  un-
expressed— with  the  Supreme  Spirit.  Let  us  next  try  to  define  the  word


3io  CHAPTER    X  [App.  C

Supplication  in  such  a  way  as  to  distinguish  it  from  a  request  made  to  a
living  friend.

For  our  present  purposes,  at  any  rate,  it  seems  best  to  define  supplica-
tion as  "  an  attempt  to  obtain  benefits  from  unseen  beings  by  an  inward
disposition  of  our  own  minds."  This  excludes  such  attempts  as  rest  on
charms  or  on  sorcery ;  and  at  the  same  time  begs  no  question  as  to  the
nature  of  the  beings  to  whom  we  appeal.  They  are,  at  any  rate,  habitually
unseen  ;  it  remains  for  us  to  argue  from  the  nature  of  the  supplication,  or
of  the  answer,  who  or  what  the  beings  who  may  have  sent  that  answer  are
likely  to  be.

For  the  sake  of  clearness,  I  may  observe  that  in  excluding  charms,  &c.,
from  the  category  of  true  supplication,  I  mean  to  exclude  any  process
which  is  supposed  to  gain  the  desired  benefit  by  its  own  virtue  without
the  operation  of  our  own  minds.  Charms  and  incantations  may  have,  as
we  shall  presently  see,  another  kind  of  efficiency,  as  mere  self-suggestions.
And  experience  seems  to  show  (what  might  antecedently  have  seemed
improbable)  that  if  we  wish  to  learn  something  from  spirits  speaking
through  mortal  organisms,  there  may  be  some  gain  in  our  definite
statement,  in  speech  or  writing,  of  the  nature  of  the  information
desired.

This,  however,  is  a  detail,  and  I  go  on  to  the  more  important  question
of  the  benefits  for  which  our  supplications  may  rightly  be  offered  up.
What,  broadly  speaking,  are  the  benefits  which  we  do  actually  receive
from  other  souls?  either  from  the  World-Soul,  or  from  human  souls  still
in  the  flesh  ?  We  receive  Life  and  Knowledge,  which  it  is  our  business  to
develop  into  Love  and  Wisdom  and  Joy.  Our  own  capacity  of  such
development  may  still  be  classed  as  Life, — as  spiritual  Life,  of  which  our
physical  life  is  but  the  temporary  vehicle.  Our  spiritual  life  is  fed  by  the
love  which  we  receive,  our  physical  life  by  food  and  material  aids  of  every
kind.  Knowledge,  of  course,  is  one  of  the  main  ways  of  feeding  our
spiritual  life,  and  I  have  placed  it  apart  here  merely  because  its  trace-
ability  through  particular  memories  makes  it  the  most  convenient  subject-
matter  for  psychical  analysis.

A  definite  fact,  an  isolable  piece  of  knowledge,  will  often  fulfil  a
requirement  which  we  long  for  in  vain  in  physical  experimentation.  We
should  greatly  like  to  be  able  to  follow  some  individual  scrap  or  parcel  of
energy  through  its  successive  mutations, — to  track  exactly  the  given  unit  of
heat  which  is  converted  into  a  given  unit  of  motion.  Now  with  definite
facts  we  really  can  do  something  of  this  kind.  Each  piece  of  knowledge
is  more  or  less  distinctly  ear-marked,  as  belonging  to  one  or  more  assign-
able human  memories,  each  of  which  memories  contains  a  selection  of
facts  different  from  the  selection  contained  in  any  other  memory.  Omni-
science of  course  contains  all  the  facts,  but  omniscience  is  not  likely  to
show  in  each  case  the  specific  limitations.

The  upshot  of  this  is  that  there  is  a  certain  class  of  requests  made  to


App.  C]  APPENDIX    C  311

unseen  agencies,  the  answers  to  which  carry  with  them  a  strong  presump-
tive proof  of  the  identity  of  the  minds  which  send  them.

Such,  for  example,  are  the  ordinary  requests  made  to  our  discarnate
friends  for  information  on  matters  connected  with  their  lives  on  earth,  as
illustrated  by  many  cases  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  In  these  cases  we
have  virtually  supplicated  these  persons  for  certain  definite  knowledge,  and
they, — and  so  far  as  I  can  see,  no  vaster  intelligence  than  theirs, — have
directly  answered  our  supplications.  Such  cases  belong  to  the  long  series
of  requests  made  to  the  Unseen  for  knowledge,  for  truth,  for  light.  Here
is  at  last  a  definite  avenue  for  successful  supplication, — here  are  distinct
requests  granted  by  intelligences  identifiable,  although  unseen.

Leaving  the  question  of  supplication  for  knowledge  for  the  present,  let
us  consider  the  results  which  have  been  found  to  attend  supplications  for
mere  physical  life.

Readers  of  this  work  know  what  a  large  proportion  of  psychological
experiment  now  actually  going  on  falls  under  the  category  of  supplication
or  prayer  for  life.  The  pilgrims  of  Lourdes  implore  the  Virgin  for  life
and  health  as  the  most  urgent  form  of  their  devotions.  Faith-healers
pray  to  the  Divinity  for  life  and  health,  Christian  Scientists  meditate  on
the  goodness  of  the  Universe  and  on  the  love  of  Christ  with  the  same
practical  object.  And  all  of  these  groups, — as  abundant  testimony  shows
us, — are  often  successful  in  their  prayers  and  meditations.  They  attain
such  results  that  (for  instance)  Charcot,  himself  no  Catholic,  used  often
to  send  his  patients  to  Lourdes.  Yet,  as  this  juxtaposition  of  Charcot
with  Lourdes  suggests,  although  we  note  the  favourable  results,  we  have
no  clear  indication  as  to  the  source  from  whence  those  results  come.

For  we  find  that  results  equally  surprising  follow  upon  the  suggestions
of  hypnotisers ; — and  even  upon  mere  self-suggestion.  Self-suggestion  is
(as  I  have  often  insisted)  at  the  core  of  almost  all  these  healing  and
vivifying  processes ; — and  what  is  self-suggestion  but  an  at  present  indefin-
able contention  or  disposition  of  the  mind  ?

In  ancient  and  modern  times,  in  East  and  West,  among  Pagans,
Buddhists,  Brahmins,  Mahomedans,  Christians,  Infidels, — everywhere  it  has
seemed  possible  for  men  and  women,  by  a  certain  stress  of  soul,  to  become
in  great  measure  superior  to  pain,  and  often  to  renew  vitality  with  a  success
for  which  medical  science  cannot  account.  The  true  meaning  of  this  far-
reaching  and  multiplex  power  of  self-suggestion  is  one  of  the  standing
puzzles — one  of  the  growing  puzzles — alike  of  biology  and  of  psychology.
Without  pretending  to  solve  it,  I  have  nevertheless  in  an  earlier  chapter
stated  and  defined  it  in  a  manner  which  may  now  serve  to  bring  it  into
relation  with  an  even  wider  range  of  phenomena.  For  I  have  spoken  of  it
as  a  fluctuation  in  the  intensity  of  the  draft  which  each  man's  life  makes
upon  the  Unseen.  I  have  urged  that  while  our  life  is  maintained  by
continual  inflow  from  the  World-soul,  that  inflow  may  vary  in  abundance
or  energy  in  correspondence  with  variations  in  the  attitude  of  our  own


312  CHAPTER    X  [App.  C

minds.  So  soon  as  this  definition  is  made,  we  see  that  every  form  of
self-suggestion  falls  within  the  limits  which  we  have  assigned  to  supplica-
tion. The  supplication  of  the  Lourdes  pilgrims,  the  adoring  contemplation
of  the  Christian  Scientists,  the  inward  concentration  of  the  self-suggesters,
the  trustful  anticipation  of  the  hypnotised  subject, — all  these  are  mere
shades  of  the  same  mood  of  mind, — of  the  mountain- moving  faith  which
can  in  actual  fact  draw  fresh  life  from  the  Infinite.  Nor  is  the  life  thus
indrawn  a  physical  life  alone.  Even  from  the  physician's  post-hypnotic
suggestion, — which  seems  the  furthest  removed  of  all  these  channels  from
a  true  spiritual  inflow, — both  moral  and  intellectual  revivification  will
often  follow.

But  this  reflection  suggests  afresh  the  question,  already  discussed  in
Chapter  V.,  whether  in  some  such  cases  of  hypnotic  suggestion  the
resultant  inflow  of  life  may  not  in  some  mediate  fashion  at  least  depend
on  and  emanate  from  the  physician  himself.  He,  no  doubt,  must  ulti-
mately draw  his  own  life  from  the  Unseen ;  but  may  there  not  be  some
virtue  passing  from  him  which  vivifies  his  patient  of  its  own  force?  I
have  already  expressed  my  belief  that  in  some  cases  there  is  such  virtue,
— which  would  show  from  our  present  point  of  view  that  it  is  in  some  cases
useful  to  supplicate  finite  embodied  spirits  for  increase  of  life.

May  it  then  be  desirable  to  supplicate  finite  disembodied  spirits  not
only  for  knowledge,  but  for  life  ?  Can  they  also  transmit  to  us, — more
directly,  perhaps,  than  the  embodied  hypnotist, — some  special  stream  of
the  informing  energy  of  the  universe?

I  believe  that  there  is  evidence  that  they  can  sometimes  produce  this
vivifying  effect  in  various  ways.  Sometimes  they  seem  able  to  transport
the  sensitive's  spirit  into  their  own  realm,  and  to  infuse  at  once  a  spiritual
and  a  physical  renovation.  Sometimes  they  produce  the  impression  of
material  touches  or  passes,  like  those  employed  by  the  earthly  hypnotist.
In  that  case  the  removal  of  pain,  or  the  soothing  effect,  may  seem  to  follow
directly  on  some  unseen  manifestation.

And  this  brings  us  to  one  remaining  service  which  we  may  sometimes,
it  seems,  successfully  ask  disembodied  spirits  to  perform.  They  will
occasionally  move  objects  for  us ; — thus  repeating  yet  further  the  services
rendered  by  embodied  friends.  Not,  of  course,  that  we  shall  think  of
asking  them  for  movements  practically  useful  to  us,  like  those  ascribed  to
the  "  lubber-friends  "  of  ancient  fable.  It  will  be  enough  if  by  any  dis-
placement of  matter,  however  trivial  in  itself,  they  can  manifest  their
persistent  power.

On  the  whole,  then,  we  see  that  supplication  obtains  for  us  from  the
Unseen  a  certain  limited  extension  of  the  benefits  which  we  know  by
everyday  experience  that  we  can  obtain  from  the  Universe  on  the  one
hand  and  from  individual  spirits  on  the  other.

As  regards  the  human  spirits,  in  the  first  place,  we  find  that  our
successful  supplications  to  them  are  such  as  they  might  be  likely  to  grant,


App.  C]  APPENDIX    C  313

assuming  that  they  still  exist,  and  that  they  have  certain  continuing  powers
of  acting  upon  embodied  minds  and  upon  matter  in  much  the  old  way.
While  they  were  embodied  they  gave  us  knowledge,  they  gave  us  material
help  by  moving  objects  and  the  like ;  they  renewed  our  strength,  it  may
be  by  touches  or  passes  which  were  for  us  channels  of  the  inflowing
cosmic  life.  Disembodied  now,  they  operate  in  the  same  way.  In  some
respects  the  loss  of  the  body  is  a  drawback.  They  can  but  slightly  and
rarely  move  ponderable  matter.  They  can  but  seldom  heal  or  vitalise
with  their  spirit-touch.  They  can  communicate  their  knowledge  only
through  an  organism  which  they  invade  for  the  purpose.  But  on  the
other  hand  their  knowledge,  when  they  do  communicate  it,  is  of  absolutely
priceless  worth.  Fragmentary  and  trivial  though  it  may  seem,  it  con-
stitutes the  one  great  assurance  of  a  providential  Universe  and  an  eternal
life.

Supplication  to  these  spirits  near  ourselves  has,  then,  assuredly  not
been  in  vain, — nay,  is  likely  to  become  more  and  more  fruitful  as  the  con-
ditions are  better  understood.

At  the  other  end  of  the  scale,  again,  the  prayers  addressed  to  the
Universe, — to  God, — or  say,  rather,  to  the  Supreme  which  is  above  person-
ality, are  now  seen  to  be  the  normal  development  and  intensification  of
that  mysterious  power  of  self-suggestion  which  we  witness  every  day.  In
so  saying  I  am  far  from  meaning  that  we  affect  our  own  spirits  only  by
our  fervent  prayer.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  insisted  that  even  the  self-
suggestion  which  refuses  to  appeal  to  any  higher  power, — which  believes
that  it  is  only  calling  up  its  own  private  resources  into  play, — must  derive
its  ultimate  efficacy  from  the  increased  inflow  from  the  Infinite  life  which
the  spirit's  powerful  effort  of  attention — the  faith  of  the  suppliant — does
in  some  manner  induce.  And  the  more  penetrating  this  faith,  the  more
striking  the  results  are  likely  to  be.  Beyond  this  point  we  have  no
evidential  warrant  for  going.  We  cannot  specify  from  any  real  com-
parative experience  what  particular  shade  or  colour  of  this  saving  faith  is
most  effectual  in  evoking  an  answer.  The  great  intermediate  names —
between  the  spirits  of  our  own  friends  and  the  Source  of  All — have  not
given  recognisable  evidence,  specific  proof,  of  their  recipience  and  reply.
Such  proof  might  be  given,  for  example,  if  the  cures  at  Lourdes  were
really  "  miraculous"  in  the  sense  that  they  were  cures  of  maladies  never
cured  elsewhere ;  or  even  if  patients  at  Lourdes  were  cured  in  markedly
larger  proportion  than,  say,  the  patients  in  a  hypnotic  clinique.  But  I
have  elsewhere  (see  578  and  579)  shown  strong  reasons  for  believing  that
this  is  not  so ; — nay,  that  the  general  evidence  offered  for  the  Lourdes
cures  needs  a  strict  sifting  before  the  residuum  of  fact  can  be  separated
from  the  exaggerations  due  to  strong  moral  prepossession, — from  which
the  great  pecuniary  interests  which  have  grown  up  around  that  place  of
pilgrimage  can  hardly  be  altogether  excluded.  I  will  not  say  more,  for
my  object  here  is  not  to  disparage  any  special  type  of  prayer  or  supplica-


314  CHAPTER    X  [App.  C

tion,  but  rather  to  insist  on  their  importance  and  efficacy  in  general.  I
wish  to  show  that  so  far  from  our  needing  to  suppose  that  an  answer  to
prayer  is  an  interruption  of  the  natural  order  of  things,  many  answers  to
prayer  are,  on  the  contrary,  manifest  extensions, — natural  developments,
— of  perfectly  familiar  phenomena.  We  already  have  life,  and  by  dis-
posing our  spirits  rightly,  we  can  get  more  life ;  we  already  have  friends
who  help  us  on  earth;  those  friends  survive  bodily  death,  and  are  to
some  extent  able  to  help  us  still.  It  is  for  us  to  throw  ourselves  into  the
needed  mental  state ; — to  make  the  heartfelt  and  trustful  appeal.  To  the
benefit  which  we  may  thus  derive  no  theoretical  limit  can  be  assigned.
It  must  needs  grow  with  man's  evolution ;  for  the  central  fact  of  that
condition  is  the  ever- increasing  closeness  of  the  soul's  communion  with
other  souls.


713  A]


APPENDICES

TO

CHAPTER  VII

713  A.  It  is  possible  that  we  might  learn  much  were  we  to  question
dying  persons,  on  their  awakening  from  some  comatose  condition,  as  to
their  memory  of  any  dream  or  vision  during  that  state.  If  there  has  in
fact  been  any  such  experience  it  should  be  at  once  recorded,  as  it  will  pro-
bably fade  rapidly  from  the  patient's  supraliminal  memory,  even  if  he  does
not  die  directly  afterwards.  A  curious  case  was  published  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living  (vol.  ii.  p.  305),  where  a  dying  man  returns,  as  it  were,  from
the  gates  of  death  expressly  to  announce  that  he  has  had  a  vision,  or  "  paid
a  visit,"  of  this  kind — which  "  visit,"  however,  it  was  not  possible  to  verify.

A  somewhat  similar  instance,  but  with  ultimate  recovery  of  the  patient,
Dr.  Wiltse,  was  printed  in  the  St.  Louis  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,
November,  1889,  and  in  the  Mid- Continental  Review,  February,  1890.
Dr.  Wiltse  has  since  obtained  for  us  the  sworn  depositions  of  the  witnesses
of  importance.  The  experience  is  long,  and  for  the  most  part  of  a
thoroughly  dreamlike  type ;  but  in  any  view  it  is  extremely  unusual,  nor
can  it  be  fairly  understood  from  extracts  alone.  I  quote,  therefore,  the
essential  part  of  the  case  in  full  (from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  180).

[After  describing  his  gradual  sinking  in  the  summer  of  1889  under  an  un-
usual disease — typhoid  fever  with  subnormal  temperature  and  pulse — Dr.  Wiltse
(of  Skiddy,  Kansas)  continues  as  follows :] — I  asked  if  I  was  perfectly  in  posses-
sion of  my  mind,  so  that  what  I  might  say  should  be  worthy  of  being  relied
upon.  Being  answered  in  the  decided  affirmative,  I  bade  adieu  to  family  and
friends,  giving  such  advice  and  consolation  to  each  and  all  as  I  deemed  best,
conversed  upon  the  proofs  pro  and  con  of  immortality,  and  called  upon  each
and  all  to  take  testimony  for  themselves  by  watching  the  action  of  my  mind,  in
the  bodily  state  in  which  they  saw  me,  and  finally,  as  my  pupils  fell  open,  and
vision  began  to  fail,  and  my  voice  to  weaken,  feeling  a  sense  of  drowsiness
come  over  me,  with  a  strong  effort,  I  straightened  my  stiffened  legs,  got  my
arms  over  the  breast,  and  clasped  the  fast  stiffening  fingers,  and  soon  sank  into
utter  unconsciousness.

I  passed  about  four  hours  in  all  without  pulse  or  perceptible  heart-beat,  as
I  am  informed  by  Dr.  S.  H.  Raynes,  who  was  the  only  physician  present.
During  a  portion  of  this  time  several  of  the  bystanders  thought  I  was  dead,
and  such  a  report  being  carried  outside,  the  village  church  bell  was  tolled.

315


316  APPENDICES  [713

Dr.  Raynes  informs  me,  however,  that  by  bringing  his  eyes  close  to  my  face,
he  could  perc&ive  an  occasional  short  gasp,  so  very  light  as  to  be  barely  per-
ceptible, and  that  he  was  upon  the  point,  several  times,  of  saying,  "  He  is  dead,"
when  a  gasp  would  occur  in  time  to  check  him.

He  thrust  a  needle  deep  into  the  flesh  at  different  points  from  the  feet  to
the  hips,  but  got  no  response.  Although  I  was  pulseless  about  four  hours,  this
state  of  apparent  death  lasted  only  about  half-an-hour.

I  lost,  I  believe,  all  power  of  thought  or  knowledge  of  existence  in  absolute
unconsciousness.  Of  course,  I  need  not  guess  at  the  time  so  lost,  as  in  such  a
state  a  minute  or  a  thousand  years  would  appear  the  same.  I  came  again  into
a  state  of  conscious  existence  and  discovered  that  I  was  still  in  the  body,  but
the  body  and  I  had  no  longer  any  interests  in  common.  I  looked  in  astonish-
ment and  joy  for  the  first  time  upon  myself— the  me,  the  real  Ego,  while  the
not  me  closed  it  upon  all  sides  like  a  sepulchre  of  clay.

With  all  the  interest  of  a  physician,  I  beheld  the  wonders  of  my  bodily
anatomy,  intimately  interwoven  with  which,  even  tissue  for  tissue,  was  I,  the
living  soul  of  that  dead  body.  I  learned  that  the  epidermis  was  the  outside
boundary  of  the  ultimate  tissues,  so  to  speak,  of  the  soul.  I  realised  my  con-
dition and  reasoned  calmly  thus.  I  have  died,  as  men  term  death,  and  yet  I
am  as  much  a  man  as  ever.  I  am  about  to  get  out  of  the  body.  I  watched
the  interesting  process  of  the  separation  of  soul  and  body.  By  some  power,
apparently  not  my  own,  the  Ego  was  rocked  to  and  fro,  laterally,  as  a  cradle  is
rocked,  by  which  process  its  connection  with  the  tissues  of  the  body  was  broken
up.  After  a  little  time  the  lateral  motion  ceased,  and  along  the  soles  of  the
feet  beginning  at  the  toes,  passing  rapidly  to  the  heels,  I  felt  and  heard,  as  it
seemed,  the  snapping  of  innumerable  small  cords.  When  this  was  accom-
plished I  began  slowly  to  retreat  from  the  feet,  toward  the  head,  as  a  rubber
cord  shortens.  I  remember  reaching  the  hips  and  saying  to  myself,  "  Now,
there  is  no  life  below  the  hips."  I  can  recall  no  memory  of  passing  through
the  abdomen  and  chest,  but  recollect  distinctly  when  my  whole  self  was  col-
lected into  the  head,  when  I  reflected  thus :  I  am  all  in  the  head  now,  and  I
shall  soon  be  free.  I  passed  around  the  brain  as  if  I  were  hollow,  compressing
it  and  its  membranes,  slightly,  on  all  sides,  toward  the  centre  and  peeped  out
between  the  sutures  of  the  skull,  emerging  like  the  flattened  edges  of  a  bag  of
membranes.  I  recollect  distinctly  how  I  appeared  to  myself  something  like  a
jelly-fish  as  regards  colour  and  form.  As  I  emerged,  I  saw  two  ladies  sitting
at  my  head.  I  measured  the  distances  between  the  head  of  my  cot  and  the
knees  of  the  lady  opposite  the  head  and  concluded  there  was  room  for  me  to
stand,  but  felt  considerable  embarrassment  as  I  reflected  that  I  was  about  to
emerge  naked  before  her,  but  comforted  myself  with  the  thought  that  in  all
probability  she  could  not  see  me  with  her  bodily  eyes,  as  I  was  a  spirit.  As  I
emerged  from  the  head  I  floated  up  and  down  and  laterally  like  a  soap-bubble
attached  to  the  bowl  of  a  pipe  until  I  at  last  broke  loose  from  the  body  and  fell
lightly  to  the  floor,  where  I  slowly  rose  and  expanded  into  the  full  stature  of  a
man.  I  seemed  to  be  translucent,  of  a  bluish  cast  and  perfectly  naked.  With
a  painful  sense  of  embarrassment  I  fled  toward  the  partially  opened  door  to
escape  the  eyes  of  the  two  ladies  whom  I  was  facing  as  well  as  others  who  I
knew  were  about  me,  but  upon  reaching  the  door  I  found  myself  clothed,  and
satisfied  upon  that  point  I  turned  and  faced  the  company.  As  I  turned,  my
left  elbow  came  in  contact  with  the  arm  of  one  of  two  gentlemen,  who  were


713A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  317

standing  in  the  door.  To  my  surprise,  his  arm  passed  through  mine  without
apparent  resistance,  the  severed  parts  closing  again  without  pain,  as  air  re-
unites. I  looked  quickly  up  at  his  face  to  see  if  he  had  noticed  the  contact,
but  he  gave  me  no  sign, — only  stood  and  gazed  toward  the  couch  I  had  just  left.
I  directed  my  gaze  in  the  direction  of  his,  and  saw  my  own  dead  body.  It
was  lying  just  as  I  had  taken  so  much  pains  to  place  it,  partially  upon  the
right  side,  the  feet  close  together  and  the  hands  clasped  across  the  breast.  I
was  surprised  at  the  paleness  of  the  face.  I  had  not  looked  in  a  glass  for  some
days  and  had  imagined  that  I  was  not  as  pale  as  most  very  sick  people  are.  I
congratulated  myself  upon  the  decency  with  which  I  had  composed  the  body
and  thought  my  friends  would  have  little  trouble  on  that  score.

I  saw  a  number  of  persons  sitting  and  standing  about  the  body,  and  parti-
cularly noticed  two  women  apparently  kneeling  by  my  left  side,  and  I  knew
that  they  were  weeping.  I  have  since  learned  that  they  were  my  wife  and  my
sister,  but  I  had  no  conception  of  individuality.  Wife,  sister  or  friend  were  as
one  to  me.  I  did  not  remember  any  conditions  of  relationship  ;  at  least  I  did
not  think  of  any.  I  could  distinguish  sex,  but  nothing  further.

I  now  attempted  to  gain  the  attention  of  the  people  with  the  object  of
comforting  them  as  well  as  assuring  them  of  their  own  immortality.  I  bowed
to  them  playfully  and  saluted  with  my  right  hand.  I  passed  about  among
them  also,  but  found  that  they  gave  me  no  heed.  Then  the  situation  struck
me  as  humorous  and  I  laughed  outright.

They  certainly  must  have  heard  that,  I  thought,  but  it  seemed  otherwise,
for  not  one  lifted  their  eyes  from  my  body.  It  did  not  once  occur  to  me  to
speak  and  I  concluded  the  matter  by  saying  to  myself :  "  They  see  only  with
the  eyes  of  the  body.  They  cannot  see  spirits.  They  are  watching  what  they
think  is  I,  but  they  are  mistaken.  That  is  not  I.  This  is  I  and  I  am  as  much
alive  as  ever."

I  turned  and  passed  out  at  the  open  door,  inclining  my  head  and  watching
where  I  set  my  feet  as  I  stepped  down  on  to  the  porch.

I  crossed  the  porch,  descended  the  steps,  walked  down  the  path  and  into
the  street.  There  I  stopped  and  looked  about  me.  I  never  saw  that  street
more  distinctly  than  I  saw  it  then.  I  took  note  of  the  redness  of  the  soil  and
of  the  washes  the  rain  had  made.  I  took  a  rather  pathetic  look  about  me,
like  one  who  is  about  to  leave  his  home  for  a  long  time.  Then  I  discovered
that  I  had  become  larger  than  I  was  in  earth  life  and  congratulated  myself
thereupon.  I  was  somewhat  smaller  in  the  body  than  I  just  liked  to  be,  but  in
the  next  life,  I  thought,  I  am  to  be  as  I  desired.

My  clothes,  I  noticed,  had  accommodated  themselves  to  my  increased
stature,  and  I  fell  to  wondering  where  they  came  from  and  how  they  got  on  to
me  so  quickly  and  without  my  knowledge.  I  examined  the  fabric  and  judged
it  to  be  of  some  kind  of  Scotch  material,  a  good  suit,  I  thought,  but  not  hand-
some ;  still,  neat  and  good  enough.  The  coat  fits  loosely  too,  and  that  is
well  for  summer.  "  How  well  I  feel,"  I  thought.  "  Only  a  few  minutes  ago  I
was  horribly  sick  and  distressed.  Then  came  that  change,  called  death,  which
I  have  so  much  dreaded.  It  is  past  now,  and  here  am  I  still  a  man,  alive  and
thinking,  yes,  thinking  as  clearly  as  ever,  and  how  well  I  feel ;  I  shall  never  be
sick  again.  I  have  no  more  to  die."  And  in  sheer  exuberance  of  spirits  I
danced  a  figure,  and  fell  again  to  looking  at  my  form  and  clothes.

Suddenly  I  discovered  that  I  was  looking  at  the  straight  seam  down  the


3i8  APPENDICES  [713  A

back  of  my  coat.  How  is  this,  I  thought,  how  do  I  see  my  back  ?  and  I  looke
again,  to  reassure  myself,  down  the  back  of  the  coat,  or  down  the  back  of
legs  to  the  very  heels.  I  put  my  hand  to  my  face  and  felt  for  my  eyes.  They
are  where  they  should  be,  I  thought.  Am  I  like  an  owl  that  I  can  turn  my
head  half-way  round  ?  I  tried  the  experiment  and  failed.

No !  Then  it  must  be  that  having  been  out  of  the  body,  but  a  few  moments,
I  have  yet  the  power  to  use  the  eyes  of  my  body,  and  I  turned  about  and  looked
back  in  at  the  open  door,  where  I  could  see  the  head  of  my  body  in  a  line  with
me.  I  discovered  then  a  small  cord,  like  a  spider's  web,  running  from  my
shoulders  back  to  my  body  and  attaching  to  it  at  the  base  of  the  neck  in
front.

I  was  satisfied  with  the  conclusion  that  by  means  of  that  cord  I  was  using
the  eyes  of  my  body,  and  turning,  walked  down  the  street.

I  had  walked  but  a  few  steps  when  I  again  lost  my  consciousness,  and  when
I  again  awoke  found  myself  in  the  air,  where  I  was  upheld  by  a  pair  of  hands,
which  I  could  feel  pressing  lightly  against  my  sides.  The  owner  of  the  hands,
if  they  had  one,  was  behind  me,  and  was  shoving  me  through  the  air  at  a  swift
but  a  pleasant  rate  of  speed.  By  the  time  I  fairly  realised  the  situation  I  was
pitched  away  and  floated  easily  down  a  few  feet,  alighting  gently  upon  the
beginning  of  a  narrow,  but  well-built  roadway,  inclined  upward  at  an  angle  of
something  less  than  45  degrees.

I  looked  up  and  could  see  sky  and  clouds  above  me  at  the  usual  height.  I
looked  down  and  saw  the  tops  of  green  trees  and  thought :  It  is  as  far  down  to
the  tree  tops  as  it  is  high  to  the  clouds.

As  I  walked  up  the  road,  I  seemed  to  face  nearly  north.  I  looked  over  the
right  side  of  the  road  and  under  it  could  see  the  forest,  but  discovered  naught
to  support  the  roadway,  yet  I  felt  no  fear  of  its  falling.  I  examined  the  material
of  which  it  was  built.  It  was  built  of  milky  quartz  and  fine  sand.  I  picked  up
one  of  the  gravels  and  looked  at  it  particularly.  I  distinctly  remember  that  it
had  a  dark  speck  in  the  centre.  I  brought  it  close  to  the  eye  and  so  discovered
that  it  was  a  small  hole  apparently  caused  by  chemical  action  of  some  metal.
There  had  been  a  recent  rain,  and  the  coolness  was  refreshing  to  me.  I
noticed  that,  although  the  grade  was  steep,  I  felt  no  fatigue  in  walking,  but  my
feet  seemed  light,  and  my  step  buoyant  as  the  step  of  childhood,  and  as  I
walked  I  again  reverted  to  my  late  condition  of  illness  and  rejoiced  in  my
perfect  health  and  strength.  Then  a  sense  of  great  loneliness  came  over  me
and  I  greatly  desired  company,  so  I  reasoned  thus :  Some  one  dies  every
minute.  If  I  wait  twenty  minutes  the  chances  are  great  that  some  one  in  the
mountains  will  die,  and  thus  I  shall  have  company.  I  waited,  and  while  so
doing  surveyed  the  scenery  about  me.  To  the  east  was  a  long  line  of  moun-
tains, and  the  forest  underneath  me  extended  to  the  mountains,  up  their  sides
and  out  on  to  the  mountain  top.  Underneath  me  lay  a  forest-clad  valley,  through
which  ran  a  beautiful  river  full  of  shoals,  which  caused  the  water  to  ripple  in
white  sprays.  I  thought  the  river  looked  much  like  the  Emerald  River,  and
the  mountains,  I  thought,  as  strongly  resembled  Waldron's  Ridge.  On  the  left
of  the  road  was  a  high  bluff  of  black  stone,  and  it  reminded  me  of  Lookout
Mountain,  where  the  railroad  passes  between  it  and  the  Tennessee  River.
Thus  memory,  judgment,  and  imagination,  the  three  great  faculties  of  the  mind,
were  intact  and  active.

I  waited  for  company,  what  I  judged  to  be  twenty  minutes ;  but  no  one


713A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  319

came.  Then  I  reasoned  thus  :  It  is  probable  that  when  a  man  dies  he  has  his
individual  road  to  travel  and  must  travel  it  alone.  As  no  two  men  are  exactly
alike,  so,  most  likely,  no  two  travel  the  same  road  into  the  other  world.  I
reflected  that  as  eternal  existence  was  now  assured,  I  had  no  need  to  hurry,  and
so  walked  very  leisurely  along,  now  stopping  and  looking  at  the  scenery,  or
looking  back  over  the  road,  if,  perchance,  some  one  might  come  along,  and
occasionally  turning  and  walking  backward,  and  thus  watching  the  road  behind
me  for  company  I  so  strongly  desired.  I  thought  certainly  some  one  from  the
other  world  would  be  out  to  meet  me,  though,  strangely  enough,  I  thought  of  no
person  whom  above  others  I  desired  to  see.  Angels  or  fiends,  one,  I  said,  will
come  out  to  meet  me — I  wonder  which  it  will  be?  I  reflected  that  I  had  not
believed  all  the  Church  tenets,  but  had  written  and  taught  verbally  a  new  and,
I  believed,  a  better  faith.  But,  I  reasoned,  I  knew  nothing,  and  where  there  is
room  for  doubt  there  is  room  for  mistake.  I  may,  therefore,  be  on  my  way  to
a  terrible  doom.  And  here  occurred  a  thing  hard  to  describe.  At  different
points  about  me  I  was  aware  of  the  expressed  thought,  "  Fear  not,  you  are
safe !  "  I  heard  no  voice,  I  saw  no  person,  yet  I  was  perfectly  aware  that  at
different  points,  at  varying  distances  from  me,  some  one  was  thinking  that
thought  for  my  benefit,  but  how  I  was  made  aware  of  it  was  so  great  a  mystery
that  it  staggered  my  faith  in  its  reality.  A  great  fear  and  doubt  came  over  me
and  I  was  beginning  to  be  very  miserable,  when  a  face  so  full  of  ineffable  love
and  tenderness  appeared  to  me  for  an  instant  as  set  me  to  rights  upon  that  score.

Suddenly  I  saw  at  some  distance  ahead  of  me  three  prodigious  rocks  block-
ing the  road,  at  which  sight  I  stopped,  wondering  why  so  fair  a  road  should  be
thus  blockaded,  and  while  I  considered  what  I  was  to  do,  a  great  and  dark
cloud,  which  I  compared  to  a  cubic  acre  in  size,  stood  over  my  head.  Quickly
it  became  filled  with  living,  moving  bolts  of  fire,  which  darted  hither  and  thither
through  the  cloud.  They  were  not  extinguished  by  contact  with  the  cloud,  for
I  could  see  them  in  the  cloud  as  one  sees  fish  in  deep  water.

The  cloud  became  concave  on  the  under  surface  like  a  great  tent  and  began
slowly  to  revolve  upon  its  perpendicular  axis.  When  it  had  turned  three  times,
I  was  aware  of  a  presence,  which  I  could  not  see,  but  which  I  knew  was  enter-
ing into  the  cloud  from  the  southern  side.  The  presence  did  not  seem,  to  my
mind,  as  a  form,  because  it  filled  the  cloud  like  some  vast  intelligence.  He  is
not  as  I,  I  reasoned :  I  fill  a  little  space  with  my  form,  and  when  I  move  the
space  is  left  void,  but  he  may  fill  immensity  at  his  will,  even  as  he  fills  this
cloud.  Then  from  the  right  side  and  from  the  left  of  the  cloud  a  tongue  of
black  vapour  shot  forth  and  rested  lightly  upon  either  side  of  my  head,  and  as
they  touched  me  thoughts  not  my  own  entered  into  my  brain.

These,  I  said,  are  his  thoughts  and  not  mine :  they  might  be  in  Greek  or
Hebrew  for  all  power  I  have  over  them.  But  how  kindly  am  I  addressed  in  my
mother  tongue  that  so  I  may  understand  all  his  will.

Yet,  although  the  language  was  English,  it  was  so  eminently  above  my
power  to  reproduce  that  my  rendition  of  it  is  as  far  short  of  the  original  as  any
translation  of  a  dead  language  is  weaker  than  the  original ;  for  instance,  the
expression,  "  This  is  the  road  to  the  eternal  world,"  did  not  contain  over  four
words,  neither  did  any  sentence  in  the  whole  harangue,  and  every  sentence,
had  it  been  written,  must  have  closed  with  a  period,  so  complete  was  the  sense.
The  following  is  as  near  as  I  can  render  it : —

"  This  is  the  road  to  the  eternal  world.    Yonder  rocks  are  the  boundary


320  APPENDICES  [713  A

between  the  two  worlds  and  the  two  lives.  Once  you  pass  them,  you  can  no
more  return  into  the  body.  If  your  work  was  to  write  the  things  that  have
been  taught  you,  waiting  for  mere  chance  to  publish  them,  if  your  work  was
to  talk  to  private  individuals  in  the  privacy  of  friendship— if  this  was  all,  it  is
done,  and  you  may  pass  beyond  the  rocks.  If,  however,  upon  consideration
you  conclude  that  it  shall  be  to  publish  as  well  as  to  write  what  you  are  taught,
if  it  shall  be  to  call  together  the  multitudes  and  teach  them,  it  is  not  done  and
you  can  return  into  the  body."

The  thoughts  ceased  and  the  cloud  passed  away,  moving  slowly  toward  the
mountain  in  the  east.  I  turned  and  watched  it  for  some  time,  when  suddenly,
and  without  having  felt  myself  moved,  I  stood  close  to  and  in  front  of  the  three
rocks.  I  was  seized  with  a  strong  curiosity  then  to  look  into  the  next  world.

There  were  four  entrances,  one  very  dark,  at  the  left  between  the  wall  of
black  rock  and  the  left  hand  one  of  the  three  rocks,  a  low  archway  between
the  left  hand  and  the  middle  rock,  and  a  similar  one  between  that  and  the
right  hand  rock,  and  a  very  narrow  pathway  running  around  the  right  hand
rock  at  the  edge  of  the  roadway.

I  did  not  examine  the  opening  at  the  left — I  know  not  why,  unless  it  was
because  it  appeared  dark,  but  I  knelt  at  each  of  the  low  archways  and  looked
through.  The  atmosphere  was  green  and  everything  seemed  cool  and  quiet
and  beautiful.  Beyond  the  rocks,  the  roadway,  the  valley,  and  the  mountain
range  curved  gently  to  the  left,  thus  shutting  off  the  view  at  a  short  distance.
If  I  were  only  around  there,  I  thought,  I  should  soon  see  angels  or  devils  or
both,  and  as  I  thought  this,  I  saw  the  forms  of  both  as  I  had  often  pictured
them  in  my  mind.  I  looked  at  them  closely  and  discovered  that  they  were
not  realities,  but  the  mere  shadowy  forms  in  my  thoughts,  and  that  any  form
might  be  brought  up  in  the  same  way.  What  a  wonderful  world,  I  exclaimed,
mentally,  where  thought  is  so  intensified  as  to  take  visible  form.  How  happy
shall  I  be  in  such  a  realm  of  thought  as  that.

I  listened  at  the  archways  for  any  sound  of  voice  or  of  music,  but  could
hear  nothing.  Solid  substances,  I  thought,  are  better  media  of  sound  than
air,  I  will  use  the  rocks  as  media,  and  I  rose  and  placed  my  left  ear  to  first
one  rock  and  then  the  other  throughout,  but  could  hear  nothing.

Then  suddenly  I  was  tempted  to  cross  the  boundary  line.  I  hesitated
and  reasoned  thus :  "  I  have  died  once  and  if  I  go  back,  soon  or  late,  I  must
die  again.  If  I  stay  some  one  else  will  do  my  work,  and  so  the  end  will  be
as  well  and  as  surely  accomplished,  and  shall  I  die  again  ?  I  will  not,  but  now
that  I  am  so  near  I  will  cross  the  line  and  stay."  So  determining  I  moved
cautiously  along  the  rocks.  There  was  danger  of  falling  over  the  side  of  the
road,  for  the  pathway  around  was  but  narrow.  I  thought  not  of  the  archways,
I  placed  my  back  against  the  rock  and  walked  sideways.

I  reached  the  exact  centre  of  the  rock,  which  I  knew  by  a  carved  knob  in
the  rock  marking  the  exact  boundary.  Here,  like  Caesar  at  the  Rubicon,  I
halted  and  parleyed  with  conscience.  It  seemed  like  taking  a  good  deal  of
responsibility,  but  I  determined  to  do  it,  and  advanced  the  left  foot  across  the
line.  As  I  did  so,  a  small,  densely  black  cloud  appeared  in  front  of  me  and
advanced  toward  my  face.  I  knew  that  I  was  to  be  stopped.  I  felt  the  power
to  move  or  to  think  leaving  me.  My  hands  fell  powerless  at  my  side,  my
shoulders  and  head  dropped  forward,  the  cloud  touched  my  face  and  I  knew
no  more.


713A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  321

Without  previous  thought  and  without  apparent  effort  on  my  part,  my
eyes  opened.  I  looked  at  my  hands  and  then  at  the  little  white  cot  upon
which  I  was  lying,  and  realising  that  \  was  in  the  body,  in  astonishment  and
disappointment,  I  exclaimed  :  "  What  in  the  world  has  happened  to  me  ?  Must
I  die  again  ?  "

I  was  extremely  weak,  but  strong  enough  to  relate  the  above  experience
despite  all  injunctions  to  quiet.  Soon  afterward  I  was  seized  with  vomiting,
severe  and  uncontrollable.  About  this  time  Dr.  J.  H.  Sewel,  of  Rockwood,
Tenn.,  called  upon  a  friendly  visit,  not  knowing  I  was  sick*  I  was  hiccoughing
terribly,  and  in  consultation  he  said,  "  Nothing  short  of  a  miracle,  I  fear,  can
save  him."

After  many  days,  it  seemed  to  me,  the.  temperature  began  to  creep  up  and
soon  ran  above  normal,  but  only  a  little,  wavered  back  and  forth  for  a  few
days,  and  settled  at  a  half  degree  below,  where  it  remained  during  the  greater
part  of  convalescence,  when  it  mounted  to  normal,  the  pulse  mounted  to  above
fifty  for  keeps,  as  boys  say  at  marbles,  then  went  to  seventy-six,  and  I  made  a
rapid  and  good  recovery,  for  having  travelled  some  hundreds  of  miles  during
the  interval,  as  I  close  this  paper  my  pulse  stands  at  eighty-four  and  is  strong,
just  eight  weeks  from  "  the  day  I  died,"  as  some  of  my  neighbours  speak  of  it.

There  are  plenty  of  witnesses  to  the  truth  of  the  above  statements,  in  so
far  as  my  physical  condition  was  concerned.  Also  to  the  fact  that  just  as  I
described  the  conditions  about  my  body  and  in  the  room,  so  they  actually  were.
I  must,  therefore,  have  seen  these  things  by  some  means.

The  following  are  questions  addressed  to  Dr.  Wiltse  about  his  ex-
perience, and  his  answers  : —

1.  Q.  You  perceived  two  gentlemen  standing  in  the  door.     Were  they
actually  standing  in  the  door?     A.   They  were.

2.  Q.  Was  your  face  as  pale  as  you  perceived  it  to  be  ?     A.    It  was  much
paler  as  compared  with  some  days  before,  but  one  witness  states  that,  as  com-
pared with  only  a  short  time  before  becoming  unconscious,  the  face  appeared  of
a  dark  purple  hue.

3.  Q.  Did  you  not  recognise  any  person  at  all  among  those  whom  you  per-
ceived in  the  room  ?    A.    I  had  no  thought  of  names  nor  ideas  of  relationship.
I  had  a  strong  sense  of  good  fellowship,  if  I  may  so  term  it,  but  my  interest
in  each  seemed  alike.     I  must  have  forgotten  all  personalities.

4.  Q.  Did  the  washes  which  you  perceived  the  rain  to  have  made  actually
exist?     A.    They  did  to  a  marked  degree,  there  having  been  heavy  rains  for
many  days  consecutively.

5.  Q.  Did  the  fabric  in  which  you  seemed  to  be  clothed  resemble  any  which
you  had  ever  worn  ?     A.    It  did  not,  and  I  distinctly  recollect  thinking  that  I
had  no  such  clothing  in  the  house,  although  it  did  not  then  occur  to  me  that  I
had  never  possessed  such  a  suit.     I  think,  however,  that  my  brother  who  was
visiting  me  had  on  something  such  a  suit,  but  cannot  be  certain,  as  I  cannot
learn  that  I  made  any  reference  to  any  suit  in  the  room  as  being  like  it  while
rehearsing  my  experience  after  awaking.     If  I  could  see  a  suit  like  it  I  should
recognise  it  at  once.

6.  Q.  Were  you  previously  familiar  with  the  notion  that  a  delicate  thread,  in
cases  of  trance,  connects  the  ethereal  organism  with  the  ordinary  body?     A.
Yes,  and  this  will  seem  to  you  a  case  of  expectancy.     I  deem  it  fair  to  your

VOL.  ii.  x


322  APPENDICES  [713  A

Society  to  state,  however,  that  so  far  from  believing  the  theory  was  I  that  in  a
volume  of  fiction  upon  which  I  am  engaged  I  had  set  down  an  entirely  different
theory  as  emanating  from  one  of  the  characters  who  is  made  to  teach  my  own
private  views  strongly  enough.  When  I  discovered  the  thread  my  mind  did
not  go  back  to  any  previous  recollections  or  ideas  upon  the  subject,  as  I
should  suppose  would  naturally  be  the  case.

Dr.  Wiltse's  narrative  is  followed  by  corroborative  statements  from  five
persons  who  were  present  in  the  sick-room,  viz.,  his  wife  and  sister,  the
physician  in  attendance,  and  two  friends.  These  statements  are  given  in
full  in  the  Proceedings,  and  show  that  the  description  of  his  experience
given  by  Dr.  Wiltse  immediately  after  recovering  consciousness  was  in  all
essential  details  the  same  as  the  account  printed  above.  They  also
confirm  what  he  reports  of  the  actual  external  facts  of  the  case,  the  illness
and  attendant  circumstances.

Here,  at  any  rate,  whatever  view  we  take  as  to  the  source  or  the
content  of  Dr.  Wiltse's  vision,  the  fact  remains  that  the  patient,  while  in  a
comatose  state,  almost  pulseless,  and  at  a  temperature  much  below  the
normal,  did,  nevertheless,  undergo  a  remarkably  vivid  series  of  mental
impressions.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  we  may  err  in  other  cases  by
assuming  prematurely  that  all  power  of  perception  or  inference  has
ceased.

Setting  aside  the  manifestly  dream-like  or  symbolical  element  of  the
vision,  we  observe  that  Dr.  Wiltse  believes  that  his  perception  of  the
people  in  the  room,  and  of  the  rain-washed  streets  outside,  was  of  a  clair-
voyant type.  But  this  cannot  be  proved ;  for  the  picture  of  the  streets
might  be  due  to  unconscious  inference  ;  and  some  acuteness  of  perception,
like  that  of  the  lethargic  hypnotised  subject,  might  account  for  his  know-
ledge of  movements  in  the  room  made  after  his  eyes  were  closed.  How-
ever this  may  be,  it  is  probable  that  if  he  had  actually  died,  and  if  some
kind  of  message  from  him  had  been  subsequently  received,  that  message
might  have  included  facts  as  to  the  scene  of  death  which  the  survivors
would  have  believed  to  have  been  unknown  to  him  while  still  living,  but
which  he  did  in  fact  acquire  during  his  comatose  condition.

I  may  add  that  since  the  first  publication  of  Dr.  Wiltse's  narrative
both  Dr.  Hodgson  and  I  have  made  his  personal  acquaintance,  and  have
further  corresponded  with  him  on  psychical  experiments,  with  the  result
that  the  experience  just  cited,  though  it  cannot,  of  course,  be  made
evidential,  has  risen  in  importance  in  our  eyes.  See  also  another  ex-
perience of  Dr.  Wiltse's  in  663  A.

A  case  similar  in  many  respects  to  the  one  just  quoted  is  that  of  the
Rev.  L.  J.  Bertrand,  given  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  194.  During
a  dangerous  ascent  of  the  Titlis,  Mr.  Bertrand  separated  from  his  com-
panions, sat  down  to  rest,  and  became  paralysed  by  the  cold.  His  head,
however,  remained  clear,  and  he  experienced  the  sensation  described  by
Dr.  Wiltse  of  passing  out  of  his  body  and  remaining  attached  to  it  by  "  a


714  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  323

kind  of  elastic  string."  While  in  this  condition,  he  had  clairvoyant  im-
pressions about  his  absent  companions,  and  much  astonished  them  on
their  return  by  describing  their  doings  to  them.  The  case,  which  I  have
not  space  here  to  quote,  is  very  remote  and  therefore  probably  contains
errors  of  detail ;  but  it  is  most  likely  that  some  genuine  clairvoyance  was
exhibited.

714  A.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  450.  The  next  case — I
have  given  the  percipients  the  name  of  Adie — is  a  curiously  complicated
one ;  but  its  evidential  value  rests  mainly  on  the  similarity  between  a
recognised  phantom  seen  by  a  mourner  (and  therefore  not  in  itself
evidential)  and  an  unrecognisable  appearance  observed  at  about  the  same
time  by  a  near  relation,  also  aware  of  the  death.

This  latter  phenomenon — a  segment  of  illumination  in  a  room  other-
wise dark,  and  closed  against  light — is  undoubtedly  rare.  Retinal
hyperaesthesia  will  sometimes  make '  a  room  look  light  for  a  moment  or
two  when  the  eyes  are  first  opened,  but  the  limitation  of  area  seems  to
make  this  explanation  improbable  here.

Miss  C.  A.  writes  : —

July  \2th,  1888.

About  two  months  before  the  death  of  my  dear  father,  which  occurred  on
December  loth,  1887,  one  night  about  from  12  to  I  A.M.,  when  I  was  in  bed  in
a  perfectly  waking  condition,  he  came  to  my  bedside,  and  led  me  right  through
the  cemetery  at  Kensal  Green,  stopping  at  the  spot  where  his  grave  was  after-
wards made.

He  was  very  ill  at  that  time  and  in  a  helpless  condition — so  far  as  his  ability
to  walk  up  three  flights  of  stairs  to  my  room  was  concerned.  I  had  at  that  time
never  been  in  that  cemetery,  but  when  I  went  there  after  his  interment  the
scene  was  perfectly  familiar  to  me.

He  led  me  beyond  his  grave  to  a  large  iron  gate,  but  my  recollection  of  this
part  is  confused.  I  there  lost  sight  of  him.

In  a  later  letter  Miss  C.  A.  adds  : —

It  was  just  like  a  panorama.     I  cannot  say  if  my  eyes  were  closed  or  open.

Again,  a  day  or  two  before  his  death,  somewhere  between  the  4th  and
the  loth  of  December  (the  day  of  his  decease),  when  he  was  lying  in  an
unconscious  state  in  a  room  on  the  ground  floor,  and  I  sleeping  on  the  second
floor,  I  was  awoke  suddenly  by  seeing  a  bright  light  in  my  bedroom — the  whole
room  was  flooded  with  a  radiance  quite  indescribable — and  my  father  was
standing  by  my  bedside,  an  etherealised  semi-transparent  figure,  but  yet  his
voice  and  his  aspect  were  normal.  His  voice  seemed  a  far-off  sound,  and  yet
it  was  his  same  voice  as  in  life.  All  he  said  was,  "  Take  care  of  mother."
He  then  disappeared,  floating  in  the  air  as  it  were,  and  the  light  also  vanished.

About  a  week  afterwards,  that  is  to  say,  between  the  I2th  and  the  i;th  of
December,  the  same  apparition  came  to  me  again,  and  repeated  the  same
words.  An  aunt,  to  whom  I  related  these  three  experiences,  suggested  to  me
that  possibly  something  was  troubling  his  spirit,  and  I  then  promised  her  that
should  my  dear  father  visit  me  again  I  would  answer  him.  This  occurred  a
short  time  afterwards.  On  this,  the  fourth,  occasion  he  repeated  the  same


324  APPENDICES  [714  A

words,   and   I   replied,   "  Yes,  father."     He    then  added,   "  I    am   in  perfect
peace."

Apparently  he  was  satisfied  with  this  my  assurance.  Since  that  time  I
have  neither  seen  nor  heard  any  more.

I  have  never  before  or  since  had  any  such  experience.

(Signed)       C.  A.

Mrs.  Adie  writes  : —

March,   1889.

Towards  the  middle  of  the  month  of  October  1887  [since  fixed  by  letters  of
that  year  as  Sunday,  October  23rd,  1887],  in  fact,  as  nearly  as  I  can  recall,
about  the  time  when  C.'s  father  first  appeared  to  her  in  a  spiritualised  form,  I
had  a  singular  and  most  vivid  impression  that  the  post  would  bring  me  bad
news.  We  were  then  in  Switzerland.  I  could  daily  from  my  window,  at  1 1.20
A.M.  to  a  moment,  see  the  train  arrive  which  brought  our  English  letters.  These
were  taken  to  the  post-office  close  by  and  sorted ;  and  about  twenty  minutes
after  the  train  came  in  my  letters  (if  any)  were  placed  upon  my  table.  On  Sun-
day mornings  the  English  Church  service  began  at  10.30,  so  that  by  11.40  the
chaplain  was  well  advanced  in  his  sermon.  On  that  one  particular  Sunday  it
was,  as  nearly  as  I  can  tell,  exactly  at  that  moment  of  time  I  suddenly  felt
much  distressed  and  mentally  disturbed,  feeling  convinced  that  bad  news  was
awaiting  me  on  my  return  to  the  hotel.  I  had  to  put  considerable  force  upon
myself  to  refrain  from  rising  from  my  seat  and  leaving  the  church.

My  presentiment  was  only  too  true ;  on  my  writing-table  I  found  a  most
agonising  letter  from  T.  (C.'s  elder  sister)  telling  me  that  their  father  had  had
a  most  alarming  attack  of  illness  (this  was  the  first  of  the  three  seizures  which
resulted  in  his  decease  on  December  loth).  One  point  I  would  especially
notice ;  apparently  this  letter  conveyed  no  impression  to  my  mind  so  long  as
it  was  in  the  train  or  at  the  post-office,  but  took  effect  upon  me  so  soon  as  it
was  put  upon  my  writing-table — came  within  my  surroundings,  as  it  were.

We  returned  to  England  on  December  ist.     After  C.'s  father's  death—
during  the  night  of  December  I2th-I3th— I  was  sleeping  in  a  small  back  room
on  the  ground  floor  of  a  lodging  in  London,  a  room  which  had  only  one  window,
closed  by  shutters  and  a  thick  curtain.     The  gas  in  the  passage  was  put  out
when  I  went  to  bed,  so  that,  after  I  had  extinguished  my  candle,  the  room  was
shrouded  in  impenetrable  darkness— darkness  that  could  be  felt.     About  3  A.M.
on  the  morning  of  the  I3th  I  awoke  en  sursaut,  as  the  French  expression  has  it
(that  is  to  say,  I  was  wide  awake,  not  in  a  half-dreamy  condition),  to  see  the
room  up  to  the  ceiling,  for  about  the  width  of  my  bed,  and  extending  to  the
fireplace  opposite,  flooded  with  a  pale  golden  radiance,  an  unearthly  light-
quite  unlike  any  we  are  acquainted  with ;  it  seemed  to  come  from  behind  1
bed ;  so  bright  was  it  that  I  could  distinctly  see  the  design  on  the  wall-paper
opposite   me,  and  over  the  fireplace.     This   paper  was  a  very  pale  Frend
grey,  of  two  tints,  outlined  here  and  there  with  a  thin  line  of  colour,
effect  lasted,  as  nearly  as  I  can  tell,  about  five  minutes,  during  which  I  opene
and  shut  my  eyes  several  times,  clasped  and  unclasped  my  hands,  and  hit
self  to  be  certain  that  I  was  not  dreaming.     When  the  light  went  I  was
total  darkness  as  before.

That  same  day  I  confided  the  circumstance  to  T.  (Clara's  sister),  b«
her  not  to  tell  her  about  it,  since  C.  was  feeling  her  fathers  death  most  acut
but  when  a  day  or  two  later  C.  told  me  of  his  three  appearances  to  her,  ai
this  same  remarkable  golden  light  which  accompanied  them,  I  related  to  h


714A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  325

what  I  had  myself  seen,  expressing  my  regret  that  awe  or  astonishment  had
prevented  me  from  speaking  or  making  some  sign ;  though,  unlike  herself,  I
had  seen  no  shadowy  form  approach  me.  The  thought  then  occurred  to  me
that  there  might  be  something  regarding  which  the  deceased  wished  to  be
satisfied— something  which  prevented  his  spirit  from  obtaining  perfect  rest,
and  I  suggested  to  her  that  should  this  experience  be  repeated  to  either  of
us  we  should  answer  him.  The  result  is  stated  in  C.'s  account.

My  own  impression  is  that  his  spirit  tried  to  communicate  with  me,  but
in  my  great  amazement  at  the  vision  I  was  unable  to  receive  his  message.
C.  was  prepared.

Later  on — viz.,  in  a  letter,  dated  February  27th,  1888,  C.,  when  writing  to
me,  says  :  "  When  I  told  you  in  my  last  letter,  dear  auntie,  that  I  had  spoken,
it  was  from  your  advice,  for  you  told  me  to  do  so.  Now,  I  must  try  and  explain
to  you  just  what  happened.  It  was  about  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  or  even
earlier.  A  bright  light  suddenly  came  into  my  room — not  a  light  like  from  a
fire  or  a  candle,  but  a  glow  of  golden  light.  Then  I  saw  a  form,  quite  white,
bend  over  me,  and  in  my  darling  father's  voice  I  heard  these  words :  '  Take
care  of  mother — I  am  in  perfect  peace.'  I  said  :  'Yes,  father.'  And  then  the
light  by  degrees  disappeared.  Since  this,  I  have  not  seen  or  heard  anything
more,  and  I  have  a  feeling  that  I  shall  never  again,  as  I  feel  sure  that  all  he
wanted  to  say  he  has  said,  and  is  at  rest  since  I  answered  him.  What  you  tell
me  as  having  happened  to  you  on  the  night  of  December  I2th  is,  indeed,
passing  strange.  I  should  so  like  to  know  what  was  meant  to  tell  you.  Have
you  any  idea?  It  is  strange  that  both  you  and  I  should  see  the  same  light.
You  see  I  told  you  first,  so  it  could  not  have  been  a  dream,  as  I  might  possibly
have  fancied  if  you  had  told  of  your  strange  light  (for  I  do  sometimes  dream  of
things  which  I  hear  and  read  of).  If  anything  should  happen  again  I  will  write
it  down,  and  let  you  know  at  once;  but,  somehow,  I  feel  I  shall  not."

In  further  letters  Mrs.  Adie  says  : —

April  1st,  1889.

I  must  now  add  to  my  statement  in  my  last  (so  positively  put),  as  to  only  a
segment  of  my  room  being  illumined,  what  I  then  omitted,  viz.,  that  what  made
me  so  certain  of  this  fact  was — that  neither  the  white  muslin-covered  dressing-
table  on  my  right  hand,  nor  the  wardrobe  standing  against  the  wall  on  my  left
hand,  were  visible  to  me  on  that  occasion !  No  ;  when  I  saw  this  luminosity
I  had  heard  nothing  of  my  niece's  experiences  up  to  that  date.

I  have  occupied  the  same  room  again  in  the  interval  which  has  since
elapsed,  and  found  that  the  room  was  so  obscure  that  even  in  winter  day-
light (no  fog)  when  lying  on  the  bed  I  could  not  make  out  the  design  on  the
wall-paper  opposite  me,  although  on  the  occasion  I  there  mention  every  little
detail  of  form  and  colour  was  sharply  defined.

My  husband  had  to  pass  through  my  room  to  get  to  his,  and  when  he  left
our  sitting-room  the  whole  house  was  in  bed.  It  was  his  business  to  extinguish
the  feeble  little  gas-jet  which  was  left  burning.  Had  he  forgotten  to  do  this,
the  light  from  the  burner  could  not  have  resembled  what  I  saw.  My  niece  has
more  than  once  assured  me  positively  "  that  she  at  no  other  time  has  ever  had
any  hallucination  of  the  senses."  I  cannot  recall  ever  having  had  any  hallucina-
tions which  did  not  mean  anything,  or  rather,  which  have  not  come  true, — if  I
except  [a  vision  which  may  or  may  not  have  corresponded  to  reality,  but  which
cannot  at  present  be  tested].


326                                  APPENDICES                             [716  A
716  A.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  25.     Mrs.  P.  writes :

June  gth,  1885.

Our  mother  died  while  we  were  all  very  young ;  and  as  I,  the  fourth  child
of  seven,  was  the  eldest  living  daughter,  I  became  early  acquainted  (from  my
eighth  year)  with  sorrow  of  various  kinds  and  degrees,  principally  caused,  how-
ever, by  the   harshness  and  frequent  neglect  of    housekeeper  and  servants   !
towards  my  baby  brother  and  sister.     The  two  eldest  boys — between  whom  and
myself  was  a  gap  of  some  years — were  almost  always  away  from  home,  and
ultimately  went  abroad,  so  that  from  the  time  I  was  quite  a  little  child  I  was
continually  with  my  father,  who  made  much  of  me,  and  at  last  I  became  his    :
constant  companion.     He  never  married  again,  and  our  love  was  probably,
therefore,  a  closer  union  even   than  commonly  exists   between  a  father  and    i
daughter  while  the  latter  is  of  tender  years.     It  was  a  great  pain  to  me  ever  to
be  away  from  him,  especially  after  my  fourteenth  year,  at  which  time  he  began    i
to  make  me  his  confidante  as  well  as  companion ;  and  we  had  frequent  earnest
talks  and  discussions  on  many  subjects.     At  length,  when  I  was  about  eighteen
years  old,  a  terrible  grief  befell  us,  viz.,  the  death  of  my  two  elder  brothers
within  a  few  weeks  of  each  other,  while  they  were  still  abroad.

My  father's  sorrow  was  great ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  became  seriously
troubled  with  many  doubts  regarding  various  points  of  Christian  faith,  and  so
gradually  lost  nearly  all  his  buoyancy  of  spirit,  and  became  sadly  depressed  and
worn-looking,  though  only  forty-eight  years  old.  For  a  year  he  thus  suffered,  \
when  it  was  arranged  that,  so  soon  as  he  could  plan  to  leave  home,  he  should
go  to  some  seaside  place,  and  try  what  new  scenes  would  effect.  He  also  per-
suaded— nay,  insisted — that  I  should  go  away  for  awhile,  without  waiting  for
him,  and  accompany  some  friends  to  South  Devonshire.

The  writer  then  narrates  how  a  sudden  summons  brought  her  back  to
find  her  father  dead.

I  went  early  to  bed,  to  escape  the  presence  and  sympathetic  ministrations
of  the  many  in  that  kind  household  who  gathered  around  me  ;  and  by  my  own
choice  I  shared  the  room  of  a  motherly-looking  personage,  whom  I  supposed  to  i
be  my  cousin's  nurse.  She  occupied  the  larger  bed  in  the  room,  and  I  a  smaller
one  placed  at  some  distance  from  hers.  She  was  soon  asleep  and  breathing
heavily  ;  but  I  was  lying  in  deepest  anguish,  beset  not  only  with  the  grief  of
the  sudden  loss  sustained,  but  with  the  wretched  fear  that  my  beloved  father
had  died  too  suddenly  to  find  peace  with  God,  regarding  those  miserable  doubts
that  had  so  troubled  him.  As  the  night  wore  on,  the  pain  of  heart  and  thought
grew  worse  and  worse,  and  at  length  I  knelt  in  prayer,  earnestly  pleading  that
my  distressful  thoughts  might  be  taken  away,  and  an  assurance  of  my  father's
peace  be  given  me  by  God's  Most  Holy  Spirit.  No  immediate  relief  came,
however,  and  it  was  early  dawn  when  I  rose  from  my  knees,  and  felt  that  I  must
be  patient  and  wait  for  the  answer  of  my  prayer.

Now  a  longing  suddenly  seized  me  to  creep  into  that  kind-faced  woman's
bed,  and  to  feel  perhaps  less  lonely  there.  Her  bed  was  opposite  a  window,
over  which  a  white  blind  was  drawn,  and  as  I  softly  lifted  the  bedclothes  and
sat  for  a  moment  after  drawing  my  feet  up  into  the  bed,  I  noticed  the  pale  dawn
feebly  lighting  up  the  window,  and  the  movement  of  a  little  bird  on  the  sill  out-
side ;  but  the  room  itself  was  as  yet  almost  dark.


716A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  327

I  was  just  about  to  slip  quietly  down  into  the  bed,  when  on  the  opposite
side  of  it  (that  on  which  the  nurse  was  sleeping)  the  room  became  suddenly
full  of  beautiful  light,  in  the  midst  of  which  stood  my  father  absolutely  trans-
figured, clothed  with  brightness.  He  slowly  moved  towards  the  bed,  raising  his
hands,  as  I  thought,  to  clasp  me  in  his  arms;  and  I  ejaculated:  "Father!"
He  replied,  "  Blessed  for  ever,  my  child  !  For  ever  blessed  ! "  I  moved  to
climb  over  nurse  and  kiss  him,  reaching  out  my  arms  to  him  ;  but  with  a  look
of  mingled  sadness  and  love  he  appeared  to  float  back  with  the  light  towards
the  wall  and  was  gone  !  The  vision  occupied  so  short  a  time  that,  glancing
involuntarily  at  the  window  again,  I  saw  the  morning  dawn  and  the  little  bird
just  as  they  had  looked  a  few  minutes  before.  I  felt  sure  that  God  had  vouch-
safed to  me  a  wonderful  vision,  and  was  not  in  the  least  afraid,  but,  on  the
contrary,  full  of  a  joy  that  brought  floods  of  grateful  tears,  and  completely
removed  all  anguish  except  that  of  having  lost  my  father  from  earth.  I  offer  no
explanation,  and  can  only  say  most  simply  and  truthfully  that  it  all  happened
just  as  I  have  related.

You  may  find  a  solution  to  the  occurrence  in  the  sympathy  which  had
existed  between  my  dear  father  and  myself  ;  or,  as  friends  have  often  insisted,
in  the  condition  of  excitement  and  exhaustion  which  I  was  suffering  at  the  time  ;
but  after  all  these  years  of  life  and  experience,  the  memory  of  that  wonderful
morning  is  ever  vividly  fresh,  and  real,  and  true.

The  writer's  husband  adds,  under  date  June  lyth,  1885  : —

The  narrative,  as  related  above,  is  substantially  the  same  given  to  me  by
Mrs.  P.  as  early  as  1865,  and  at  subsequent  periods.  W.  B.  P.

And  Dr.  and  Mrs.  C.,  referred  to  above,  write,  June  i6th,  1885  : —

The  preceding  narrative  was  related  to  us  by  Mrs.  P.,  substantially  as  here
recorded,  some  four  or  five  years  ago.  JAMES  C.

ELLEN  H.  C.

Now  comes  the  case  which  has  evidential  importance.

In  the  year  1867  I  was  married,  and  my  husband  took  a  house  at  S ,

quite  a  new  one,  just  built  in  what  was,  and  still  is  probably,  called  "  Cliff
Town,"  as  being  at  a  greater  elevation  than  the  older  part  of  the  town.  Our  life
was  exceedingly  bright  and  happy  there  until  towards  the  end  of  1869,  when
my  husband's  health  appeared  to  be  failing,  and  he  grew  dejected  and  moody.
Trying  in  vain  to  ascertain  the  cause  for  this,  and  being  repeatedly  assured  by
him  that  I  was  "too  fanciful,"  and  that  there  was  "nothing  the  matter  with
him,"  I  ceased  to  vex  him  with  questions,  and  the  time  passed  quietly  away  till
Christmas  Eve  of  that  year  (1869).

An  uncle  and  aunt  lived  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  they  invited  us  to  spend
Christmas  Day  with  them — to  go  quite  early  in  the  morning  to  breakfast,
accompanied  by  the  whole  of  our  small  household.

We  arranged  therefore  to  go  to  bed  at  an  early  hour  on  the  night  of  the  24th,
so  as  to  be  up  betimes  for  our  morning  walk.  Consequently  at  9  o'clock,  we
went  upstairs,  having  as  usual  carefully  attended  to  bars  and  bolts  of  doors,
and  at  about  9.30  were  ready  to  extinguish  the  lamp;  but  our  little  girl — a
baby  of  fifteen  months — generally  woke  up  at  that  time,  and  after  drinking  some


328  APPENDICES  [716  A

warm  milk  would  sleep  again  for  the  rest  of  the  night;  and,  as  she  had  not
yet  awakened,  I  begged  my  husband  to  leave  the  lamp  burning  and  get  into
bed,  while  I,  wrapped  in  a  dressing-gown,  lay  on  the  outside  of  the  bed  with
the  cot  on  my  right  hand.  The  bedstead  faced  the  fireplace,  and  nothing  stood
between  but  a  settee  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.  On  either  side  of  the  chimney  was
a  large  recess, — the  one  to  the  left  (as  we  faced  in  that  direction)  having  a  chest
of  drawers,  on  which  the  lamp  was  standing.  The  entrance  door  was  on  the
same  side  of  the  room  as  the  head  of  the  bed  and  to  the  left  of  it — facing,  there-
fore, the  recess  of  which  I  speak.  The  door  was  locked ;  and  on  that  same
side  (to  my  left)  my  husband  was  lying,  with  the  curtain  drawn,  towards  which
his  face  was  turned.

[Plan  of  room  given,  omitted  here.]

As  the  bed  had  curtains  only  at  the  head,  all  before  us  was  open  and  dimly-
lighted,  the  lamp  being  turned  down.

This  takes  some  time  to  describe,  but  it  was  still  just  about  9.30,  Gertrude
not  yet  awake,  and  I  just  pulling  myself  into  a  half-sitting  posture  against  the
pillows,  thinking  of  nothing  but  the  arrangements  for  the  following  day,  when
to  my  great  astonishment  I  saw  a  gentleman  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,
dressed  as  a  naval  officer,  and  with  a  cap  on  his  head  having  a  projecting  peak.
The  light  being  in  the  position  which  I  have  indicated,  the  face  was  in  shadow
to  me,  and  the  more  so  that  the  visitor  was  leaning  upon  his  arms  which  rested
on  the  foot-rail  of  the  bedstead.  I  was  too  astonished  to  be  afraid,  but  simply
wondered  who  it  could  be;  and,  instantly  touching  my  husband's  shoulder
(whose  face  was  turned  from  me),  I  said,  "  Willie,  who  is  this?"  My  husband
turned,  and  for  a  second  or  two  lay  looking  in  intense  astonishment  at  the
intruder ;  then  lifting  himself  a  little,  he  shouted  "  What  on  earth  are  you  doing
here,  sir  ?  "  Meanwhile  the  form,  slowly  drawing  himself  into  an  upright  posi-
tion, now  said  in  a  commanding,  yet  reproachful  voice,  "  Willie !  Willie  !  "

I  looked  at  my  husband  and  saw  that  his  face  was  white  and  agitated.  As
I  turned  towards  him  he  sprang  out  of  bed  as  though  to  attack  the  man,  but
stood  by  the  bedside  as  if  afraid,  or  in  great  perplexity,  while  the  figure  calmly
and  slowly  moved  towards  the  wall  at  right  angles  with  the  lamp  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  dotted  line  [shown  in  the  plan].  As  it  passed  the  lamp,  a  deep
shadow  fell  upon  the  room  as  of  a  material  person  shutting  out  the  light  from
us  by  his  intervening  body,  and  he  disappeared,  as  it  were,  into  the  wall.
My  husband  now,  in  a  very  agitated  manner,  caught  up  the  lamp,  and  turning
to  me  said,  "  I  mean  to  look  all  over  the  house,  and  see  where  he  is  gone."

I  was  by  this  time  exceedingly  agitated  too,  but  remembering  that  the  door
was  locked,  and  that  the  mysterious  visitor  had  not  gone  towards  it  at  all,
remarked,  "  He  has  not  gone  out  by  the  door ! "  But  without  pausing,  my
husband  unlocked  the  door,  hastened  out  of  the  room,  and  was  soon  searching
the  whole  house.  Sitting  there  in  the  dark,  I  thought  to  myself,  "We  have
surely  seen  an  apparition  !  Whatever  can  it  indicate  ? — perhaps  my  brother
Arthur  (he  was  in  the  navy,  and  at  that  time  on  a  voyage  to  India)  is  in  trouble :
such  things  have  been  told  of  as  occurring."  In  some  such  way  I  pondered
with  an  anxious  heart,  holding  the  child,  who  just  then  awakened,  in  my  arms,
until  my  husband  came  back  looking  very  white  and  miserable.

Sitting  upon  the  bedside,  he  put  his  arm  about  me  and  said,  "  Do  you  know
what  we  have  seen  ?  "  And  I  said,  "  Yes,  it  was  a  spirit.  I  am  afraid  it  was


716B]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  329

Arthur,  but  could  not  see  his  face  "—and  he  exclaimed,  "  Oh !  no,  it  was  my
father!"

My  husband's  father  had  been  dead  fourteen  years :  he  had  been  a  naval
officer  in  his  young  life ;  but,  through  ill-health,  had  left  the  service  before  my
husband  was  born,  and  the  latter  had  only  once  or  twice  seen  him  in  uniform,
/had  never  seen  him  at  all.  My  husband  and  I  related  the  occurrence  to  my
uncle  and  aunt,  and  we  all  noticed  that  my  husband's  agitation  and  anxiety
were  very  great:  whereas  his  usual  manner  was  calm  and  reserved  in  the
extreme,  and  he  was  a  thorough  and  avowed  sceptic  in  all— so-called — super-
natural events.

As  the  weeks  passed  on  my  husband  became  very  ill,  and  then  gradually
disclosed  to  me  that  he  had  been  in  great  financial  difficulties  ;  and  that,  at
the  time  his  father  was  thus  sent  to  us,  he  was  inclining  to  take  the  advice
of  a  man  who  would  certainly — had  my  husband  yielded  to  him  (as  he  had
intended  before  hearing  the  warning  voice) — have  led  him  to  ruin,  perhaps
worse.  It  is  this  fact  which  makes  us  most  reticent  in  speaking  of  the  event ;
in  addition  to  which,  my  husband  had  already  been  led  to  speculate  upon
certain  chances  which  resulted  in  failure  and  infinite  sorrow  to  us  both,  as

well  as  to  others,  and  was  indeed  the  cause  of  our  coming  to ,  after  a  year

of  much  trouble,  in  the  January  of  1871.

None  of  us  were  particularly  ready  to  believe  in  such  evidences,  notwith-
standing my  experience  at  my  father's  death,  because  we  had  regarded  that  as
a  special  answer  to  prayer  ;  so  that  no  condition  of  "  over-wrought  nerves,"  or
"superstitious  fears,"  could  have  been  the  cause  of  the  manifestation,  but  only,
so  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  judge  by  subsequent  events,  a  direct  warning
to  my  husband  in  the  voice  and  appearance  of  the  one  that  he  had  most
reverenced  in  all  his  life,  and  was  the  most  likely  to  obey.

Dr.  and  Mrs.  C.,  friends  of  Mrs.  and  Mr.  P.,  add  the  following  note  : —

June  i6th,  1885.
This  narrative  was  told  us  by  Mrs.  P.,  as  here  recorded,  some  years  ago.

J.  C.

ELLEN  H.  C.
Mr.  P.  confirms  as  follows,  June  iyth,  1885  : —

Without  wishing  to  add  more  to  the  incidents  recorded  herein  by  my  wife,
I  would  simply  note  that  the  details  of  No.  2  are  quite  correct,  and  that  the
occurrence  took  place  as  stated.  ...  W.  B.  P.

716  B.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  236.  In  the  narrative
next  to  be  cited,  there  is  a  record  of  prolonged  speech,  but  in  such  cases,
especially  when  few  or  no  actual  words  are  quoted,  we  can  hardly  be  sure
as  to  the  degree  of  externalisation  which  the  voice  assumes.  The  appari-
tion here  seems  to  have  at  least  comprehended  the  percipient's  inward
situation,  although  it  is  not  clear  that  any  prediction  requiring  super-
normal insight  was  actually  made.  I  owe  the  narrative  to  the  kindness  of
Mr.  Morell  Theobald,  who  printed  it  first  in  Light  for  March  5th,  1892.
It  is  written  on  an  old  piece  of  paper  (sent  to  me)  and  marked  "For  Mr.
B.'s  private  perusal."  The  history  of  the  paper  is  as  follows  : — A  Mr.  C.


330  APPENDICES  [716  B

(I  must  not  give  the  names),  well  known  to  Mr.  Theobald,  and  holding  a
good  position  in  one  of  the  Australian  colonies,  discovered  it  among  the
private  papers  of  his  uncle,  Mr.  B.,  who  died  twelve  years  ago.  The
apparition,  as  will  be  seen,  occurred  on  October  24th,  1860,  and  the
account  is  endorsed  on  November  Qth  by  the  percipient's  father.  Further
particulars,  sent  to  Mr.  B.  by  the  percipient  (who  is  here  called  Mr.  D.)
are  dated  November  i3th,  1860.  The  first  account  seems  to  have  been
sent  by  the  percipient  to  his  father,  and  by  the  father  to  Mr.  B.

The  percipient  has  been  identified,  and  confirms,  as  will  be  seen,  this
early  narrative,  which  is  as  follows  : —

On  the  evening  of  Wednesday,  October  24th,  1860,  having  retired  to  bed
about  nine  o'clock,  I  had  slept,  I  conclude,  about  two  hours,  making  it  then
about  eleven  o'clock  P.M.  I  was  awoke  from  my  sleep  by  a  hand  touching  my
forehead,  and  the  well-known  voice  of  Mrs.  B.  pronouncing  my  name,  E.  I
started  up,  and  sat  in  bed,  rubbed  my  eyes,  and  then  saw  Mrs.  B.  From  the
head  to  the  waist  the  figure  was  distinct,  clear,  and  well-defined  :  but  from  the
waist  downwards  it  was  all  misty  and  the  lower  part  transparent.  She  appeared
to  be  dressed  in  black  silk.  Her  countenance  was  grave  and  rather  sad,  but
not  unhappy.

The  words  she  first  uttered  were  :  "  I  have  left  dear  John ; "  what  followed
related  entirely  to  myself,  and  she  was  permitted  by  a  most  kind  Providence  to
speak  words  of  mercy,  promise,  and  comfort,  and  assurance  that  what  I  most
wished  would  come  to  pass.  She  came  to  me  in  an  hour  of  bitter  mental
agony,  and  was  sent  as  a  messenger  of  mercy.

I  would  have  spoken  more  to  her,  but  the  form  faded,  and  in  answer  to  an
earnest  appeal,  a  voice  came  to  me  which,  though  apparently  hundreds  of  miles
away,  was  distinct  and  clear,  saying,  "  Only  believe,"  and  she  was  gone.

Throughout  the  interview  I  felt  no  fear,  but  an  inward,  heavenly  peace.  It
was  new  moon,  but  the  room  was  as  light  as  day !

Our  next  information  consists  of  a  statement  of  Mr.  D.'s,  written  in
reply  to  Mr.  B.'s  questions,  November  i3th,  1860,  found  (in  Mr.  B.'s
handwriting)  among  Mr.  B.'s  papers,  and  now  summarised  for  us  by
Mr.  C.

Mr.  D.  had  been  asleep,  but  could  not  say  how  long.  Had  not  seen  Mrs.  B.
for  several  months.  Can't  recollect  what  dress  she  had  on  then.  Was  not
in  bad  health.  Was  alone  in  the  house.  The  subject  of  his  anxiety  was  not
known  to  Mrs.  B.  nor  connected  with  her.  The  apparition  seemed  to  wait  for
questions,  and  when  put  they  were  answered.  The  subject  of  the  communica-
tion was  one  greatly  influencing  his  thoughts  and  feelings,  and  had  been  deeply
agitating  him  before  he  went  to  bed.  It  was  not  a  religious  matter;  but
Scriptural  language  was  used;  Mark  xi.  23,  24  were  quoted — a  passage  well
known  to  the  writer,  and  often  dwelt  upon  by  him.  The  window  faces  north.
The  night  was  wet  and  cloudy.  The  writer  did  not  put  it  down  at  the  time,
believing  it  too  real  ever  to  be  forgotten.  He  had  not  mentioned  it  to  any  one
but  his  father  and  [Mr.]  B.  He  saw  the  notice  of  the  death  for  the  first  time
on  Saturday  in  the  Observer.  Resided  about  ten  miles  from  Gawler,  which  is
twenty-five  miles  from  Adelaide.


716B]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  331

Mr.  C.  has  forwarded  to  us  a  printed  extract  from  the  South  Australian
Register  of  October  25th,  1860,  which  includes  a  notice  of  the  death  of
Mrs.  B.  on  October  24th,  at  Bank  Street,  Adelaide.  The  hour  of  the  death
is  fixed  by  Mr.  C.'s  own  recollection,  depending  on  his  own  fixed  habits
at  the  time.  He  writes  to  Mr.  Theobald  under  date  May  3rd,  1892  : —

I  was  at  that  time  a  clerk  in  my  uncle's  office,  which  was  at  his  house  in
Bank  Street,  Adelaide;  but  was  staying  just  then  at  Glenelly.  I  left  the  office
at  4  P.M.  on  the  23rd  after  saying  good-bye  to  Mrs.  B.,  leaving  her  in  her  usual
state  of  health.  She  was  taken  ill  about  n  P.M.,  and  asked  frequently  for  me,
expressing  a  strong  desire  not  to  die  before  I  arrived ;  but  when  I  got  to  the
house  at  the  usual  time,  about  10  A.M.  next  morning,  I  was  met  with  the  news
that  she  had  been  dead  about  two  hours.

The  death,  therefore,  had  taken  place  more  than  twelve  hours  before
the  apparition  was  seen.

Mr.  D.  makes  a  slight  mistake  in  his  original  account,  in  saying  that  it
was  new  moon,  whereas  the  moon  was  then  ten  days  old.  But  as  it  was  a
cloudy  night,  and  his  window  faced  north,  the  light  by  which  the  figure
was  seen  was  doubtless,  as  in  so  many  of  these  cases,  itself  a  part  of  the
apparition.

At  Mr.  Theobald's  request  Mr.  C.  communicated  with  Mr.  D.,  who  is
still  living ;  and  we  have  therefore  the  opportunity  of  comparing  a  thirty
years'  old  recollection  with  the  same  person's  contemporary  statement.
The  comparison  shows  that, — as  I  believe  to  be  often  the  case, — the
memory  of  the  supernormal  incident  had  not  grown,  but  dwindled.

Reminded  in  a  general  way,  but  without  detail,  of  the  occurrence,
Mr.  D.  writes  (in  a  letter  seen  by  me),  April  2ist,  1892  : —

There  was  no  conversation.  She  only  said  to  me,  "  E.,  I  have  left  dear
John."  I  cannot  remember  whether  it  was  wet  or  not ;  but  as  to  the  moon,  it
was  not  at  all  like  that  light.  It  was  more  like  an  electric  light ; — a  subdued
brilliancy.  ..."  How  long  did  the  spirit  remain  in  conversation  with  me  ?  "
Certainly  not  more  than  five  minutes,  if  so  long.  ...  I  sent  the  account  to  my
father,  who  probably  handed  it  to  [Mr.]  B.

Further  reminded  of  his  contemporary  account,  Mr.  D.  writes,  May  ist,
1892  : — "I  appear  to  have  spoken,  but  have  no  distinct  recollection  of
doing  so.  What  she  did  say  was  entirely  personal."  It  related  to  the
removal  of  a  painful  misunderstanding  with  a  friend.  "  So  far  as  I  know
she  had  never  seen,  or  even  heard  of,  the  friend  alluded  to."  Mr.  D.
declines  to  give  further  detail ;  but  he  still  considers  that  the  communica-
tion showed  "  a  plenary  knowledge  "  of  facts  personal  to  himself.  His
hesitation  of  memory  seems  to  have  been  on  the  point  whether  the  hope
and  consolation  were  conveyed  by  spoken  words,  or  in  some  directer
fashion.  The  confidence  inspired  by  the  message  was,  he  tells  us,  justified
by  the  result.  The  supposed  conversation  in  this  case  may  have  been
more  dream-like  than  the  percipient  imagined.  It  may  have  taken  place,
so  to  say,  in  his  own  mind,  without  definite  auditory  externalisation.


332  APPENDICES

716  C.     From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  10.     The  four  incid<
which  follow  were  written  out  for  me  in  1888  by  a  lady  whom  I  will  tei
Mrs.  V.,  who  has  had  other  experiences   somewhat   similar,   which,  fc
private  reasons,  she  does  not  wish  to  give.     I  am  well  acquainted  wit
Mrs.  V.,  and  with  her  husband,  who  has  held  an  important  position  ir
India.

I.  In  1874  I  was  in  India,  at  a  hill  station.     On  the  yth  June,  between
and  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I  woke  with  the  sensation  that  half  my  11
had  been  taken  from  me  (I  can  only  describe  the  feeling  in  this  vague  way)
I  sat  up  and  pressed  my  side  in  wonder  at  what  was  happening.     I  then  sa
most  beautiful  lights  at  the  end  of  the  room  ;  these  lights  gave  place  to  a  cloud,
and  after  a  few  moments  the  face  of  a  dear  sister,  then  living  (as  I  believed),
appeared  in  the  cloud,  which  remained  a  little  while  and  then  gradually  faded;
away.     I  became  much  alarmed  and  at  once  felt  I  should  hear  bad  news  of  my
sister,  who  was  living  in  London  and  had  been  very  ill,  though  the  last  accounts
we  had  received  had  been  better.     I  told  my  husband  what  had  happened,  and  \
when  a  telegram  was  brought  by  a  friend  at  eight  o'clock  that  morning  I  knewj
what  its  contents  must  be.     The  telegram  contained  the  news  of  my  sister's
death  during  the  previous  night.

II.  In   1885   I  was  present  in  church  at  the  confirmation  of  my  sister's!
youngest  boy.     I  was  in  the  left-hand  gallery  of  the  church,  the  boy  in  the !
body  of  the  church,  on  the  right  side.     As  I  was  kneeling,  I  looked  towards  •
the  opposite  gallery,  which  was  of  dark  wood.     There  I  saw  the  half  figure  of
my  sister;  the  head  and  arms  outstretched  high  above  the  boy,  as  if  blessing  ;
him.     For  the  moment  I  thought  it  was  impossible,  and  closed  my  eyes  for  a
few  seconds.     Opening  them   again   I  saw  the  same   beautiful  form,  which  |
almost  immediately  vanished.

III.  In  India,  in  the  winter  of  1881,  the  husband  of  an  acquaintance  was
lying  dangerously  ill  at  a  hotel  about  five  miles  from  us.     Knowing  this,  I  j
went  frequently  to  inquire  after  him.     One  particular  evening  I  remained  with
his  wife  some  time,  as  the  doctor  thought  his  condition  most  critical.     When  I
returned  home,  about  ten  o'clock  that  night,  I  ordered  beef  essences  and  jellies
to  be  made  to  send  early  the  next  morning.

The  night  was  perfectly  calm  and  sultry,  not  a  leaf  stirring.  About  twelve
o'clock  the  Venetians  in  my  bedroom  suddenly  began  to  shake  and  knockings
were  heard,  which  seemed  to  proceed  from  a  box  under  my  writing-table.  The
knocking  and  shaking  of  the  Venetians  went  on  for  half-an-hour  or  more,  off
and  on.

During  this  time  I  heard  a  name  whispered,  A B ,  of  which  the

Christian  name  was  unknown  to  me,  the  surname  being  the  maiden  name  of
the  sick  man's  wife.  I  felt  so  certain  that  I  was  wanted  at  the  hotel  that  I
wished  to  start  at  once,  but  I  was  advised  not  to  do  so  at  that  hour  of  the
night.  Early  the  next  morning  a  messenger  arrived  with  a  note  begging  me
to  go  at  once  to  the  hotel,  as  my  friend's  husband  had  died  at  one  o'clock.
When  I  reached  the  hotel,  she  told  me  how  she  had  wished  to  send  for  me
during  the  night  whilst  his  death  was  impending.  I  went  at  once  to  stay  with
her  till  after  the  funeral,  and  found  that  the  Christian  name  I  had  heard
whispered  was  the  name  of  her  brother  who  had  died  seven  years  previously.

IV.  In  1884  we  were  staying  in  a  villa  in  the  south  of  France.     One  night,


•717  A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  333

soon  after  we  arrived,  I  went  from  my  room  upstairs  to  fetch  something  in  the
drawing-room  (which  was  on  the  ground  floor),  and  saw  a  slight  figure  going
down  the  stairs  before  me  in  a  white  garb  with  a  blue  sash  and  long  golden
hair.  She  glided  on  into  a  room  near  the  hall  door.  This  startled  and  im-
pressed me  so  much  that  I  afterwards  went  to  the  house-agent  and  asked  if
any  one  had  lately  died  in  that  house  with  long  golden  hair.  He  replied  that
an  American  lady,  young  and  slight,  with  golden  hair,  had  died  there  a  few
months  before — in  the  very  room  into  which  I  had  seen  the  figure  gliding.

I  talked  over  the  cases  with  Mr.  V.,  and  noted  his  remarks.

In  Case  I.  he  remembers  being  told  in  the  morning  of  Mrs.  V.'s  vision,
though  at  this  distance  of  time  he  cannot  state  whether  the  telegram
announcing  the  death  had  arrived  before  he  was  told.

In  Case  II.  he  was  told  at  once  of  the  incident.

On  Case  III.  he  has  made  and  signed  the  following  remarks : —

This  noise  resembled  the  shaking  of  the  lid  of  the  tin  box.  I  got  up  and
went  to  the  box,  which  continued  making  the  noise,  to  see  if  there  were  rats,
but  there  were  none.  There  were  no  rats  in  the  house,  and  there  was  nothing
i  in  the  box.  A  night-light  was  burning  in  the  room.  The  rattling  was  con-
tinuous— not  like  what  a  rat  could  produce.  It  went  on  again  after  I  had  in-
vestigated it  in  vain.  This  incident  was  unique  in  my  experience.

Mrs.  V.  added  in  conversation  :  "  The  Christian  name  whispered  was
Henry.  This  brother  was  not  an  Indian  official,  and  I  had  never  heard  of
him."  Mrs.  V.'s  acquaintance  with  the  lady  whose  husband  was  dying
was  not  an  intimate  one.

In  Case  IV.  Mr.  V.  again  informs  me  that  he  was  told  at  once  of  the
incident.  The  name  of  the  villa  was  La  Baronne,  of  the  house-agent,
Mr.  Taylor.

717  A.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  20.  The  following  account
was  received  from  Miss  Pearson,  15  Fitzroy  Square,  London,  W.C.

April  1888.

The  house,  19  St.  James's  Place,  Green  Park,  had  been  taken  on  a  very
long  lease  by  my  grandfather,  a  solicitor,  in  large  county  practice,  having  his
offices  in  Essex  Street,  Strand.  There  my  father  was  born  and  his  two  sisters,
Ann  and  Harriet.  Aunt  Ann  died  in  1858,  leaving  all  she  possessed  to  Aunt
Harriet,  who  remained  in  the  house.  They  had  been  devotedly  attached  to
each  other.  In  November  1864  I  was  summoned  to  Brighton.  My  Aunt
Harriet  was  then  very  ill  there.  Mrs.  Coppinger,  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Thomas
Pearson,  my  father's  brother,  was  there,  and  her  son,  Mr.  George  James,  by
her  first  husband,  came  up  and  down.  Eliza  Quinton  was  nursing  her.  She
only  craved  to  go  back  to  the  old  house  where  she  was  born,  and  I  made
arrangements  with  the  railway  company  and  took  her  home.

This  was  in  the  second  week  in  December.  She  became  worse  and  worse.
Eliza  continued  to  nurse  her,  and  Mrs.  Coppinger,  Mrs.  John  Pearson,  the
wife  of  a  nephew,  and  myself  helped  with  the  night  work.

Miss  Harriet  Pearson  slept  in  a  large  three-windowed  bedroom  over  the
drawing-room.  The  room  behind  was  occupied  by  Mrs.  Coppinger  and  myself,


334  APPENDICES  [717  B

though  one  of  us  was  generally  in  the  patient's  room  at  night.  On  the  night
of  December  22nd,  1864,  Mrs.  John  Pearson  was  in  the  room,  Mrs.  Coppinger
and  myself  in  the  back  room ;  the  house  lighted  up  on  the  landings  and  stair-
cases, our  door  wide  open.

About  i  or  2  A.M.  on  the  morning  of  December  2$rd,  both  Mrs.  Coppinger
and  myself  started  up  in  bed ;  we  were  neither  of  us  sleeping,  as  we  were
watching  every  sound  from  the  next  room.

We  saw  some  one  pass  the  door,  short,  wrapped  up  in  an  old  shawl,  a  wig
with  three  curls  each  side  and  an  old  black  cap.  Mrs.  Coppinger  called  out,
"  Emma,  get  up,  it  is  old  Aunt  Ann."  I  said,  "  So  it  is,  then  Aunt  Harriet  will
die  to-day."  We  jumped  up,  and  Mrs.  John  Pearson  came  rushing  out  of  the
room  and  said,  "  That  was  old  Aunt  Ann.  Where  is  she  gone  to?  "  I  said  to
soothe  her,  "  Perhaps  it  was  Eliza  come  down  to  see  how  her  mistress  is."
Mrs.  Coppinger  ran  upstairs  and  found  Eliza  sleeping  in  the  servants'  room.
She  was  very  awe-struck  but  calm,  dressed  and  came  down.  Every  room  was
searched,  no  one  was  there,  and  from  that  day  to  this  no  explanation  has  ever
been  given  of  this  appearance,  except  that  it  was  old  Aunt  Ann  come  to  call  her
sister,  and  she  died  at  6  P.M.  that  day.  EMMA  M.  PEARSON.

The  housekeeper,  who  is  still  with  Miss  Pearson,  writes  as  follows :— -

April  yd,  1888.

I  was  living  with  Miss  Ann  and  Miss  Harriet  Pearson,  in  19  St.  James's
Place.  After  the  death  of  Miss  Ann  I  remained  with  her  sister,  and  when  she
became  very  ill  and  was  ordered  change  of  air,  I  went  with  her  as  nurse  to
Brighton.  Mrs.  Coppinger  was  there  and  Mr.  George  James  now  and  then.
Miss  Emma  Pearson  was  sent  for  and  came  down.  She  brought  her  aunt  back
to  London.  I  continued  to  nurse  her.  I  remember  on  the  early  morning  of
December  2$rd  being  called  up  by  Mrs.  Coppinger,  who  said  that  she,  Miss
Emma,  and  Mrs.  John  Pearson  had  seen  some  one  come  upstairs  and  pass
into  the  patient's  room.  Was  it  I  ?  I  said,  no.  Mrs.  Coppinger  said,  "  They
said  it  was  old  Aunt  Ann."  We  searched  the  house  and  could  find  no  one.
Miss  Harriet  died  in  the  evening  of  that  day,  but  before  that  told  all  of  us  that
she  had  seen  her  sister  and  knew  it  was  her,  and  she  had  come  to  call  her.

ELIZA  QUINTON.

In  a  separate  letter  of  the  same  date  Miss  Pearson  adds  : —

I  now  remember  my  aunt  saying  "  her  sister  had  come  for  her,  for  she  had
seen  her."

717  B.  In  the  following  case,  a  child,  while  apparently  quite  well,  feels
the  impression  of  approaching  death,  and  ascribes  it  to  his  dead  brother's
call.  (From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  429.)

This  case  was  first  printed  in  the  Religio- Philosophical  Journal,  May  5th,
1894.  Mr.  B.  B.  Kingsbury,  who  contributed  it,  states  that  the  informant
is  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  and  her  husband  has  confirmed
her  as  to  the  statement  of  voices  heard  by  the  little  boy  calling  him..
Mr.  Kingsbury  adds  that  both  are  worthy  of  the  highest  credit.  The
father  is  somewhat  of  a  "sensitive"  and  the  mother  has  had  two  or  three


717  B]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  335

clairvoyant  experiences  herself.     The  statement  just  as  it  was  given  by  the
mother  runs  as  follows  : —

Is  there  a  life  beyond  the  grave?  Had  I  ever  doubted  that  there  is  a  life
beyond  (which  I  never  for  a  moment  did),  my  doubt  would  have  been  removed
by  what  I  call  a  vision.  In  1883  I  was  the  mother  of  two  strong  healthy  boys.
The  eldest  was  a  bright  boy  of  two  years  and  seven  months.  The  other,  a
darling  baby  boy  of  eight  months.  August  6th,  1883,  my  baby  died.  Ray,
my  little  son,  was  then  in  perfect  health.  Every  day  after  baby's  death  (and  I
may  safely  say  every  hour  in  the  day)  he  would  say  to  me,  "  Mamma,  baby
calls  Ray."  He  would  often  leave  his  play  and  come  running  to  me,  saying,
"Mamma,  baby  calls  Ray  all  the  time."  Every  night  he  would  waken  me  out
of  my  sleep,  and  say,  "  Mamma,  baby  calls  Ray  all  the  time.  He  wants  Ray  to
come  where  he  is  ;  you  must  not  cry  when  Ray  goes,  mamma,  you  must  not
cry,  for  baby  wants  Ray."  One  day  I  was  sweeping  the  sitting-room  floor,  and
he  came  running  as  fast  as  he  could  run,  through  the  dining-room  where  stood
the  table  with  baby's  high  chair  (which  Ray  now  used)  at  the  side.  I  never  saw
him  so  excited,  and  he  grabbed  my  dress  and  pulled  me  to  the  dining-room
door,  jerked  it  open,  saying,  "Oh,  mamma,  mamma,  come  quick;  baby  is
sitting  in  his  high  chair."  As  soon  as  he  opened  the  door  and  looked  at  the
chair  he  said,  "  Oh,  mamma,  why  didn't  you  hurry ;  now  he's  gone ;  he  laughed
at  Ray  when  he  passed  the  chair;  oh,  he  laughed  at  Ray  so  nice.  Ray  is
going  with  baby,  but  you  must  not  cry,  mamma."  Ray  soon  became  very  sick.
Nursing  and  medicine  were  of  no  avail.  He  died  October  i3th,  1883,  two
months  and  seven  days  after  baby's  death.  He  was  a  child  of  high  intelligence
and  matured  far  beyond  his  years.  Whether  it  is  possible  for  the  dead  to
return,  and  whether  my  baby  came  back  and  was  seen  by  his  little  brother  or
not,  we  leave  for  others  to  judge.

In  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  inquiries,  Mrs.  H.  wrote  : —

DEFIANCE,  OHIO,  December  iifh,  1894.

In  reply  will  say  that  Mr.  Kingsbury's  account  in  the  Religio-Philosophical
Journal  for  May  5th  last  of  my  little  boy's  clairvoyance  shortly  before  his  death
is  correct  in  every  detail.  When  the  child  ran  to  me  telling  me  the  baby  was
sitting  in  his  chair  at  the  table,  there  was  no  one  in  the  house  but  the  servant
girl,  little  Ray,  and  myself.  I  told  the  girl  nothing  about  it  and  she  did  not
hear  the  child;  but  as  soon  as  my  husband  came  to  dinner  I  told  him.  After
that  we  talked  freely  of  the  matter  to  several  of  our  friends.  Little  Ray  knew
nothing  of  death,  we  had  never  spoken  of  it  to  him  in  any  way;  the  last  time
i  took  him  to  the  baby's  grave  shortly  before  he  was  taken  sick  we  were  sitting
by  the  grave,  and  I  thought,  "  Oh !  if  I  could  only  take  baby  up  and  look  at  it
for  just  one  minute,  I  would  feel  so  glad."  Instantly  Ray  said  to  me,  "  Mamma,
let  us  take  baby  up  and  look  at  it  just  one  minute;  then  we  will  feel  better."
Just  as  we  were  leaving  the  grave  he  smoothed  it  with  his  little  hand,  and  said,
"  Ray  is  going  to  lie  down  and  sleep  right  here  beside  little  brother,  but  you
must  not  cry,  mamma."  He  is  now  lying  just  where  he  said  he  would.

P>S. — I  wish  to  say  that  I  have  never  known  much  of  what  is  called  modern
Spiritualism,  but  was  born  and  reared  a  Presbyterian  and  still  belong  to  that
Church,  of  which  I  am  an  active  member.  F.  H.


336  APPENDICES  [717  C

Mr.  H.  wrote  as  follows  : —

February  2*/th,  1895.

MR.  R.  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — In  regard  to  B.  B.  Kingsbury's  statement
in  the  Religio-Philosophical  Journal  of  May  5th,  1894,  I  can  truly  say  that  my
wife  related  it  to  me  the  day  it  occurred  when  I  came  to  dinner.  I  frequently
heard  our  little  boy  tell  his  mamma  that  the  baby  called  him  all  the  time. —
Yours  respectfully,  W.  H.  H.

H

The  following  corroboration  was  also  received : —

116  SUMMIT  STREET,  DEFIANCE,  OHIO,  February  27^,  1895.
R.  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR,— I  can  truly  say  that  Mrs.  and  Mr.  H.  often
spoke  to  me  of  Ray  seeing  the  baby  in  the  chair  before  he  took  sick.     They
told  me  the  next  day  after  it  happened.  MRS.  J.  H.  SHULTERS.

717  C.  The  next  case  appeared  originally  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
vol.  ii.  p.  208.  It  came  from  Captain  Cecil  Norton,  late  of  the  5th
Lancers,  who  wrote  as  follows  : —

5  QUEEN'S  GATE,  S.W.,  December  2Oth,  1885.

About  Christmas  time,  1875  or  1876,  being  officer  on  duty,  I  was  seated  at
the  mess-table  of  the  5th  Lancers  in  the  West  Cavalry  Barracks  at  Aldershot.
There  were  ten  or  twelve  other  officers  present,  and  amongst  them  Mr.
John  Atkinson  (now  of  Erchfont  Manor,  near  Devizes,  Wilts),  the  Surgeon-
Major  of  the  regiment,  who  sat  on  my  right,  but  at  the  end  of  the  table
furthest  from  me  and  next  to  Mr.  Russell.  [Captain  Norton  was  sitting  at  the
end  of  the  table  and  directly  facing  the  window.]  At  about  8.45  P.M.  Atkinson
suddenly  glared  at  the  window  to  his  right,  thereby  attracting  the  notice  of
Russell,  who  seizing  his  arm,  said,  "  Good  gracious,  Doctor,  what's  the  matter
with  you  ?  "  This  caused  me  to  look  in  the  direction  in  which  I  saw  Atkinson
looking,  viz.,  at  the  window  opposite,  and  I  there  saw  (for  the  curtains  were
looped  up,  although  the  room  was  lighted  by  a  powerful  central  gas  light  in  the
roof  and  by  candles  on  the  table)  a  young  woman,  in  what  appeared  a  soiled  or
somewhat  worn  bridal  dress,  walk  or  glide  slowly  past  the  window  from  east  to
west.  She  was  about  at  the  centre  of  the  window  when  I  observed  her,  and  out-
side the  window.  No  person  could  have  actually  been  in  the  position  where
she  appeared,  as  the  window  in  question  is  about  30  feet  above  the  ground.

The  nearest  buildings  to  the  window  referred  to  are  the  Infantry  Barracks
opposite,  about  300  yards  distant.  Behind  where  I  sat  is  a  conservatory,  which
was  examined  by  me,  as  well  as  the  front  window,  immediately  after  the  occur-
rence. There  was  no  person  in  the  conservatory.  [It  was  unused  in  the
winter.]  The  nearest  buildings  to  it  are  the  officers'  stables,  over  which  are
the  staff-sergeants'  quarters,  about  50  yards  distant.

The  occurrence  made  little  if  any  impression  upon  me,  though  it  impressed
others  who  were  in  the  room.  All  present  had  been  drinking  very  little  wine ;
and  the  dinner  had  been  very  quiet.

It  has  just  occurred  to  me  that  I  may  be  wrong  as  to  the  time  of  the  year,
and  that  the  occurrence  may  have  taken  place  about  I5th  October  or  about  i5th
March.  CECIL  NORTON.


717C]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  337

Mr.  Atkinson  wrote  : —

ERCHFONT  MANOR,  DEVIZES,  August  $ist,  1885.

The  appearance  of  a  woman  which  I  saw  pass  the  mess-room  window  at
Aldershot  seemed  to  be  outside,  and  it  passed  from  east  to  west.  The  mess-
room  is  on  the  first  floor,  so  the  woman  would  have  been  walking  in  the  air.
There  has  been  a  very  nice  story  made  out  of  it — like  most  other  ghost-stories,
founded  on  an  optical  illusion.

Mr.  Gurney  added  : —

Captain  Norton's  iriva  voce  account  made  it  tolerably  clear,  in  my  opinion,
that  the  case  was  one  of  hallucination,  not  illusion.  He  further  mentions  that
both  Mr.  Atkinson  and  he  were  "  satisfied  that  the  face  and  form  of  the  woman
seen  were  familiar,"  though  they  could  not  at  the  moment  identify  the  person.
Captain  Norton  afterwards  felt  sure  that  the  likeness  was  to  a  photograph
which  he  was  in  the  habit  of  seeing  in  the  room  of  the  veterinary  surgeon  of
the  regiment,  representing  the  surgeon's  deceased  wife  in  bridal  dress.  Oddly
enough,  this  man  was  at  the  time,  unknown  to  his  friends,  actually  dying,  or
within  a  day  or  two  of  death,  in  the  same  building.  But  Mr.  Atkinson  recalls
nothing  about  the  photograph ;  and  the  coincidence  is  not  one  to  which  we  can
attach  weight.

Since  the  publication  of  the  account  in  Phantasms  we  obtained  from
two  of  the  officers  who  were  present  at  the  time  their  recollections  of  the
incident.  The  letters  relating  to  this  were  printed  in  they<?#r##/S.P.R.,
vol.  viii.  p.  76,  from  which  I  proceed  to  quote.  Lieutenant  Beaumont,  in
answer  to  a  written  request  for  his  recollection  of  the  alleged  apparition  in
the  5th  Lancers'  mess-room  at  Aldershot,  writes  : —

HILLSIDE,  BURGESS  HILL,  SUSSEX,  March  iQth,  1897.

I  well  remember  the  incident  you  refer  to,  and  shall  be  pleased  to  tell  you
the  circumstances  as  I  recollect  them.

It  must  have  been  in  1876,  and  in  October,  I  fancy.  It  so  happened  that
on  the  night  in  question  there  were  very  few  officers  present  at  the  mess
dinner — so  far  as  I  can  recollect  only  Norton,  E.  the  veterinary  surgeon,  Dr.
Atkinson  and  myself,  who,  being  orderly  officer,  sat  at  the  end  of  the  table.  It
was,  I  think,  towards  the  close  of  the  dinner,  the  servants  having  retired  and
we  were  smoking  and  chatting,  when  I  was  much  struck  with  the  expression
on  the  faces  of  my  brother  officers,  who  appeared  to  be  gazing  in  amazement
at  something  behind  me.  At  first  I  thought  it  was  some  joke,  but  they  each  of
them  seriously  described  what  they  had  seen,  viz.,  a  figure  of  a  woman  in  white,
who  passed  silently  through  the  room,  coming,  as  it  were,  from  the  ante-room
and  going  behind  me  through  the  door  opposite.  It  was  impossible  to  doubt,
from  their  faces  at  the  time,  that  there  was  something  extraordinary  happening.
I  afterwards  asked  them  seriously  about  it,  and  Surgeon-Major  Atkinson,  who
was  a  long  way  the  senior,  and  a  hard-headed  man,  assured  me  that  he  had
'  certainly  seen  the  apparition,  and  he  seemed  much  impressed.  The  others
were  equally  confident,  and  assured  me  there  was  no  chaff  about  it.  It  was
frequently  alluded  to  afterwards  in  a  joking  way,  but  I  believe  that  all  those
present  thought  it  "uncanny."

VOL.    II.  Y


338  APPENDICES  [717  C

I  must  tell  you  that  none  of  us  had  imbibed  more  than  a  glass  or  two  of
claret,  and  it  was  a  most  exceptionally  quiet  evening  at  mess.

I  think  E.  died  not  long  after.  .  .  .  MONTMORENCY  BEAUMONT.

This  letter  having  been  shown  to  Captain  Norton,  he  wrote  that
Lieutenant  Beaumont  was  mistaken  in  supposing  that  Mr.  E.  was  present
on  the  occasion.  He  also  sent  us  a  sketch  (reproduced  in  the  Journal}  of
the  position  of  the  officers,  which  agrees  with  his  own  earlier  account,  but
not  with  the  present  recollections  of  Lieutenant  Beaumont.  The  dis-
crepancy, however,  is  of  comparatively  slight  importance.

The  second  officer  whose  testimony  has  been  obtained,  Lieutenant-
Colonel  Williams,  writes : —

ROCKFIELDS,  HEREFORD,  March  Wi,  1897.

I  am  afraid  I  can  give  you  very  little  information  on  the  subject ;  it  is  so
many  years  since  the  affair  took  place  that  I  have  nearly  forgotten  all  about  it.
All  that  I  remember  is  that  one  night  when  we  were  a  very  small  party  at  mess,
some  time  during  the  dinner,  I  think  just  before  beginning  dessert,  I  noticed
Dr.  Atkinson  looking  in  rather  a  peculiar  way  at  the  window  at  the  top  of  the ;
room,  and  I  think  my  brother-in-law  [Captain  Norton]  said  to  him  or  he  said  j
to  Captain  Norton,  "  Did  you  see  it  ?  "     There  was  some  little  joking  about  it  at  i
the  time,  and  on  asking  my  brother-in-law  after  dinner  what  he  really  had  seen,  i
he  told  me  that  he  had  seen  a  lady  in  a  white  dress  and  dark  hair  cross  the)
window  on  the  outside.  HUGH  P.  WILLIAMS.

Mrs.  Atkinson,  the  widow  of  Surgeon-Major  Atkinson,  in  answer  to  a
letter  asking  if  her  late  husband  had  ever  spoken  to  her  on  the  sub-
ject of  the  apparition  at  the  mess- table  of  the  5th  Lancers  at  Aldershot,j
writes : —

ERCHFONT  MANOR,  DEVIZES,  March  nth  [1897].

It  is  quite  true  that  my  husband  saw  the  appearance  at  Aldershot  in  1877  ;•
he  often  told  me  about  it.     They  were  in  the  North  Cavalry  Barracks  [  Captain  j
Norton  states  that  there  were  no  North  Cavalry  Barracks  at  Aldershot,  but
that  it  was  in  the  West  Cavalry  Barracks]  at  Aldershot,  and  were  at  mess  in
the  mess-room,  which  is  on  the  first  floor,  a  great  distance  from  the  ground.
There  is  no  balcony  outside  or  even  a  ledge  (I  believe).     My  husband  and
Captain  Norton  were  the  only  two  sitting  facing  the  window,  when  they  sa\v
the  figure  of  a  woman  go  slowly  by.     They  were  much  astonished  and  told  th
others,  and  there  was  much  excitement  about  it.     Shortly  after  the  veterinary
surgeon  died,  and  on  going  through  his  papers  either  my  husband  or  Captair
Norton  found  the  photograph  of  the  woman  they  had  seen  from  the  mess-roon
window.     I  think  they  both  recognised  it.     It  was  not  known  that  the  veterinary
surgeon  was  married.     The  appearance  was  never  in  any  way  explained.

M.  A.  ATKINSON.

A  tablet  in  All  Saints'  Church,  Aldershot,  gives  the  date  of  death  o
Mr.  E.,  veterinary  surgeon,  5th  Lancers,  as  January  3rd,  1876.  Thif
shows  that  the  date  when  the  apparition  was  seen  was  probably  aboui
Christmas  time,  1875,  as  botn  Lieutenant  Beaumont  and  Mrs.  Atkinsoi


718A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  339

confirm  Captain  Norton's  impression  that  the  incident  occurred  shortly
before  Mr.  E.  died.

718  A.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  92.     The  writer  of  the

following  account  is   Colonel ,    a  well-known  Irish  gentleman,  but

we  are  not  allowed  to  publish  his  name.  He  writes  from  Arthur's  on
March  ist,  1885  : —

Some  sixteen  years  since  Mrs. said  to  me,  "  We  have  some  people  staying

here  all  next  week.  Do  you  know  any  person  I  could  get  to  sing  with  the
girls  ?  "  I  suggested  that  my  gunmaker.  Mr.  X.,  had  a  daughter  with  a  fine

voice,  who  was  training  as  a  public  singer,  and  that  if  she,  Mrs. ,  liked  I

would  write  to  X.  and  ask  if  he  would  allow  her  to  come  down  and  spend  a
week  with  us.  On  my  wife's  approval  I  wrote,  and  Miss  X.  came  down  for  a

week,  and  then  left.  As  far  as  I  know,  Mrs. never  saw  her  again.  Shortly

after  I  called  on  X.,  thanked  him  for  allowing  his  daughter  to  come  to  us,  and
said  we  were  all  much  pleased  with  her.  X.  replied  :  "  I  fear  you  have  spoilt
her,  for  she  says  she  never  passed  so  happy  a  week  in  her  life."  Miss  X.  did
not  come  out  as  a  singer,  but  shortly  after  married  Mr.  Z.,  and  none  of  us  ever
saw  her  again.

Six  or  seven  years  passed  away,  and  Mrs. ,  who  had  been  long  ill,  was

dying,  in  fact  she  did  die  the  following  day.  I  was  sitting  at  the  foot  of  her
bed  talking  over  some  business  matters  that  she  was  anxious  to  arrange,  being
perfectly  composed  and  in  thorough  possession  of  her  senses  ;  in  fact  she  was
right,  and  my  solicitor,  who  advised  that  the  step  she  wanted  to  be  taken  was
not  necessary,  was  wrong.  She  changed  the  subject,  and  said,  "  Do  you  hear
those  voices  singing?  "  I  replied  that  I  did  not;  and  she  said,  "  I  have  heard
them  several  times  to-day,  and  I  am  sure  they  are  the  angels  welcoming  me  to
Heaven;  but,"  she  added,  "it  is  strange,  there  is  one  voice  amongst  them  I  am
sure  I  know,  and  cannot  remember  whose  voice  it  is."  Suddenly  she  stopped
and  said,  pointing  straight  over  my  head,  "  Why,  there  she  is  in  the  corner  of
the  room ;  it  is  Julia  X. ;  she  is  coming  on;  she  is  leaning  over  you  ;  she  has
her  hands  up ;  she  is  praying ;  do  look ;  she  is  going."  I  turned  but  could  see

nothing.  Mrs. then  said,  "  She  is  gone."  All  these  things  I  imagined  to

be  the  phantasies  of  a  dying  person.

Two  days  afterwards,  taking  up  the  Times  newspaper,  I  saw  recorded  the
death  of  Julia  Z.,  wife  of  Mr.  Z.  I  was  so  astounded  that  in  a  day  or  so  after

the  funeral  I  went  up  to and  asked  Mr.  X.  if  Mrs.  Z.,  his  daughter,  was

dead.  He  said,  "  Yes,  poor  thing,  she  died  of  puerperal  fever.  On  the  day  she
died  she  began  singing  in  the  morning,  and  sang  and  sang  until  she  died."

Last  year  I  saw  mentioned  that  some  person  or  persons  were  collecting
remarkable  ghost  stories,  and  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Z.  telling  him  shortly  what  I
have  now  written  at  length.  Mr.  Z.'s  answer  was  that  I  had  described  .  .  .
accurately  the  scene  of  his  wife's  death.  .  .  .

Colonel adds  later : —

Mrs.  Z.  died  on  February  2nd  at  six  or  thereabout  in  the  morning,  1874.

Mrs. died,  February  I3th,  1874,  at  about  four  in  the  evening.     I   saw

notice  of  Mrs.  Z.'s  death  on  February  I4th.     Mrs.  never  was  subject  to

hallucinations  of  any  sort.


340  APPENDICES  [718  B

We  received  later  the  following  letter  from  Mr.  Webley,  called  above
"Mr.  Z.":—

84  WENMAN  STREET,  BIRMINGHAM,  May  i8M,  1885.

In  reply  to  your  letter,  I  shall  be  happy  to  give  you  the  information  asked
for.  My  wife  died  on  2nd  February  1884  [1874],  about  5.30  A.M.  The  last
hours  of  her  life  were  spent  in  singing.  I  may  say  notes  came  from  her  within
ten  minutes  of  her  decease ;  and  beautiful  as  her  voice  was,  it  never  appeared
so  exquisitely  beautiful  as  this.  HENRY  WEBLEY.

718  B.  In  the  next  case  (quoted  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiv.
p.  288)  a  dying  mother  had  an  apparently  telepathic  vision  of  an  absent
son  who  happened  to  be  dying  at  the  same  time.  The  account  comes
from  Colonel  C.  F.  Hicks.

46  VALPLAISANT,  ST.  HELIERS,  JERSEY,  December  2yd,  1889.

Agreeably  to  my  promise  I  now  give  you  a  statement  of  my  late  wife's
last  moments.  Some  days  beforehand  I  was  informed  she  would  not  last  long ;
and  it  was  in  the  evening  about  5  or  6  o'clock  P.M.,  on  3rd  October  1887,  I
went  into  her  bedroom.  There  was  the  nurse,  my  second  and  third  daughters
in  the  room  with  me.  The  door  was  a  little  ajar.  She  was  looking  at  it  very
earnestly  when  she  said  to  my  second  daughter,  Flo,  "  There  is  some  one  out-
side, let  him  in."  Flo  answered  and  said,  "  Oh  no,  mamma  ;  there  is  no  one
— look,"  and  she  opened  the  door  wider.  We  then  talked  to  her  gently  for
some  little  time.  After  a  pause  she  said,  "  Poor  Eddie  (my  second  son  who
had  gone  out  to  Australia)  ;  oh,  he  is  looking  very  ill — he  has  had  a  fall — broken
his  leg — poor  Eddie."  When  we  all  assured  her  such  was  not  the  case — that
the  last  news  we  had  heard  from  him  was  that  he  was  quite  well — she  became
more  pacified,  although  restless  and  doubtful,  as  she  continued  to  say  now  and
then,  "Poor  Eddie!"  She  died  at  about  twenty  minutes  to  2  A.M.,  early  on
the  4th  October.  We  little  thought  that  her  words  would  be  verified,  with  the
exception  of  the  broken  leg.

Some  time  afterwards  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Thomas  Williams
announcing  my  poor  son's  death.  For  he  left  a  place  called  Wyndham  on  the
Cambridge  Gulf,  N.W.  of  Australia,  on  the  4th  [evidently  meaning  3rd,  see
below]  October  1887,  with  a  young  man  of  the  name  of  Russell.  He  suddenly
felt  ill,  and  called  for  some  water.  The  latter  went  off  to  a  spring  to  get  it,  but
coming  back  he  found  that  he  had  fallen  from  his  horse  and  was  lying  quite
dead.  So  his  poor  mother's  vision  turned  out  to  be  quite  true,  excepting  his
leg  being  broken.

Now,  the  only  question  is   about  the  time.     Did  the  son  die  before  the
mother  or  after  the  mother?  as,  taking  the  longitude  of  Wyndham  N.W.  of
Australia,  so  far  to  the  east  of  us,  there  must  be  a  good  eight  or  ten  hours'  ,
difference,  and  a  ship  going  round  the  world  making  east  all  the  way  would
gain  a  day,  and  by  westing  would  lose  one.

I  give  you  a  few  extracts  from  letters  I  have  received.  The  one  from  Mr.
Thomas  Williams,  with  whom  my  son  left  a  letter  to  be  sent  on  to  me.  Mr.  ,
T.  W.'s  letter  is  dated  the  5th  October  1887  :  "  Your  son  left  Wyndham  to  go
to  Durack  station  on  the  3rd  October,  in  company  with  Louis  Smith  and  John
Russell.  They  had  to  go  over  a  very  rough  country,  and  your  poor  boy
succumbed  to  the  pangs  of  thirst,  suffering  at  the  same  time  with  fever.  I  am


718B]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  341

glad  to  inform  you  that  his  sufferings  were  short,  and  that  the  great  God  was
pleased  to  take  him  away  quickly.  He  spoke  very  affectionately  of  his  mother,
and  what  he  would  do  if  he  could  only  get  back  to  Jersey,  for  he  was  heartsick
when  he  was  here."

I  give  you  another  extract  from  his  employer,  a  Mr.  Durack,  a  gentleman
who  dealt  largely  in  horses,  and  had  a  great  number  of  horse  stations  in
Australia : —

"  When  I  left  your  son  at  Wyndham  on  27th  September  last,  1887,  he  was
to  start  back  to  the  station,  as  he  had  a  horse,  bridle,  and  saddle  to  ride."

In  conclusion,  I  have  now  given  you  as  succinctly  as  I  can  the  death  of  the
mother  and  son,  the  one  having  taken  place  here  and  the  other  at  our  Anti-
podes, both  on  the  same  day  and  date,  and  as  far  as  I  know  about  the  same
time.  It  is  more  than  a  coincidence — it  is  very  mysterious.

(Signed)         C.  F.  HICKS.

Colonel  Hicks  writes  later  : —

February  22nd,  1890.

.  .  .  The  witnesses  in  my  wife's  late  case  are  none  of  them  present  here.
My  second  daughter,  whom  I  was  expecting  from  Bombay  when  I  received
your  letter,  has  arrived  here.  Her  statement  I  enclose.  My  third  daughter,
another  witness,  is  at  present  at  Brisbane,  in  Australia.  .  .  .

Discrepancy  in  dates:  my  late  wife  died  at  about  forty  minutes  to  2  A.M.
on  4th  October  1887 — that  is,  taking  the  time  from  12  A.M.  on  the  3rd  to
12  P.M.,  after  which  it  becomes  the  4th.  So  all  the  conversation  that  took
place  with  the  above-named  witnesses,  viz.,  the  nurse,  Miss  E.  Fenn,  two
daughters  and  self,  took  place  in  the  evening  of  the  3rd,  about  5  or  6  P.M.,
as  she  died  the  same  night,  or  more  correctly  speaking,  being  after  12  P.M.,
it  was  early  in  the  morning  of  the  4th.

Now  for  my  son's  death.  Mr.  Thomas  Williams'  letter  is  dated  the  5th
October  1887.  He  says  my  son  left  Wyndham,  on  the  Gulf  of  Cambridge,  on
the  4th  [the  date  given  in  Mr.  Williams'  letter  is  3rd,  see  below]  October  1887,
but  he  does  not  mention  at  what  time.  But  being  within  the  tropics,  where
people  generally  travel  as  early  as  they  can  to  escape  the  heat  of  the  sun,  it  is
presumed  that  he  and  his  friend,  Mr.  Russell,  must  have  started  early,  and  it
is  certain  that  they  could  not  have  gone  far  before  he  met  his  end,  and  most
probably  Mr.  T.  Williams  must  have  heard  of  it  the  same  day,  as  his  letter  is
dated  the  5th  October  1887.  .  .  .  (Signed)  C.  F.  HICKS.

The  following  letter  from  Miss  Hicks  was  enclosed  : —

February  2"ith,  1890.

I  was  in  my  late  mother's  bedroom  between  the  hours  of  five  and  six  in  the
evening,  on  the  3rd  of  October  1887,  when  she  asked  me  to  open  the  door,  as
some  one  was  outside  and  wanted  to  come  in.  I  answered  and  said,  "  Oh,
mother,  the  door  is  open,  and  there  is  no  one  outside,"  and  then  I  opened  the
door  wider.  Then  I  shut  the  door.  She  then  said,  "  Poor  Eddie,  he  looks
very  ill;  he  has  had  a  fall."  I  said  to  her,  "  Oh,  mother,  how  you  go  on;  he
is  all  right  the  last  time  we  heard."  She  said,  "  Oh,  he  is  looking  very  ill."
The  next  morning,  at  about  forty  minutes  to  2  A.M.,  she  died.  I  heard  from
letters  received  that  my  poor  brother  Eddie  died  in  Australia  on  the  same  day
and  about  the  same  time.  F.  HICKS.


342  APPENDICES  [719  A

Colonel  Hicks  also  sent  us  the  letter  from  Mr.  Williams  giving  an
account  of  his  son's  death.  The  exact  time  is,  as  Colonel  Hicks  says,  not
stated,  but  the  letter  is  dated  October  5th,  1887,  and  states  that  Mr.  E.
Hicks  started  on  his  journey  on  October  3rd.  It  seems  probable  that  the
death  took  place  on  the  same  day.

For  some  other  cases  of  this  type  see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  459,
footnote.

719  A.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  214.  The  account  is
written  by  Mrs.  J.  P.  Smith.

AMBLE,  NORTHUMBERLAND,  January  ijtk,  1891.

In  June  1879,  I  was  a  teacher  in  Macclesfield.  A  friend,  Mrs. ,  was

near  her  confinement.  She  told  me  she  was  afraid  she  would  die.  I  went  into
the  county  of  Durham  for  a  holiday.  While  there  I  was  roused  from  sleep  by

Mrs. as  I  supposed.  She  was  shaking  me,  and  saying,  "  I  have  passed

away,  but  the  baby  will  live."  Then  the  figure  left  the  room  by  the  door,  I
got  out  of  bed  and  went  to  my  sister  and  related  the  incident.  We  agreed  to
make  a  note  of  it.  Next  day  I  received  a  letter  from  a  friend  in  Macclesfield
saying  that  Mrs. was  dead  but  the  baby  was  alive.

[I  was]  in  the  best  of  health  and  about  twenty-nine  years  of  age.

No  other  persons  were  present.

Mrs.  Smith,  who  is  the  mistress  of  the  Infants'  School  at  Amble,  in-
forms us  that  this  is  the  only  experience  of  the  kind  she  has  ever  had,  and
that  to  the  best  of  her  recollection  the  apparition  was  seen  about  an  hoilr
or  two  after  the  death.

Unfortunately,  neither  the  note  made  at  the  time  nor  the  letter
announcing  the  death  has  been  preserved,  but  we  have  received  the  follow-
ing letter  of  corroboration  from  Mrs.  Smith's  sister  : —

203  ELSWICK  STREET,  LEICHHARDT,  SYDNEY,  AUSTRALIA,
November  2nd,  1891.

I  distinctly  remember  my  sister  coming  into  my  room  and  waking  me  up  to
tell  me  of  her  dream,  which  was  as  follows  : —

That  she  had  dreamt  that  a  lady  friend  of  hers  some  miles  away  had
appeared  to  her  and  said  she  was  dead ;  but  that  her  baby  would  live.  The
dream  had  evidently  impressed  my  sister  very  much,  as  she  seemed  quite
agitated,  and  we  said  we  would  note  it  down,  and  to  our  utter  astonishment
the  next  morning  my  sister  received  a  letter  to  say  that  her  friend  had  passed
away  that  same  night.  ANNIE  BROWN.

It  will  be  observed  that  Mrs.  Smith's  experience  is  here  referred  to  as
a  dream.  That  this  is  not  her  own  view  of  it  appears  from  the  following
account  given  by  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  of  an  interview  which  they
had  with  her  on  September  i6th,  1891.  The  account  was  written  within
two  hours  of  their  seeing  Mrs.  Smith,  from  notes  made  at  the  time.

The  figure  appeared  twice  on  the  same  night.  The  first  time  was  in  the
breaking  dawn  of  a  June  morning,  before  there  was  any  sun.  It  woke  her,  and


719  B]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  343

she  heard  the  words  she  mentions,  but  she  did  not  get  out  of  bed,  and  was  pro-
bably only  half  awake.  The  second  time  the  same  thing  happened,  but  she  is
quite  sure  she  was  awake.  It  appeared  at  the  left-hand  side  of  her  bed,  and,
after  speaking,  it  moved  very  quickly  round  the  bed  and  apparently  through
the  door,  which  was  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  bed  parallel  to  the  head  and
hidden  by  the  curtains,  so  that  she  did  not  see  it  go  out.  The  figure  went  as
if  in  a  great  hurry.  It  seemed  to  be  dressed  in  drab ;  the  face  was  seen — it
seemed  exactly  as  in  life.  She  felt  no  fear,  nor  sense  of  the  supernatural — only
anxiety  to  question  further — and  regarded  it  as  real  until,  running  after  the
figure  downstairs,  she  became  convinced  that  it  was  a  vision.  She  felt  as  she
ran  as  though  she  would  have  caught  it  up,  had  she  not  had  to  open  the  door.
It  was  about  five  o'clock  when  she  went  to  her  sister,  which  she  did  at  once  after

the  second  vision.  Mrs. had  told  her  she  thought  she  should  not  live,  but

Mrs.  Smith  had  thought  little  of  this,  and  it  had  quite  passed  out  of  her  mind.

She  was  in  no  anxiety.  Mrs. was  no  special  friend  of  hers.  Her  children

came  to  Mrs.  Smith's  school,  and  she  was  interested  in  them.  She  did  not

know  why  Mrs.  should  have  told  her  of  her  expectation  of  dying ;  but  she

said  at  the  same  time,  "  If  I  go,  you  will  be  very  kind  to  my  children."

The  friend  who  wrote  telling  her  of  the  death  mentioned  it  casually —
as  especially  sad  because  of  the  young  children.  She  mentioned  the  time  as
in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning,  and  it  struck  Mrs.  Smith  when  she  got  the
letter  that  the  vision  had  been  coincident  with  the  death,  but  she  did  not  verify
this  by  ascertaining  the  exact  time  of  the  death.

Mrs.  Smith  told  us  that  when  she  communicated  what  she  had  seen  to  her
sister,  the  latter  said  it  must  have  been  just  a  very  vivid  dream,  to  which  she
replied,  "  Well,  it  was  a  very  vivid  one,  then,"  or  words  to  that  effect.

719  B.  The  following  case,  taken  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
vol.  i.  p.  449,  was  received  through  the  Rev.  J.  Barmby,  of  Pittington
Vicarage,  Durham,  who  obtained  it  from  the  Rev.  J.  T.  Fowler,  Librarian
and  Hebrew  Lecturer  in  the  University  of  Durham,  in  October  1872.
The  events  related  had  occurred  about  four  years  earlier.  I  omit  Mr.
Barmby's  account  (given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living)  which  is  practically  a
repetition  of  Mr.  Clarke's,  given  below.

The  Rev.  J.  T.  Fowler,  of  Bishop  Hatfield's  Hall,  Durham,  writes  :—

November  z6th,  1884.

I  know  nothing  about  the  case  I  mentioned  to  Mr.  Barmby  beyond  what
I  gave  him  in  writing.  Mr.  Clarke,  a  tradesman  in  Hull,  told  me  of  the  case
of  Mrs.  Palliser,  and  got  her  to  come  to  his  office,  in  Queen  Street,  Hull,  for
me  to  take  down  from  her  own  lips  the  notes  I  gave  to  Mr.  Barmby.  I  took
great  pains  to  get  the  whole  of  the  story  correctly.  J.  T.  FOWLER.

Mr.  Clarke  writes  : —

WINTER-TON  HALL,  DONCASTER,  January  2oM,  1885.

Widow  Palliser  was  a  woman  who  had  seen  better  days,  and  worked  for
my  firm,  Clarke  &  Son,  Clothiers,  Queen  Street,  Hull.  She  had  an  only
son,  Matthew.  I  assisted  her  in  getting  him  to  sea.  One  morning  she  came
to  me  with  tears  rolling  down  her  cheeks,  and  said,  "Mat's  dead;  I  saw  him
drowned!  Poor  Mat,  the  last  words  he  said  were,  'Oh!  my  dear  mother.'


344  APPENDICES  [719  C

He  threw  up  his  hands  and  sank  to  rise  no  more."  I  asked  how  she  knew.
She  said,  "  I  saw  him  going  on  board  his  ship,  and  the  plank  that  he  walked
upon  slipped  on  one  side,  and  he  fell  overboard  between  the  quay  and  the  ship
and  was  drowned.  My  own  mother,  who  had  been  dead  many  years,  came  to
the  foot  of  my  bed  and  said,  '  Poor  Mat's  gone  ;  he's  drowned.'  "  I  then  said,
"  Why,  Mat's  in  New  York  "  (I  always  felt  interested  in  this  woman  and  her
son).  "  Yes,"  she  said,  "  he  was  drowned  last  night  at  New  York ;  I  saw  him."

Mrs.  P.'s  object  in  coming  to  me  was  to  ask  if  I  would  write  to  the  agent
in  New  York  to  ascertain  the  facts.  I  said  I  would,  and  wrote  stating  that  a
poor  widow  had  an  only  son  on  board  such  a  ship,  and  she  had  a  vision  that
an  accident  (I  said  nothing  about  drowning)  had  happened  to  her  son,  and  I
would  take  it  as  a  great  favour  if  he  would  ascertain  and  tell  me  all  particulars.
In  about  three  to  five  weeks  (she  came  day  by  day  to  ask  if  we  had  received  a
reply,  always  saying  that  she  knew  what  the  answer  would  be),  at  length,  the
letter  arrived.  We  sent  for  Mrs.  P.,  and  before  the  letter  was  opened  by  my
son,  I  said  to  her,  "  What  will  be  its  contents  ?"  She  at  once  and  decidedly
said  that  "  Mat  was  drowned  on  the  very  night  that  she  saw  him,  and  in  going
on  board  the  ship  the  plank  slipped,  and  he  fell  overboard  between  the  quay
and  the  ship."  So  it  was.  Mrs.  P.  was  then  wearing  mourning  for  Mat.

My  son  and  half-a-dozen  young  men  can  verify  this  if  needful.

Mrs.  P.  died  soon  after.  M.  W.  CLARKE.

Reproduction  of  the  letter  received  from  the  agent  of  the  ship,  as  nearly
as  I  and  my  son  can  remember : —

"  NEW  YORK,  date  unknown.

"  I  have  made  inquiries  of  Matthew  Palliser,  age  about  twenty,  and  learn
that  he  fell  off  a  plank  in  going  on  board  his  ship,  and  got  drowned  on  .  .  .'*
The  date  was  the  same  as  Mrs.  Palliser  said.  .  .  .

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Clarke  adds  : —

April  6th,  1885.

We  have  no  copy  of  the  agent's  letter,  but  both  my  son  and  myself  and
others  are  certain  that  Mrs.  P.'s  vision  and  the  agent's  account  of  the  accident
were  the  same,  both  as  to  the  time  and  cause,  viz.,  that  Mrs.  P.  saw  her  son
slip  off  the  plank  in  going  on  board  his  ship,  and  that  he  was  drowned  between
the  quay  and  the  ship ;  agent's  account  that  he  fell  off  the  plank  and  was
drowned,  at  the  time  mentioned,  between  the  ship  and  the  quay.  Mrs.  P.  died
soon  after  the  event,  which  in  my  opinion  shortened  her  life.

[In  the  absence  of  a  written  note,  we  cannot  of  course  be  perfectly  certain
that  Mrs.  Palliser  did  not  read  back  the  details  of  the  plank  and  the  quay  into
her  vision  after  the  arrival  of  the  news,  and  that  Mr.  Clarke  is  right  in  his
recollection  of  having  heard  these  details  from  the  first.  But  there  can  hardly
be  a  doubt  that  the  vision  was  described  as  a  very  impressive  one  before  the
arrival  of  the  news ;  and  Mr.  Clarke's  interest  in  the  matter  may  fairly  be  sup-
posed to  have  made  him  careful  in  his  scrutiny  of  the  dates.]

719  C.  The  following  case  of  an  apparition  coinciding  with  a  death,
but  representing  a  near  relative  of  the  dying  person,  instead  of  the  dying
person  herself,  is  taken  from  the  "  Report  on  the  Census  of  Halluci-
nations," Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  261.  There  were  four  cases  of


719C]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  345

this  type  in  the  Census,  of  which  one  had  already  been  published  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  357  (No.  124),  and  two  others  are  given
in  the  "  Report."  I  quote  the  preliminary  comments  of  the  writers  of  the
"  Report  "  on  these  cases.

"Such  cases  need  present  no  difficulty  on  the  telepathic  theory.
Indeed,  it  may  be  rather  said  that  the  absence  of  any  cases  of  the  kind
would  render  the  theory  improbable.  They  raise  the  question,  however,
who  the  '  agent ' — the  person,  that  is,  from  whom  the  telepathic  com-
munication comes — is,  in  hallucinations  coinciding  with  a  death.  Usually
it  seems  natural  to  assume  that  it  is  the  dying  person,  and  in  some  cases —
as  we  have  seen  in  Chapter  XII. — this  view  is  supported  by  evidence
that  the  dying  person's  thoughts  were  specially  directed  to  the  percipient.
The  mere  fact,  however,  that  the  apparition  represents  a  particular  person
does  not  prove  that  that  person  was  the  agent.  It  is  possible  for  an  agent
to  transfer  to  a  percipient  an  image  of  some  third  person,  and  it  is  possible
for  a  percipient  to  embody  an  impression  telepathically  received  in  a  form
suggested  by  his  own  mind  and  not  by  the  agent's.  As  an  instance
where  it  seems  improbable  that  the  person  whose  figure  was  seen  was  the
agent,  see  Mrs.  McAlpine's  vision  of  her  baby  nephew  at  the  time  of  its
death  (printed  at  p.  281).  It  seems  more  likely  in  this  case  that  the
agent  was  some  one  with  the  child,  than  the  child  itself,  aged  six  months.
In  one  of  the  death  coincidences  quoted  in  Chapter  XII.  (No.  579.24,
p.  223),  there  is  some  reason  for  thinking  that  the  agent  was  the  sister
who  telegraphed  the  news  rather  than  the  decedent;  because  (i)  the
hallucination  nearly  coincided  in  time  with  the  despatch  of  the  telegram,
while  it  occurred  some  hours  after  the  death,  and  (2)  it  foretold  the  arrival
of  the  telegram.  These  cases,  of  course,  differ  from  those  we  are  about  to
quote,  in  that  the  apparition  is  of  the  dying  person,  but  they  should  be
kept  in  view  in  interpreting  them."

[In  the  first  case,  omitted  here,  the  apparition  represented  a  man  who
was  at  the  time  at  the  deathbed  of  his  mother.]

"  In  the  next  case  the  fact  that  the  person  whose  figure  was  seen  can
hardly  by  any  normal  means  have  known  of  his  mother's  death  at  the
time  of  the  hallucination  makes  it  difficult  to  suppose  that  he  was  the
agent,  without  a  telepathic  hypothesis  so  complicated  as  to  be  extremely
improbable."

The  account  came  from  Miss  C.  L.  Hawkins-Dempster,  having  been
written  in  1890.

24  PORTMAN  SQUARE,  W.

I  ran  downstairs  and  entered  the  drawing-room  at  7.30  P.M.,  believing  I  had
kept  my  two  sisters  waiting  for  dinner.  They  had  gone  to  dinner,  the  room
was  empty.  Behind  a  long  sofa  I  saw  Mr.  H.  standing.  He  moved  three  steps
nearer.  I  heard  nothing.  I  was  not  at  all  afraid  or  surprised,  only  felt  concern
as  [to]  what  he  wanted,  as  he  was  in  South  America.  I  learnt  next  morning
that  at  that  moment  his  mother  was  breathing  her  last.  I  went  and  arranged


346  APPENDICES  [722  A

her  for  burial,  my  picture  still  hanging  above  the  bed,  between  the  portraits  of
her  two  absent  sons.

I  was  in  the  habit  of  hearing  often  from  [Mr.  H.],  and  was  not  at  that
moment  anxious  about  Mrs.  H.'s  health,  though  she  was  aged.

I  had  had  twenty-five  days  before  the  grief  of  losing  an  only  brother.  No
[other  persons  were  present  at  the  time].  C.  L.  H.  DEMPSTER.

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  we  learnt  from  Miss  Hawkins- Dempster
that  the  above  incident  occurred  on  New  Year's  Eve,  1876-77  ;  the  room
was  lighted  by  "  one  bright  lamp  and  a  fire,"  and  the  figure  did  not  seem
to  go  away,  she  merely  "  ceased  to  see  it."  She  used  to  see  Mrs.  H.
often,  and  was  in  no  anxiety  as  to  her  health  at  the  time.  Mrs.  H.  was
very  old,  but  not  definitely  ill.  Miss  Hawkins-Dempster  corrected  her
first  statement  as  to  the  exactness  of  the  coincidence  by  informing  us  that
Mrs.  H.  died  in  the  morning  of  the  same  day  on  which  the  apparition
was  seen.

Miss  Hawkins-Dempster  mentioned  what  she  had  seen  to  her  sister,
who  thus  corroborates  : —

July  i$M,  1892.

I  heard  of  my  sister  Miss  C.  L.  Hawkins-Dempster's  vision  of  Mr.  H.  in  the
drawing-room  at  7.30  P.M.  on  New  Year's  Eve,  1876-77,  immediately  after  it
happened,  and  before  hearing  that  Mrs.  H.  died  the  same  day,  the  news  of
which  reached  us  later  that  evening.  H.  H.  DEMPSTER.

We  have  verified  the  date  of  death  at  Somerset  House.
I  had  an  interview  with  the  Misses  Hawkins- Dempster  on  July  i6th,
1892,  and  wrote  the  following  account  of  it  the  next  day : —

Miss  C.  Hawkins-Dempster's  veridical  experience  is  well  remembered  by
both  sisters.  The  decedent  was  a  very  old  lady,  who  was  on  very  intimate
terms  with  them,  and  had  special  reasons  for  thinking  of  Miss  C.  Hawkins-
Dempster  in  connection  with  the  son  whose  figure  appeared.  He  was  at  the
other  side  of  the  world,  and  almost  certainly  had  not  heard  of  his  mother's
death  at  the  time.

The  figure  was  absolutely  life-like.  Miss  Hawkins-Dempster  noticed  the
slight  cast  of  the  eye  and  the  delicate  hands.  The  figure  rested  one  hand  on
the  back  of  a  chair  and  held  the  other  out.  Miss  Hawkins-Dempster  called
out,  "  What  can  I  do  for  you?  "  forgetting  for  the  moment  the  impossibility
that  it  could  be  the  real  man.  Then  she  simply  ceased  to  see  the  figure.

She  was  in  good  health  at  the  time,  and  her  thoughts  were  occupied  with
business  matters.

"  Here  "(say  the  writers  of  the  "  Report ")  "  the  apparition  followed  the
death  by  some  hours,  so  that,  if  Mrs.  H.  was  the  agent,  the  telepathic  im-
pression must  either  have  remained  latent  for  some  time,  or  have  been
produced  by  the  agent  after  death."

722  A.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  188.  The  following
case  was  sent  to  us  from  Brazil  by  Professor  A.  Alexander,  the  witnesses
being  persons  well  known  to  him.  He  informs  us  that  the  incident  is
"  of  a  type  rather  frequent  among  Brazilian  Catholics,"  and  the  votive


722A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  347

candle  seems  indeed  a  natural  thing  to  dream  of  under  the  circumstances
described,  but  the  exact  place  where  the  candle  was  to  be  found  and
the  fact  of  its  having  been  already  partly  burnt  were  not  likely  to  be
guessed.  The  account  of  the  dreamer,  Donna  Nery,  is  as  follows  : —

BARBACENA,  March  26th,  1895.

In  January  1894,  the  decease  occurred  of  Fe'licite'  G.,  a  young  Belgian  lady,
who  was  married  to  a  nephew  of  mine.  After  the  death  of  his  wife,  the  latter
came  to  our  house  at  Barbacena,  bringing  with  him  much  luggage  belong-
ing to  the  deceased,  and  he  stayed  here  with  his  children  for  some  days.

Some  two  months  afterwards — I  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  the  exact
date — I  went  to  a  soiree  and  returned  home  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,
having  passed  some  pleasant  hours  in  which  all  thoughts  of  sadness  were  tem-
porarily swept  from  my  memory.  On  that  very  night,  however,  I  had  a  vivid
dream  of  Felicitd.  It  seemed  to  me  that  she  entered  the  room  where  I  really
lay  asleep,  and,  sitting  down  on  the  bedside,  asked  me,  as  a  favour,  to  look
into  an  old  tin  box  under  the  staircase  for  a  certain  wax  candle,  which  had
been  already  lighted,  and  which  she  had  promised  to  Our  Lady.  On  my
consenting  to  do  so,  she  took  leave  of  me,  saying,  "  At6  o  outro  mundo  (Till
the  other  world)."1  I  awoke  from  the  dream  much  impressed.  It  was  still
dark,  but  I  could  no  longer  sleep.

On  that  day,  the  others  having  gone  out,  I  called  a  servant  and  ordered  her
to  search  in  the  tin  box,  which  had,  in  fact,  been  placed  under  the  staircase,
and  which  had  belonged  to  Fe'licite'.  No  one  had  opened  the  box  before.  It
was  full  of  old  clothes  and  cuttings,  among  which  it  was  by  no  means  probable
that  we  should  find  a  wax  candle.  The  servant  turned  over  these  clothes  at
first  without  result,  and  I  was  already  beginning  to  think  that  my  dream  was  of
no  importance,  when,  on  straightening  out  the  clothes  so  that  the  box  might  be
closed,  I  saw  the  end  of  a  candle,  which  I  at  once  ordered  her  to  take  out.  It
was  of  wax — of  the  kind  used  for  promises  [to  saints]— and,  what  was  a  still
more  singular  coincidence,  it  had  already  been  lighted.

We  delivered  the  candle  to  Monsenhor  Jose"  Augusto,  of  Barbacena,  in
performance  of  my  niece's  pious  vow  thus  curiously  revealed  in  a  dream.

(Signed)  GUILHERMINA  NERY.

Senhor  Nery  writes : —

BARBACENA,  March  26th,  1895.

I  recollect  that,  on  the  occasion,  my  wife  told  me  of  the  dream,  much
impressed  by  it.  It  is  exactly  what  is  written.

(Signed)  DOMINGOS  NERY.

Professor  Alexander  adds  : —

At  my  request,  Catharina,  the  servant  referred  to  in  the  above  account,  was
called  to  be  examined.  I  found  that  she  was  a  mere  child.  On  being  ques-
tioned she  confirmed  the  narrative  of  her  mistress,  and  recollected  the  cir-
cumstance of  finding  the  wax  candle  in  the  tin  box.

Jose',  a  black  boy,  declared  that  he  carried  the  candle  to  Monsenhor  Josd
Augusto,  who  told  him  to  give  it  to  the  sacristan.

A.  ALEXANDER.

1  "Till  soon,"  "Till  to-morrow,"  "Till  the  return,"  &c.,  are  the  expressions
generally  used  in  Brazilian  leave-taking. — A.  A.


348  APPENDICES  [722  B

722  B.  Dr.  Binns,  an  author  of  some  scientific  repute  in  his  day,  gives
the  following  narrative  in  his  Anatomy  of  Sleep,  p.  462,  adding  that
"  perhaps  there  is  not  a  better  authenticated  case  on  record."  It  consists
of  a  letter  written,  October  2ist,  1842,  by  the  Rev.  Charles  M'Kay,  a
Catholic  priest,  to  the  Countess  of  Shrewsbury.  The  Earl  of  Shrewsbury
sent  on  the  letter  to  Dr.  Binns.  It  is  quoted  by  Dale  Owen  (Footfalls,
p.  294).  I  abbreviate  it  here: —

In  July,  1838,  I  left  Edinburgh  to  take  charge  of  the  Perthshire  missions.
On  my  arrival  in  Perth  I  was  called  upon  by  a  Presbyterian  woman,  Anne
Simpson,  who  for  more  than  a  week  had  been  in  the  utmost  anxiety  to  see  a
priest.  [This  woman  stated  that  a  woman  lately  dead  (date  not  given)  named
Maloy,  slightly  known  to  Anne  Simpson,  had  "  appeared  to  her  during  the
night  for  several  nights"  urging  her  to  go  to  the  priest,  who  would  pay  a
sum  of  money,  three  and  tenpence,  which  the  deceased  owed  to  a  person  not
specified.]

I  made  inquiry,  and  found  that  a  woman  of  that  name  had  died,  who  had
acted  as  washerwoman  and  followed  the  regiment.  Following  up  the  inquiry  I
found  a  grocer  with  whom  she  had  dealt,  and  on  asking  him  if  a  female  named
Maloy  owed  him  anything,  he  turned  up  his  books,  and  told  me  she  did  owe
him  three  and  tenpence.  I  paid  the  sum.  Subsequently  the  Presbyterian
woman  came  to  me,  saying  that  she  was  no  more  troubled.

725  A.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  556.  The  account
was  received  in  1882,  from  Captain  G.  F.  Russell  Colt,  of  Gartsherrie,
Coatbridge,  N.B.

I  was  at  home  for  my  holidays,  and  residing  with  my  father  and  mother,
not  here,  but  at  another  old  family  place  in  Mid-Lothian,  built  by  an  ancestor
in  Mary  Queen  of  Scots'  time,  called  Inveresk  House.  My  bedroom  was  a
curious  old  room,  long  and  narrow,  with  a  window  at  one  end  of  the  room  and
a  door  at  the  other.  My  bed  was  on  the  right  of  the  window,  looking  towards
the  door.  I  had  a  very  dear  brother  (my  eldest  brother),  Oliver,  lieutenant  in
the  7th  Royal  Fusiliers.  He  was  about  nineteen  years  old,  and  had  at  that
time  been  some  months  before  Sebastopol.  I  corresponded  frequently  with
him ;  and  once  when  he  wrote  in  low  spirits,  not  being  well,  I  said  in  answer
that  he  was  to  cheer  up,  but  that  if  anything  did  happen  to  him,  he  must  let  me
know  by  appearing  to  me  in  my  room,  where  we  had  often  as  boys  together  sat
at  night  and  indulged  in  a  surreptitious  pipe  and  chat.  This  letter  (I  found
subsequently)  he  received  as  he  was  starting  to  receive  the  Sacrament  from  a
clergyman  who  has  since  related  the  fact  to  me.  Having  done  this,  he  went  to
the  entrenchments  and  never  returned,  as  in  a  few  hours  afterwards  the  storm-
ing of  the  Redan  commenced.  He,  on  the  captain  of  his  company  falling,  took
his  place,  and  led  his  men  bravely  on.  He  had  just  led  them  within  the  walls,
though  already  wounded  in  several  places,  when  a  bullet  struck  him  on  the
right  temple  and  he  fell  amongst  heaps  of  others,  where  he  was  found  in  a  sort
of  kneeling  posture  (being  propped  up  by  other  dead  bodies)  thirty-six  hours
afterwards.  His  death  took  place,  or  rather  he  fell,  though  he  may  not  have
died  immediately,  on  the  8th  September  1855.


725  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  349

That  night  I  awoke  suddenly,  and  saw  facing  the  window  of  my  room,  by
my  bedside,  surrounded  by  a  light  sort  of  phosphorescent  mist,  as  it  were,  my
brother  kneeling.  I  tried  to  speak  but  could  not.  I  buried  my  head  in  the
bedclothes,  not  at  all  afraid  (because  we  had  all  been  brought  up  not  to  believe
in  ghosts  or  apparitions),  but  simply  to  collect  my  ideas,  because  I  had  not
been  thinking  or  dreaming  of  him,  and,  indeed,  had  forgotten  all  about  what  I
had  written  to  him  a  fortnight  before.  I  decided  that  it  must  be  fancy,  and
the  moonlight  playing  on  a  towel,  or  something  out  of  place.  But  on  looking
up,  there  he  was  again,  looking  lovingly,  imploringly,  and  sadly  at  me.  I  tried
again  to  speak,  but  found  myself  tongue-tied.  I  could  not  utter  a  sound.  I
sprang  out  of  bed,  glanced  through  the  window,  and  saw  that  there  was  no
moon,  but  it  was  very  dark  and  raining  hard,  by  the  sound  against  the  panes.
I  turned,  and  still  saw  poor  Oliver.  I  shut  my  eyes,  walked  through  it,  and
reached  the  door  of  the  room.  As  I  turned  the  handle,  before  leaving  the
room,  I  looked  once  more  back.  The  apparition  turned  round  his  head  slowly
and  again  looked  anxiously  and  lovingly  at  me,  and  I  saw  then  for  the  first
time  a  wound  on  the  right  temple  with  a  red  stream  from  it.  His  face  was  of  a
waxy  pale  tint,  but  transparent-looking,  and  so  was  the  reddish  mark.  But  it
is  almost  impossible  to  describe  his  appearance.  I  only  know  I  shall  never
forget  it.  I  left  the  room  and  went  into  a  friend's  room,  and  lay  on  the  sofa
the  rest  of  the  night.  I  told  him  why.  I  told  others  in  the  house,  but  when  I
told  my  father,  he  ordered  me  not  to  repeat  such  nonsense,  and  especially  not
to  let  my  mother  know.

On  the  Monday  following l  he  received  a  note  from  Sir  Alexander  Milne  to
say  that  the  Redan  was  stormed,  but  no  particulars.  I  told  my  friend  to  let  me
know  if  he  saw  the  name  among  the  killed  and  wounded  before  me.  About
a  fortnight  later  he  came  to  my  bedroom  in  his  mother's  house  in  Athole
Crescent,  in  Edinburgh,  with  a  very  grave  face.  I  said,  "  I  suppose  it  is  to
tell  me  the  sad  news  I  expect ; "  and  he  said  "Yes."  Both  the  colonel  of  the
regiment  and  one  or  two  officers  who  saw  the  body  confirmed  the  fact  that  the
appearance  was  much  according  to  my  description,  and  the  death-wound  was
exactly  where  I  had  seen  it.  But  none  could  say  whether  he  actually  died  at
the  moment.  His  appearance,  if  so,  must  have  been  some  hours  after  death,  as
he  appeared  to  me  a  few  minutes  after  two  in  the  morning.  Months  later,  a
small  prayer-book  and  the  letter  I  had  'written  to  him  were  returned  to  Inveresk,
found  in  the  inner  breast  pocket  of  his  tunic  which  he  wore  at  his  death.  I  have
them  now.

The  account  in  the  London  Gazette  Extraordinary  of  September  22nd,
1855,  shows  that  the  storming  of  the  Redan  began  shortly  after  noon  on
September  8th,  and  lasted  upwards  of  an  hour  and  a  half.  We  learn  from
Russell's  account  that  "  the  dead,  the  dying,  and  the  uninjured  were  all
lying  in  piles  together  "  ;  and  it  would  seem  that  the  search  for  the
wounded  was  still  continuing  on  the  morning  of  the  Qth.  The  exact  time
of  Lieutenant  Oliver  Colt's  death  is  uncertain.

Captain  Colt  mentioned  several  persons  who  could  corroborate  this

1  Communication  with  the  Crimea  was  then  conducted  by  telegraph  for  only  part  of
the  way.


350  APPENDICES  [727  A

narrative.     We  received  the  following  letter  from  his  sister,  Mrs.  Hope,  of
Fermoy : —

December  \2th,  1882.

On  the  morning  of  September  8th,  1855,  my  brother,  Mr.  Colt,  told  myself,
Captain  Ferguson  of  the  42nd  regiment,  since  dead,  and  Major  Borthwick  of
the  Rifle  Brigade  (who  is  living),  and  others,  that  he  had  during  the  night
awakened  from  sleep  and  seen,  as  he  thought,  my  eldest  brother,  Lieutenant  Oliver
Colt  of  the  Royal  Fusiliers  (who  was  in  the  Crimea),  standing  between  his  bed
and  the  door ;  that  he  saw  he  was  wounded  in  more  than  one  place — I  remember
he  named  the  temple  as  one  place — by  bullet-wounds ;  that  he  aroused  himself,
rushed  to  the  door  with  closed  eyes  and  looked  back  at  the  apparition,  which
stood  between  him  and  the  bed.  My  father  enjoined  silence,  lest  my  mother
should  be  made  uneasy  ;  but  shortly  afterwards  came  the  news  of  the  fall  of  the
Redan  and  my  brother's  death.  Two  years  afterwards,  my  husband,  Colonel
Hope,  invited  my  brother  to  dine  with  him  ;  the  former  being  still  a  lieutenant
in  the  Royal  Fusiliers,  the  latter  an  ensign  in  the  Royal  Welsh  Fusiliers.
While  dining  they  were  talking  of  my  eldest  brother.  My  husband  was  about
to  describe  his  appearance  when  found,  when  my  brother  described  what  he
had  seen,  and  to  the  astonishment  of  all  present,  the  description  of  the  wounds
tallied  with  the  facts.  My  husband  was  my  eldest  brother's  greatest  friend,  and
was  among  those  who  saw  the  body  as  soon  as  it  was  found.

It  will  be  seen  that  this  corroboration  varies  from  the  previous  account
in  two  points,  which,  however,  do  not  greatly  affect  its  value.  The  date
was  really  September  9th,  not  the  8th — but  it  is  very  natural  that  the
vision  should  have  become  associated  with  the  memorable  date,  which  was
of  course  the  8th ;  and  the  figure  was  kneeling,  not  standing.

727  A.  The  following  case  (quoted  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
vol.  ii.  p.  216,  foot-note)  was  received  from  the  Rev.  Arthur  Bellamy,  of
Publow  Vicarage,  Bristol,  in  February  1886 ;  but  the  particulars  were  first
published  in  1878.

When  a  girl  at  school  my  wife  made  an  agreement  with  a  fellow  pupil,  Miss
W.,  that  the  one  of  them  who  died  first  should,  if  Divinely  permitted,  appear
after  her  decease  to  the  survivor.  In  1874  my  wife,  who  had  not  seen  or  heard
anything  of  her  former  school-friend  for  some  years,  casually  heard  of  her
death.  The  news  reminded  her  of  her  former  agreement,  and  then,  becoming
nervous,  she  told  me  of  it.  I  knew  of  my  wife's  compact,  but  I  had  never  seen
a  photograph  of  her  friend,  or  heard  any  description  of  her.  [Mr.  Bellamy  told
Gurney,  in  conversation,  that  his  mind  had  not  been  in  the  least  dwelling  on
the  cpmpact.]

A  night  or  two  afterwards  as  I  was  sleeping  with  my  wife,  a  fire  brightly
burning  in  the  room  and  a  candle  alight,  I  suddenly  awoke,  and  saw  a  lady
sitting  by  the  side  of  the  bed  where  my  wife  was  sleeping  soundly.  At  once  I
sat  up  in  the  bed,  and  gazed  so  intently  that  even  now  I  can  recall  her  form
and  features.  Had  I  the  pencil  and  the  brush  of  a  Millais,  I  could  transfer  to
canvas  an  exact  likeness  of  the  ghostly  visitant.  I  remember  that  I  was  much
struck,  as  I  looked  intently  at  her,  with  the  careful  arrangement  of  her  coiffure,
every  single  hair  being  most  carefully  brushed  down.  How  long  I  sat  and
gazed  I  cannot  say,  but  directly  the  apparition  ceased  to  be,  I  got  out  of  bed  to


727B]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  351

see  if  any  of  my  wife's  garments  had  by  any  means  optically  deluded  me.  I
found  nothing  in  the  line  of  vision  but  a  bare  wall.  Hallucination  on  my  part
I  rejected  as  out  of  the  question,  and  I  doubted  not  that  I  had  really  seen  an
apparition.  Returning  to  bed,  I  lay  till  my  wife  some  hours  after  awoke  and
then  I  gave  her  an  account  of  her  friend's  appearance.  I  described  her  colour,
form,  &c.,  all  of  which  exactly  tallied  with  my  wife's  recollection  of  Miss  W.
Finally  I  asked,  "  But  was  there  any  special  point  to  strike  one  in  her  appear-
ance ?  "  "  Yes,"  my  wife  promptly  replied ;  "  we  girls  used  to  tease  her  at  school
for  devoting  so  much  time  to  the  arrangement  of  her  hair."  This  was  the  very
thing  which  I  have  said  so  much  struck  me.  Such  are  the  simple  facts.

I  will  only  add  that  till  1874  I  had  never  seen  an  apparition,  and  that  I  have
not  seen  one  since.  ARTHUR  BELLAMY.

We  have  also  seen  an  account  written  by  Mrs.  Bellamy  in  May  1879,
which  entirely  agrees  with  the  above,  except  that  she  "  thinks  it  was  a
fortnight  after  the  death  "  that  the  vision  occurred,  and  that  the  light  was
"  the  dim  light  of  a  night-lamp."  She  says,  "  The  description  accorded
in  all  points  with  my  deceased  friend."  In  conversation,  Mr.  Bellamy
described  the  form  as  seen  in  a  very  clear  light ;  and  this  may  account
for  his  idea  that  the  room  itself  was  lighted  by  fire  and  candle.
Gurney  adds : —

This  experience,  as  I  have  said,  may  have  been  purely  subjective ;  and
identification  of  a  person's  appearance  by  mere  description  is  generally  to  be
regarded  with  great  doubt.  But  in  view  of  the  circumstances,  and  especially
of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Bellamy  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination,  two
alternative  hypotheses  seem  at  least  worth  suggesting.  (i)  Believers  in
telepathic  phantasms  may  suspect  Mr.  Bellamy's  experience  to  have  been
conditioned  by  his  wife's  state  of  mind — possibly  even  by  a  dream,  forgotten  on
waking,  in  which  her  friend  figured.  (2)  Believers  in  the  possibility  of  post-
mortem communications,  if  they  believe  that  this  was  one  of  them,  might
further  suppose  that  Mr.  Bellamy's  experience  depended  on  a  psychical  in-
fluence exercised  in  the  first  instance  on  Mrs.  Bellamy,  though  acting  below  the
level  of  her  normal  consciousness.  To  me,  I  confess,  this  appears  a  more
reasonable  supposition  than  that  a  direct  influence  (so  to  speak)  missed  its
mark,  and  was  exercised  on  Mr.  Bellamy  by  a  stranger  who  cared  nothing
about  him.

727  B.  The  following  is  another  case  which  seems  analogous  to  a
deflected  fulfilment  of  a  compact,  though  we  do  not  know  that  any  compact
to  appear  had  been  made,  but  only  that  the  dying  person  had  had  a  strong
desire  to  see  her  niece  before  she  died.  The  case  is  taken  from  the
"Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.
p.  263.  The  account,  given  by  Miss  S.  Money,  was  written  in  1890.

47  UPPER  BAKER  STREET,  REGENT'S  PARK,  N.W.

At  Redhill  on  Thanksgiving  Day,  between  eight  and  nine  in  the  evening,
when  I  was  taking  charge  of  the  little  daughter  of  a  friend,  during  [my]  friend's
absence  for  that  evening,  I  left  the  child  sleeping  in  the  bedroom,  and  went


352  APPENDICES  [727  B

to  drop  the  blinds  in  two  neighbouring  rooms,  being  absent  about  three  minutes.
On  returning  to  the  child's  room,  in  the  full  light  of  the  gas-burner  from  above
I  distinctly  saw,  coming  from  the  child's  cot,  a  white  figure,  which  figure  turned,
looked  me  full  in  the  face,  and  passed  down  the  staircase.  I  instantly  followed,
leaned  over  the  banisters  in  astonishment,  and  saw  the  glistening  of  the  white
drapery  as  the  figure  passed  down  the  staircase,  through  the  lighted  hall,  and
silently  through  the  hall  door  itself,  which  was  barred,  chained,  and  locked.  I
felt  for  the  moment  perfectly  staggered,  went  back  to  the  bedroom,  and  found
the  child  peacefully  sleeping.  I  related  the  circumstance  to  the  mother  im-
mediately on  her  return  late  that  night.  She  was  incredulous,  but  said  that  my
description  of  the  figure  answered  to  that  of  an  invalid  aunt  of  the  child's.  The
next  morning  came  a  telegram  to  say  that  this  relative,  who  had  greatly  wished
to  see  her  niece,  had  died  between  eight  and  nine  the  previous  evening.

I  had  just  put  down  the  Pickwick  Papers  with  which  I  had  been  whiling
the  time,  was  free  from  trouble,  and  in  good  health.

No  one  was  in  the  house  but  myself,  the  child,  and  one  servant,  who,  at  the
time,  was  in  the  kitchen,  dressed  in  black.

This  is  the  only  experience  of  this  nature  I  have  ever  had.

P.S.— The  writer  cannot  give  the  date  in  figures  without  reference  to  an
almanac  of  that  year,  but  is  certain  that  this  occurred  on  the  evening  of
Thanksgiving  Day  for  the  recovery  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  [*.*.,  February
2;th,  1872.]  S.  MONEY.

In  answer  to  our  inquiries,  the  collector,  Miss  B.  Garnett,  writes  :—

HIGHLANDS,  CLARENDON  ROAD,  LEWISHAM,  S.E.,
December  2Oth,  1890.

I  obtained  lately  an  interview  with  Miss  Money,  and  wrote  down  her  replies
to  the  four  questions  enclosed.  This  was  all  the  information  she  was  able  to
give.  I  should  state  that  Miss  Money's  rather  interesting  experience  was  told
me  long  before  I  was  asked  to  collect  answers  for  the  Society,  and  then  merely
was  told  by  her  in  the  course  of  conversation,  when  I  had  been  expressing  my
scepticism  about  all  so-called  spiritual  manifestations.  She  then  said  she  had
been  utterly  sceptical  until  she  herself  met  with  this  experience.

The  replies  enclosed  were  : —

1.  The  child's  mother  died  about  ten  or  eleven  years  ago.

2.  Miss  Money  did  not  even  know  of  the  existence  of  the  aunt  at  the  time
of  [her]  experience.

3.  Miss  Money  has  scruples  about  giving  the  name  without  permission.
She  states  that  the  aunt  was  a  single  woman,  and  a  step-sister  of  the  father  of
the  child,  and  that  the  aunt  was  not  living  near.

4.  As  the  lady  (the  aunt)  was  no  acquaintance  of  Miss  Money's,  and  as  she
heard  no  further  details,  she  knows  of  no  further  way  of  proving  the  fact.    Miss
Money  lost  sight  of  the  parents,  having  been  abroad  herself  for  many  years
afterwards.

Miss  Garnett  says  further,  in  speaking  of  the  original  account,  which
was  first  given  to  her  verbally  by  Miss  Money,  "  It  was  clearly  and  re-
peatedly given,  amid  many  critical  suggestions  on  my  part.  I  may  add
that  Miss  Money's  testimony  on  any  subject  is  one  that  I  have  always


728A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  353

found  reliable.  I  merely  add  this  because  there  are  so  many  people  who
seem  scarcely  able  to  help  exaggerating  in  the  direction  of  the  particular
bias  of  their  minds."

Mr.  Podmore  called  on  Miss  Money  on  February  2nd,  1892,  and
heard  full  particulars  of  the  incident  from  her.  He  further  ascertained
that  no  corroboration  is  now  obtainable,  and  that  Miss  Money  has  failed
to  obtain  permission  to  give  the  name  of  the  lady  who  died.  We  have
therefore  been  unable  to  verify  the  date  of  the  death.

728  A.  From  the  "  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  383.  "  In  the  case  we  have  next  to  quote  "
(say  the  writers  of  the  "Report"),  "unless  we  accept  the  hypothesis  of
chance-coincidence — the  evidence  for  the  agency  of  the  dead  is  certainly
strong,  because  any  other  explanation  compatible  with  the  veracity  of
the  narrators  requires  a  very  complicated  and  improbable  hypothesis  as
regards  the  sub-conscious  action  of  Senhor  Cabral's  mind.  The  case
came  into  our  collection  merely  as  a  tactile  hallucination :  but  the  main
interest  of  it  depends  on  the  coincident  experience  of  Donna  Feliciana
Fortes.  It  seems  doubtful  from  the  account  given  whether  she  had  a
hallucinatory  vision,  or  merely  a  mental  vision,  but  for  our  present  pur-
pose this  is  unimportant."

From  SENHOR  ULYSSES  J.  C.  CABRAL.

RUA  ESCOBAR  48,  Rio  DE  JANEIRO,  March.  i2th,  1892.

[After  relating  his  first  meeting  in  June  1886,  with  "  Deolinda,"  a  child
whom  he  had  found  in  great  poverty  and  had  taken  charge  of,  and  her  death
from  consumption  shortly  afterwards,  Senhor  Cabral  continues  :  — ]

Some  months  passed,  and  my  family  (which  now  included  my  wife's  other
sister,  Amelia)  went  to  stay  at  a  plantation  belonging  to  friends.  I  escorted
them  thither,  and  returned  to  attend  to  my  obligations  in  the  city.  In  order
not  to  be  alone,  I  accepted  the  invitation  of  my  friend,  Barboza  de  Andrade,
and  went  to  live  with  him  in  S.  Christovam.  One  month  afterwards,  a  sister
of  Barboza's,  who  was  ill,  came  into  his  house.  She  grew  daily  worse,  and
after  the  lapse  of  a  few  months  had  sunk  so  low  that  we  had  to  sit  up  with  her
at  night.

One  night,  when  I  had  taken  my  turn  at  nursing,  I  felt  sleepy,  and  went
to  lie  down.  Two  sisters,  Donnas  Anna  Ignez  Dias  Fortes  and  Feliciana  Dias
(now  deceased),  took  my  place.  I  had  made  their  acquaintance  but  a  few
days  before.  After  stretching  myself  on  the  bed,  I  was  rilled  with  a  feeling  of
unbounded  joy.  I  was  happy,  and  could  not  imagine  what  was  the  cause  of
my  happiness.  I  had  a  sensation  as  if  some  one  were  holding  my  head  and
placing  something  round  it.

Astonished  at  my  experience,  I  called  to  the  ladies  who  were  watching  in
the  next  room,  and  Donna  Feliciana,  though  from  the  place  where  she  was
seated  she  could  not  see  me,  answered  me  back,  "  I  see  at  your  bedside  a
spirit  child  clothed  in  white.  She  places  on  your  head  a  crown  of  roses.  She
says  her  name  is  Deolinda,  and  she  comes  to  thank  you  for  the  kindness  and
charity  with  which  you  behaved  to  her."  I  was  amazed  at  such  a  declaration,
for  that  very  day  was  the  anniversary  of  Deolinda's  death,  and  neither  I  nor

VOL.    II.  Z


354  APPENDICES  [728  A

any  other  person  in  the  house  had  recollected  this.1     Besides,  I  had  never
spoken  on  the  subject.

The  two  ladies  were  worthy  of  the  highest  respect.  As  for  Donna  Anna
Fortes,  who  is  still  alive,  our  friendship  is  now  of  long  standing,  and  I  render
her  all  the  homage  which  her  virtue  and  goodness  merit.

ULYSSES  CABRAL,
(Director  of  the  "  Atheneu  Brazileiro  ").

The  following  corroborative  statements  were  obtained  by  Professor
Alexander:  —

Rio  DE  JANEIRO,  March  i6th,  1892.

The  part  of  the  above  narrative  which  respects  me  is  exact.  I  am  sure  that
neither  my  sister  nor  I  knew  of  the  story  of  Deolinda  before  she  was  seen  by
the  side  of  Senhor  Ulysses  Cabral  on  the  night  mentioned.

ANNA  IGNEZ  DIAS  FORTES.

Rio  DE  JANEIRO,  March  \*jth,  1892.

The  above  narrative  coincides  with  our  recollection  of  what  happened  in
our  house.2  We  are  certain  that  our  friend,  Senhor  Ulysses  Cabral,  told  us
the  story  of  Deolinda  only  after  the  latter  had  been  seen  by  Donna  Feliciana
Fortes.  MANUEL  JM.  BARBOZA  DE  ANDRADE.

EMILIA  BARBOZA  DE  ANDRADE.

Professor  Alexander  writes  : —

Rio  DE  JANEIRO,  March  17 'th,  1892.

In  reply  to  further  questions,  Senhor  Ulysses  Cabral  said  the  sensation  on
the  head  was  that  of  a  slight  but  distinct  compression.  He  supposed  at  first
that  a  towel  had  in  some  way  wound  itself  round  his  head.  He  did  not  speak
of  this  sensation  to  the  ladies  in  the  next  room.  The  ecstatic  feeling  would
not  allow  him  to  sleep  when  he  lay  down.  It  was  on  the  night  of  the  anni-
versary of  the  child's  death,  about  twelve  o'clock,  that  this  occurred.  Senhor
Cabral  believed  that  he  had  not  spoken  of  Deolinda  to  the  people  of  the  house,
and  this  is  confirmed,  if  there  are  no  lapses  of  memory,  by  the  statements  of
the  other  persons  concerned.  He  thought  that  the  lustre  of  his  deed  of  charity
would  be  somewhat  tarnished  if  told  even  to  friends.  Though  at  my  request
he  has  made  the  whole  incident  public,  he  does  so,  I  am  well  assured,  with  the
intention  of  helping  us  in  a  quest  which  he  holds  to  be  all-important.  Both
he  and  Donna  Anna  Fortes  affirm  that  they  came  together  in  that  house  for
the  first  time  on  that  night,  although  they  had  met  once  or  twice  before  at
Spiritist  sittings.  The  lady  says  they  were  conversing  about  Spiritism  at  the
time  of  Senhor  Cabral's  experience.

Donna  Feliciana  Fortes,  now  dead,  was  a  remarkable  sensitive,  according
to  the  accounts  I  have  received  of  her  by  surviving  friends.

The  witnesses  to  the  above  case  are  all  Spiritists ;  but  they  are  people  in
whose  veracity  I  can  trust  implicitly.  ALFRED  ALEXANDER.

"If"  (say  the  writers  of  the  "  Report  ")  "we  are  to  exclude  Deolinda's
agency  here,  we  must  suppose  that  Senhor  Cabral  was  sub-consciously

1  Note  by  the  collector,  Professor  Alexander  : —  "  According  to  the  other  state-
ments, no  other  person  in  the  house  knew  anything  about  Deolinda. — A.  A."

2  "  They  were  sleeping  at  the  time,  and  only  heard  of  it  the  next  day. — A.  A."


728B]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  355

aware  that  it  was  the  anniversary  of  her  death,  and  that  this  sub-conscious
recollection  produced  by  association  the  feeling  of  happiness  and  the
tactile  hallucination,  without  even  then  influencing  his  conscious  memory ;
and,  further,  that  the  other  witnesses  were  affected  by  telepathic  influence
from  his  unconscious  memory.  This  is  certainly  a  highly  strained  hypo-
thesis, and  a  few  more  well-evidenced  cases  of  this  sort  would  go  far  to
establish  the  agency  of  the  dead."

728  B.  From  the  "  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  371.  Mrs.  B.  writes  as  follows : —

April  1892.

At  Fiesole,  on  March  nth,  1869, 1  was  giving  my  little  children  their  dinner
at  half-past  one  o'clock.  It  was  a  fine  hot  day.  As  I  was  in  the  act  of  serving
macaroni  and  milk  from  a  high  tureen,  so  that  I  had  to  stand  to  reach  it,  and
give  my  attention  to  what  I  was  doing — on  raising  my  head  (as  much  from
fatigue  as  for  any  purpose),  the  wall  opposite  me  seemed  to  open,  and  I  saw  my

mother  lying  dead  on  her  bed  in  her  little  house  at .     Some  flowers  were

at  her  side  and  on  her  breast  ;  she  looked  calm,  but  unmistakably  dead,  and  the
coffin  was  there.

It  was  so  real  that  I  could  scarcely  believe  that  the  wall  was  really  brick
and  mortar,  and  not  a  transparent  window — in  fact,  it  was  a  wall  dividing  the
hotel  in  which  we  were  living  from  the  Carabinieri.

I  was  in  very  weak  health — suffering  intensely  with  neuralgia — having  gone
through  a  bad  confinement,  brought  on  by  travelling — the  baby  was  almost
still-born,  on  January  3ist.

Owing  to  a  family  quarrel,  I  had  left  England  without  telling  my  people
where  I  was  going ;  but  I  was  so  fond  of  my  mother  that,  when  in  Paris,  I
made  an  excuse  to  write  to  an  old  servant,  who  lived  with  my  mother,  to  ask
her  for  a  toy  which  we  had  left  with  her,  the  object  being  to  get  news  of  my
mother.  Reply  came  that  for  years  she  had  not  been  so  well  and  strong ;  thus
I  had  no  reason  for  imagining  her  to  be  dead.

I  was  so  distressed  at  the  vision  that  I  wrote  to  her  (my  mother)  to  give  her
my  address,  and  entreat  her  to  let  me  know  how  she  was.  By  return  of  post
came  the  statement  that  she  had  died  on  March  5th,  and  was  buried  on  the
nth.  At  the  hour  I  saw  her  she  was  removed  from  her  home  to  Kensal  Green
Cemetery.  She  had  wished  to  see  me  so  much  that  letters  had  been  sent  to  a
great  many  continental  cities,  hoping  I  might  be  found  ;  but  I  never  got  a  letter
from  my  sister  till  long  after  I  had  received  the  news  of  my  mother's  death.

When  I  was  married  my  mother  made  me  promise  as  I  was  leaving  home
to  be  sure  to  let  her  know  in  any  way  God  permitted  if  I  died,  and  she  would
try  to  find  some  way  of  communicating  to  me  the  fact  of  her  death,  supposing
that  circumstances  prevented  the  usual  methods  of  writing  or  telegraphing.  I
considered  the  vision  a  fulfilment  of  this  promise,  for  my  mind  was  engrossed
with  my  own  grief  and  pain — the  loss  of  baby,  and  my  neuralgia,  and  the
anxieties  of  starting  a  new  life.

My  youngest  sister,  since  dead,  was  called  to  my  mother,  and  left  Devon-
shire, where  she  was  staying  with  friends,  to  come  home.  When  she  arrived  at
home,  she  entered  the  drawing-room,  but  rushed  out  terrified,  exclaiming  that
she  had  seen  godmamma,  who  was  seated  by  the  fire  in  my  mother's  chair.
Godmamma  had  been  dead  since  1852.  She  had  been  my  mother's  governess


356  APPENDICES  [731  A

— almost  foster-mother ;  had  lived  with  her  during  her  married  life,  been  god-
mother to  her  eldest  girl,  and  when  my  father  died,  had  accepted  the  duty  of
taking  his  place  as  far  as  possible  in  the  family,  to  shield  her  from  trouble  and
protect  her— a  duty  which  she  fulfilled  nobly.

My  other  sister  went  into  the  drawing-room  to  see  what  had  scared  K ,

and  saw  the  figure  of  godmamma  just  as  K had.     Later  in  the  day  the

same  figure  stood  by,  then  sat  on  the  edge  of  my  mother's  bed,  and  was  seen
by  both  my  sisters  and  the  old  servant,  looking  just  as  she  had  when  alive,
except  that  she  wore  a  grey  dress,  and,  as  far  as  we  could  remember,  she  had
always  worn  black.  My  mother  saw  her,  for  she  turned  towards  her  and  said,
"  Mary  " — her  name.

We  have  verified  the  date  of  death  through  the  Register  at  Somerset
House.

Mrs.  B.  has  had  several  other  hallucinatory  experiences,  e.g.,  in  1876,
in  an  Italian  church,  she  saw  an  apparition  of  a  child,  which  had  been
pointed  out  to  her  by  her  little  daughter,  then  aged  three,  but  was  invisible
to  a  friend  who  accompanied  her.  It  disappeared,  and  immediately  after-
wards the  body  of  a  dead  child,  resembling  the  figure  they  had  seen,  was
brought  into  the  church.  The  friend  who  was  with  Mrs.  B.  is  now  dead,
so  that  no  corroboration  can  be  obtained,  her  daughter  not  being  able  to
remember  the  incident.  Most  of  Mrs.  B.'s  other  experiences  were,  so  far
as  can  be  ascertained,  purely  subjective.

Mr.  Podmore,  who  visited  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.  on  April  8th,  1893,
writes : —

April  loth,  1893.

Mrs.  B.  gave  me  a  full  account  of  her  vision  of  her  mother.  She  had
absolutely  no  cause  for  anxiety,  the  last  news  being  that  her  mother  was  better
than  she  had  been  for  years.  There  was  a  chronic  ailment,  but  no  reason  to
anticipate  death  soon.  The  children  were  too  young  to  remember  it,  but
Mr.  B.  told  me  that  he  came  in  a  few  minutes  later  and  comforted  his  wife,
whilst  she  was  crying  on  the  sofa.  A  written  note  of  the  date  was  taken  and
compared  with  the  date  given  in  the  letter  afterwards  received,  but  all
memoranda  and  letters  of  that  time  were  lost.  Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.  are
satisfied  of  the  coincidence  of  the  vision  with  the  day  of  the  funeral.

731  A.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  173.  The  following
case  was  sent  to  us  by  Mrs.  Browne,  of  Bidston,  Alleyn  Road,  West  Dul-
wich.  The  first  narrative  is  extracted  from  an  account  privately  printed
a  few  months  after  the  events  occurred.

HAYLETT  HOUSE,  SURBITON,T«/J/  1891.

Newbray  Hall  was  drowned  off  Start  Point,  Devon,  during  the  great  storm
of  March  9th,  1891,  his  vessel,  the  Marana,  being  one  of  the  many  which  were
lost  at  that  spot.

He  had  had  the  offer  of  two  or  three  vessels,  including  the  Marana,  and
came  home  on  the  28th  February,  to  consider  what  he  should  do,  and  discussed
the  matter  at  considerable  length  on  Tuesday  evening,  the  3rd  March,  with  his
father  and  Captain  Byng,  an  old  naval  friend.  The  deceased  slept  at  home  on


731  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  357

Wednesday  and  Friday,  and  stated  that  he  would  return  to  dinner  on  the
Saturday,  but  he  did  not  do  so,  and  on  Monday  morning  his  mother  received  a
letter  from  him  stating  that  he  had  sailed  the  previous  day  in  the  Marana.

On  Monday  evening  the  storm  took  place,  and  on  the  Tuesday  or  Wednes-
day night  following,  Miss  Annie  Hall,  aged  twenty-seven,  the  sister  of  the
deceased,  dreamt  that  she  saw  her  brother  on  a  raft  apparently  composed  of
loose  planks  of  wood,  and  he  appeared  to  be  swimming.  On  the  same  or  sub-
sequent nights  she  had  other  dreams,  in  which  she  saw  her  brother  lying  in  a
room,  but  she  was  unable  to  say  whether  alive  or  dead.  This  all  took  place
before  any  news  had  been  received  of  the  loss  of  the  Marana,  and  Miss  Hall
related  her  dreams  immediately  to  Mrs.  Syms,  aged  forty,  who  had  lived  with
the  family  as  cook  for  about  ten  years.  On  Friday  night  a  telegram  was  re-
ceived at  Surbiton  from  the  owners  stating  that  the  Marana  had  been  wrecked,
and  on  the  Saturday  morning  Mr.  Wood,  who  was  in  the  employ  of  the  de-
ceased's father,  went  down  to  Devonshire,  and  having  ascertained  that  the  body
of  the  deceased  had  been  recovered,  and  was  lying  in  a  house  at  Prawle,  South
Devon,  he  identified  it,  and  brought  it  to  Brookwood  for  burial.

Matters  remained  in  this  position  until  the  i6th  June,  when  Mrs.  Hall  and
her  daughter  went  to  the  house  at  Prawle  in  which  the  body  had  been  placed,
and  Miss  Hall  at  once  positively  identified  the  room  as  the  one  she  had  seen  in
her  dreams.  Upon  going  to  the  spot  also  where  the  body  had  been  found,  a
large  number  of  railway  sleepers  were  observed,  which  had  been  washed  up
from  the  wreck,  and,  as  can  be  seen  from  a  photograph,  have  very  much  the
appearance  of  a  raft  such  as  that  described  in  the  first  dream.

The  sister's  dreams,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  accurately  represented  the
events  which  took  place  in  connection  with  the  death  of  her  brother.

Miss  Hall  wrote  to  Mrs.  Browne  : —

BLENHEIM  LODGE,  SURBITON, /«/*/  4//z,  1895.

My  brother  Newbray  sailed  on  Sunday,  March  8th,  1891,  in  the  Marana,  a
small  steamer,  as  he  had  to  fill  up  six  months  before  he  could  pass  as  captain  •
then  he  was  going  in  the  P.  &  O.  I  had  no  idea  Newbray  was  going  to  sail  so
soon,  but  we  were  to  meet  him  in  London  on  Saturday,  March  7th,  but  he
didn't  come.  On  Sunday  mother  had  a  letter  to  say  they  were  sailing  that
morning  and  he  couldn't  get  away.  I  wrote  him  a  long  letter  on  Monday  [the]
9th,  and  in  the  afternoon  went  to  see  a  girl  friend  in  Kingston,  but  I  felt  so  ill
and  depressed  that  I  didn't  stay  very  late.  It  was  about  4.30  when  I  went  into
the  market-place  to  take  the  omnibus  home.  When  I  was  standing  waiting,  a
fearful  gust  of  wind  and  snow  seemed  to  blow,  especially  round  me, — that  was
about  the  time  the  ship  struck, — though  the  storm  was  getting  very  bad  indeed.
Newbray  and  I  were  so  devoted  that  I  felt  he  was  in  some  awful  trouble.  When
I  got  home  I  gave  up  a  concert  I  was  going  to,  as  I  felt  so  ill  and  anxious.  I
didn't  dream  anything  on  the  Monday,  but  on  Tuesday  I  dreamt  that  I  saw  him
on  a  raft  made  up  of  loose  planks  of  wood,  and  he  appeared  to  be  swimming.
On  the  same  and  following  nights  I  had  other  dreams,  and  in  one  particular
one  I  saw  him  lying  on  the  floor  in  a  room  with  a  slanting  roof  ;  he  looked  very
still  and  white,  but  I  couldn't  tell  if  he  were  alive  or  dead.  I  could  tell  the
room  was  in  the  country  somewhere,  as  I  could  see  it  was  whitewashed  and
they  had  red  flowers  in  the  windows.  I  told  our  old  cook,  Mrs.  Syms,  who  had
been  with  us  ten  years,  when  she  came  up  with  my  tea.  On  Friday  we  got  a


358  APPENDICES  [733  A

telegram  to  say  the  Marana  was  wrecked.  On  June  i6th  mother  and  I  went
to  the  house  at  Prawle  where  they  had  taken  his  poor  body.  As  soon  as  I  got
in  I  went  upstairs  to  the  room,  as  I  knew  it  at  once  from  my  dream,  and
pointed  out  to  mother  the  spot  where  he  lay.  The  woman  in  the  house  couldn't
understand  it,  as  I  had  never  been  there.  My  dream  was  accurate  in  every
detail,  even  to  the  low  long  windows,  and  the  most  wonderful  thing  was  that  I
dreamt  the  dream  the  night  he  was  taken  to  the  cottage.  His  body  was  found
amongst  railway  sleepers  that  looked  just  the  same  as  I  saw  them  in  my  first
dream,  so  in  every  respect  my  dreams  represented  accurately  the  events  which
took  place  in  connection  with  my  brother's  death.  I  had  never  been  to  South
Devon,  and  never  heard  of  Prawle.  He  was  twenty-five  and  I  twenty-seven
when  he  died.  We  were  most  devoted.  ANNIE  HALL.

The  following  note  was  written  by  the  servant  to  whom  Miss  Hall
related  her  dreams  at  the  time  : —

BLENHEIM  LODGE,  SURBITON.

Miss  Hall  told  me  about  her  dreams  when  I  took  her  bedroom  tea  in  before
she  was  up.  MARY  SYMS.

Mrs.  Hall  writes  : —

BLENHEIM  LODGE,  SURBITON,/«/J/  \zth.

I  beg  to  say  that  my  daughter,  Annie  Hall,  described  the  room  at  Prawle  to
me  before  we  visited  the  place,  in  fact  so  distinctly  that  on  entering  the  room  I
was  struck  with  the  resemblance  and  turned  to  my  daughter  for  confirmation.

E.  O.  HALL.
Miss  Hall  writes  further : —

BLENHEIM  LODGE,  SURBITON,  July  i2th,  1895.

The  dreams  were  of  conditions  actually  existing,  just  as  it  was  happening
to  my  brother  Newbray,  not  prophetic.  I  have  never  had  any  other  dreams  in
my  life.  And  I  can  only  conclude  that  I  had  these  because  my  brother  and  I
were  so  devoted.

See  also  a  case  given  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  239,  where  a
man  while  boating  sees  in  the  water  a  vision  of  the  soles  of  two  stockinged
feet,  which  he  recognises  as  those  of  a  friend.  The  friend  is  drowning
three  miles  off  at  the  time.

733  A.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  230.  The  following
account  was  sent  to  Mr.  Podmore,  by  Miss  F.  Atkinson,  of  25  Aldershot
Road,  Willesden  Lane,  N.W.,  enclosed  in  a  letter  dated  November  5th,
1893.  Mr.  Podmore  had  received  a  verbal  account  of  the  incident  from
Miss  Atkinson  on  the  previous  day.

On  Saturday,  July  ist,  1893, 1  was  in  L for  the  purpose  of  looking  over

the  old  churches  with  a  friend  with  whom  I  was  staying.     Among  others  we

went  to  St.  M 's.     My  friend  had  been  telling  me  of  a  very  dear  old  friend

of  the  family  who  was  buried  in  that  church,  and  who  had  left  a  sum  of  money
to  have  a  window  put  in  to  his  memory,  and  had  even  had  the  window  prepared
for  the  glass  to  be  put  in,  but  that  the  person  who  had  inherited  his  fortune
neglected  his  wish.  (I  don't  know  how  many  years  he  had  been  dead.)


733A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  359

After  we  had  looked  over  the  church,  and  among  other  things  seen  the
brass  over  this  gentleman's  vault,  we  came  to  the  window  which  ought  to  have
been  filled  in.  I  remember  that  the  neglect  of  his  wish  quite  made  me  angry,

and  I  said,  looking  at  the  window,  "  If  I  was  Dr. I  should  come  back  and

throw  stones  at  it."

Just  then  I  saw  an  old  gentleman  behind  us,  but  thinking  he  was  looking
over  the  church  took  no  notice.  But  my  friend  got  very  white  and  said,  "  Come

away,  there  is  Dr. !  "  Not  being  a  believer  in  apparitions,  I  simply  for  the

moment  thought  she  was  crazy,  though  I  knew  they  were  a  ghost-seeing  family.
But,  when  I  moved,  still  looking  at  him,  and  the  figure  before  my  very  eyes
vanished,  I  had  to  give  in.  Then  it  dawned  upon  me  that  nobody  could  have
been  looking  over  the  church  but  ourselves.

First,  the  church  had  been  empty  when  we  went  in,  and  nobody  could  have
come  in  without  their  footsteps  being  heard,  and  secondly,  the  part  where  we
were  standing  ended  in  a  "  cul  de  sac"  and  the  person  to  get  there  would  have
been  obliged  to  ask  us  to  move,  as  we  entirely  blocked  up  the  narrow  aisle.
For  the  few  moments  he  was  visible  I  saw  him  distinctly ;  he  was  short  and
broad,  and  wore  an  old-fashioned  tie,  and  a  waistcoat  cut  low  and  showing  a
great  deal  of  shirt-front.  One  hand  was  resting  on  a  pew,  and  one  down  at  his
side  holding  his  very  tall  hat.  But  the  thing  that  struck  me  most  was  the  sun
shining  on  his  white  hair,  and  making  it  look  like  silver ;  even  now  I  can  see
him  distinctly  in  my  mind's  eye.  It  certainly  surprised  me  to  see  what  was
apparently  "  too  solid  flesh  "  disappear  before  my  very  eyes,  and  when  we  got
outside  my  friend  told  me  that  his  was  the  figure  which  came  to  different
members  of  their  family  so  often,  and,  indeed,  had  been  the  cause  of  their
leaving  one  house.  One  of  her  sisters  had  been  so  affected  by  it,  that  she  will
never  sleep  alone,  or  go  upstairs  alone.  When  we  got  home  I  easily  recognised
the  doctor  by  his  photograph.  F.  ATKINSON.

In  reply  to  Mr.  Podmore's  further  inquiries,  Miss  Atkinson  writes : —

25  ALDERSHOT  ROAD,  WILLESDEN  LANE,  N.W.,  November  tyk,  1893.

I  have  not  heard  from  Miss yet,  but  am  writing  to  answer  your

questions.

No.  i.  I  heard  no  noise  whatever,  not  the  slightest  sound.  But  I  had  a
feeling  that  I  cannot  describe  that  somebody  was  behind  us.  So  I  turned
round.

No.  2.  As  far  as  I  can  now  remember  we  both  turned  at  precisely  the  same
moment.  My  friend  naturally  recognised  him.  I  did  not  think  anything  of  it,
until  I  saw  her  face  when  I  turned  back  again  to  look  at  the  window.

No.  3.  Long  before  we  went  into  L ,  my  friend  told  me  they  had

been  haunted  to  a  dreadful  extent  at  their  old  house.  But  beyond  saying  that
it  was  a  man  and  an  old  friend  of  her  mother's,  [she]  did  not  describe  it,  and  I
did  not  [pay  any  attention  to  it] — knowing  them  to  be  a  highly  nervous,
hysterical  family.  We  otherwise  never  talked  about  it,  as  she  can't  bear  the

subject.  Afterwards  she  told  me  it  was  Dr. ,  the  figure  we  saw  in  the

church,  who  haunted  them.

No.  4.  The  photograph  was  in  a  frame  and  Mrs. said :  "  Was  it  any-
thing like  this  ?  "  And  it  was  exactly  like  the  figure.  I  forgot  to  tell  you  that
afterwards  my  friend  told  me  that  on  going  into  the  church  she  had  felt
as  though  she  could  not  go  in,  as  if  something  was  there,  but  did  not  like  to


3<5o  APPENDICES  [733  B

say  so  to  me,  as  she  knew  I  very  much  wished  to  go  over  it.     She  also  thought
it  might  frighten  me.

My  only  other  experience  was  when  I  was  a  baby  of  about  two  or  three,
when  my  little  brother,  who  died,  came  to  my  mother,  and  then  to  me :  I  don't
remember  it,  but  my  mother  says  I  cried  out  that  he  had  come  back  again,  and
she  herself  had  just  seen  him.  F.  ATKINSON.

Miss  Atkinson  asked  her  friend  to  give  an  account  of  her  share  in  the
experience,  but  she  declined  to  do  so,  alleging  as  a  reason  her  strong  dis-
like of  the  whole  subject.  We  have,  therefore,  been  unable  to  obtain  any
further  evidence  in  the  matter.

733  B.  The  next  case  is  remarkable  for  the  frequent  repetition  of  the
percipient's  experience.  It  is  one  of  those  that  suggest,  as  we  have  said
(see  703  and  733),  a  kind  of  local  imprint  left  by  past  events,  and
perceptible  at  times  to  persons  endowed  with  some  special  form  of
sensitiveness.  I  quote  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  418,  the
account,  given  by  Mr.  D.  M.  Tyre,  157  St.  Andrew's  Road,  Pollokshields,
Glasgow.

October  $th,  1885.

In  the  summer  of  1874  mv  sister  and  I  went  during  our  holidays  to  stay
with  a  gardener  and  his  wife  in  a  house  which  was  built  far  up,  fully  three-
quarters  of  a  mile,  on  the  face  of  a  hill  overlooking  one  of  the  most  beautiful
lochs  in  Dumbartonshire,  just  on  the  boundary  of  the  Highlands.  A  charming
spot  indeed,  although  far  off  the  main  roadway.  We  never  wearied,  and  so
delighted  were  we  with  the  place  that  my  people  took  a  lease  of  the  house  for
the  following  three  years.  From  this  point  my  narrative  begins.  Being  con-
nected in  business  with  the  city,  we  could  not  get  down  to  Glen  M.  all  together,
so  that  my  two  sisters  and  myself  were  sent  away  early  in  May  to  have  the
house  put  in  order  and  attend  to  the  garden,  &c.  &c.,  for  the  coming  holidays,
when  we  would  be  all  down  together.  We  had  lots  of  work  to  do,  and  as  the
nearest  village  was  five  miles  distant,  and  our  nearest  neighbours,  the  people
at  the  shore,  nearly  a  mile  away,  we  were  pretty  quiet  on  the  hill  and  left  to  our
own  resources.

One  day  my  elder  sister  J.  required  to  go  to  the  village  for  something  or
other,  leaving  us  alone ;  and  as  the  afternoon  came  on  I  went  part  of  the  way
to  meet  her,  leaving  my  other  sister  L.  all  alone.  When  we  returned,  about
6  P.M.,  we  found  L.  down  the  hill  to  meet  us  in  a  rather  excited  state,  saying
that  an  old  woman  had  taken  up  her  quarters  in  the  kitchen  and  was  lying  in
the  bed.  We  asked  if  she  knew  who  she  was.  She  said  no,  that  the  old
wife  was  lying  on  the  bed  with  her  clothes  on,  and  that  possibly  she  was  a
tinker  body  (a  gipsy),  therefore  she  was  afraid  to  go  in  without  us.  We  went
up  to  the  house  with  L. ;  my  younger  sister  L.  going  in  first  said,  on  going  into
the  kitchen,  "  There  she  is,"  pointing  to  the  bed,  and  turning  to  us  expecting
that  we  would  wake  her  up  and  ask  what  she  was  there  for.  I  looked  in  the
bed  and  so  did  my  elder  sister,  but  the  clothes  were  flat  and  unruffled,  and
when  we  said  that  there  was  nothing  there  she  was  quite  surprised,  and  point-
ing with  her  finger,  said,  "  Look,  why  there's  the  old  wife  with  her  clothes  on
and  lying  with  her  head  towards  the  window ;  "  but  we  could  not  see  anything.
Then  for  the  first  time  it  seemed  to  dawn  upon  her  that  she  was  seeing  some-


733B]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  361

thing  that  was  not  natural  to  us  all,  and  she  became  very  much  afraid,  and  we
took  her  to  the  other  room  and  tried  to  soothe  her,  for  she  was  trembling  all
over.  Ghost !  why,  the  thought  never  entered  our  minds  for  a  second;  but  we
started  chopping  wood  and  making  a  fire  for  the  evening  meal.  The  very  idea
of  any  one  being  in  the  bed  was  ridiculous,  so  we  attributed  it  to  imagination,
and  life  at  the  house  went  on  as  usual  for  about  two  days,  when  one  afternoon,
as  we  were  sitting  in  the  kitchen  round  the  fire,  it  being  a  cold,  wet  day  outside,
L.  startled  us  by  exclaiming,  "  There  is  the  old  woman  again,  and  lying  the
same  way."  L.  did  not  seem  to  be  so  much  afraid  this  time,  so  we  asked  her
to  describe  the  figure ;  and  with  her  eyes  fixed  on  the  bed  and  with  motion  of
the  finger,  she  went  on  to  tell  us  how  that  the  old  wife  was  not  lying  under  the
blankets,  but  on  top,  with  her  clothes  and  boots  on,  and  her  legs  drawn  up  as
though  she  were  cold ;  her  face  was  turned  to  the  wall,  and  she  had  on  what  is
known  in  the  Highlands  as  a  "  sow-backed  mutch,"  that  is,  a  white  cap  which
only  old  women  wear;  it  has  a  frill  round  the  front  and  sticks  out  at  the  back,
thus.1  She  also  wore  a  drab-coloured  petticoat,  and  a  checked  shawl  round  her
shoulders,  drawn  tight.  Such  was  the  description  given ;  she  could  not  see  her
face,  but  her  right  hand  was  hugging  her  left  arm,  and  she  saw  that  the  hand
was  yellow  and  thin,  and  wrinkled  like  the  hands  of  old  people  who  have  done
a  lot  of  hard  work  in  their  day.

We  sat  looking  at  the  bed  for  a  long  time,  with  an  occasional  bit  of  informa-
tion from  L.,  who  was  the  only  one  who  saw  the  figure.

This  happened  often — very  often,  indeed  so  frequently  that  we  got  used  to
it,  and  used  to  talk  about  it  among  ourselves  as  "  L.'s  old  woman."

Midsummer  came,  and  the  rest  of  our  people  from  the  city,  and  then  for  the
first  time  we  became  intimate  with  our  neighbours  and  two  or  three  families  at
the  shore.  On  one  occasion  my  elder  sister  brought  up  the  subject  before  a
Mrs.  M'P.,  our  nearest  neighbour,  and  when  she  described  the  figure  to  her,
Mrs.  M'P.  well-nigh  swooned  away,  and  said  that  it  really  was  the  case;  the
description  was  the  same  as  the  first  wife  of  the  man  who  lived  in  the  house
before  us,  and  that  he  cruelly  ill-used  his  wife,  to  the  extent  that  the  last
beating  she  never  recovered  from.  The  story  Mrs.  M'P.  told  runs  somewhat
like  this,  of  which  I  can  only  give  you  the  gist : —

Malcolm,  the  man  of  the  house,  and  his  wife  Kate  (the  old  woman),  lived  a
cat  and  dog  life ;  she  was  hard-working,  and  he  got  tipsy  whenever  he  could.
They  went  one  day  to  market  with  some  fowls  and  pigs,  &c.,  and  on  their  way
back  he  purchased  a  half-gallon  of  whisky.  He  carried  it  part  of  the  way,  and
when  he  got  tired  gave  it  to  her ;  while  he  took  frequent  rests  by  the  wayside.
She  managed  to  get  home  before  him,  and  when  he  came  home  late  he  accused
her  of  drinking  the  contents  of  the  jar.  He  gave  her  such  a  beating  that  he
was  afraid,  and  went  down  to  this  Mrs.  M'P.,  saying  that  his  wife  was  very  ill.
When  Mrs.  M'P.  went  up  to  the  house  she  found  Kate,  as  my  sister  described,
with  her  clothes  on,  and  lying  with  her  face  to  the  wall  for  the  purpose,  as  Mrs.
M'P.  said,  of  concealing  her  face,  which  was  very  badly  coloured  by  the  ill-treat-
ment of  her  husband.  The  finish-up  was  her  death,  she  having  never  recovered.

The  foregoing  is  as  nearly  a  complete  compendium  of  the  facts  as  I,  with  the
help  of  my  sister  J.,  can  remember.

My  sister  L.  is  now  dead,  but  we  often  go  back  to  the  house  when  we  are
any  way  near  the  locality,  because  it  is  a  bright  spot  in  our  memory.

(Signed)        D.  M.  TYRE.

1  A  sketch  of  the  profile  was  here  given.


362  APPENDICES  [735  A

Mr.  Tyre  adds,  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  David  Stewart,  of  Kincaid  House,
Milton  of  Campsie,  N.B.,  who  procured  this  account  for  us  : —

I  was  at  the  house  last  month ;  there  is  no  one  in  it  just  now ;  the  last
tenant  has  gone  abroad,  and  the  house  is  somewhat  dilapidated,  and  the
garden  a  ruin.  We  had  a  look  through  the  window  at  the  old  kitchen  and  saw
our  own  grate  still  remaining.

Mr.  Stewart  wrote  to  us  on  August  i3th,  1885  : —

I  know  how  valuable  the  actual  names  and  localities  would  be,  as  well  as
Mrs.  MT.'s  independent  account,  but  I  have  asked  so  repeatedly,  and  been
told  that  Mrs.  M'P.  had  great  objections  to  publicity,  in  case  it  would  rake  up
old  stories  connected  with  the  case,  that  I  do  not  like  to  ask  again.

735  A.  In  a  case  -published  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  90,  Mr.
Wambey  heard  a  phantasmal  voice  as  though  in  colloquy  with  his  own
thought.  He  was  planning  a  congratulatory  letter  to  a  friend,  when  the
words  "What!  write  to  a  dead  man?  write  to  a  dead  man?"  sounded
clearly  in  his  ears.  The  friend  had  been  dead  for  some  days.  I  add
here  a  case  where  a  message  seemed  to  be  given  by  the  decedent's  voice
in  a  dream.  (From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  455.)

Mr.  George  King,  of  12  Sunderland  Terrace,  Westbourne  Park,  W.,
writes : —

November  %th,  1885.

The  following  is  a  brief  account  of  an  occurrence  that  took  place  eleven
years  ago.  I  repeat  the  facts  exactly  as  they  happened,  and  make  no  attempt
at  comment  or  explanation.  It  is  necessary  to  give  a  few  words  of  prefatory
narrative.

My  brother  D.,  a  few  years  my  junior,  was  a  handsome,  powerful  young
man,  twenty-one  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and  he  was  an  unusually
vigorous  swimmer.  He  had  greatly  distinguished  himself  at  school  and  college,
and  he  was  enthusiastically  devoted  to  scientific  pursuits.  On  leaving  the
Scottish  University  where  he  had  studied,  he  adopted  telegraphic  engineering
for  a  profession,  and  as  all  his  tastes  were  in  that  direction  his  progress  was
rapid.  His  more  especial  department  was  the  construction  and  laying  of  deep-
sea  cables,  and  when  only  twenty  years  of  age  he  was  appointed  to  the  respon-
sible post  of  superintendent  of  the  scientific  department  in  laying  a  cable  for
the  Brazilian  Government.  In  the  performance  of  his  duties  on  the  stormy
Atlantic  coast  of  South  America  he  had  to  encounter  many  perils ;  and  finally
the  steamer  Gornos,  on  which  he  was,  was  totally  wrecked,  and  the  cable  was
lost.  All  lives  were  saved,  though  for  many  hours  the  danger  had  been
extreme.  My  brother  returned  immediately  by  mail  to  London,  and  throughout
the  summer  months  of  1874  was  engaged  in  superintending  the  manufacture
of  fresh  cable  to  replace  that  which  had  become  lost  in  the  Gornos.  During
these  few  months  D.  and  I  had  much  affectionate  intercourse,  and  the  bonds
between  us  (he  was  my  only  brother)  were  drawn  even  closer  than  before.

In  November  1874  the  cable  was  finished  and  shipped  on  board  the
La  Plata,  a  magnificent  steamship,  carrying  with  her  every  appliance  that
could  be  required  to  render  the  expedition  safe.  By  the  wreck  of  the  Gornos
much  valuable  time  had  been  lost,  and  for  six  months  a  huge  sum  of  capital


735  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  363

had  been  lying  idle.  Only  a  small  section  of  cable  was  required  to  complete
the  line,  and  the  contractors,  Siemens  Brothers,  spared  no  expense  to  make
certain  of  success  on  the  second  attempt.  While,  therefore,  we  might  fear  for
my  brother  the  unhealthy  climate  of  some  parts  of  the  coast  of  Brazil,  we  had
no  anxiety  as  regards  the  perils  of  the  sea.

I  bid  D.  farewell  on  Wednesday,  November  2nd  [evidently  meaning  25th,
see  below],  1874.  I  had  a  lecture  to  deliver  that  afternoon,  and  I  could
not  go  to  see  him  off,  and  we  parted  at  the  door  of  my  office.  He  was  the
picture  of  health  and  strength,  and  we  spoke  cheerfully  of  meeting  again  in
a  few  months'  time,  when  his  work  should  be  completed.  The  next  morning
I  had  a  line  from  him,  written  at  the  docks,  and  on  Saturday  a  happy  little
letter,  which  was  posted  by  the  pilot  when  he  landed  at  the  Isle  of  Wight.
Everything  tended  to  reassure  me,  and  I  had  no  sense  of  impending  calamity.

Next  Wednesday  evening,  December  2nd,  I  attended  a  conversazione
at  King's  College,  given  by  Sir  W.  Thomson,  President  of  the  Society  of
Telegraphic  Engineers,  and,  taking  myself  a  keen  interest  in^  science,  my
mind  was  intensely  occupied  with  all  that  I  saw  and  heard.  While  examining
the  beautiful  instruments  exhibited,  I  often  wished  that  my  brother  had  been
there  to  explain  them  to  me,  and  the  many  friends  that  I  met  spoke  to  me  of
him.  He  was  thus  pleasantly  in  my  thoughts,  but  my  mind  was  not  brooding
or  concentrated  on  him.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  disturbed  by  the  multitude
of  objects,  and  only  casual  glances  were  cast  towards  D.  Rather  excited,  I
went  home  to  my  solitary  chambers,  and  retired  to  bed  shortly  after  mid-
night. I  was  soon  asleep,  but  how  long  I  remained  so  I  know  not.  So  far
as  recollection  goes,  I  had  not  been  dreaming,  but  suddenly  I  found  myself
in  the  midst  of  a  brilliant  assembly,  such  as  that  I  had  recently  left  at  King's
College.  I  stood  in  evening  dress  on  the  steps  at  the  entrance  to  a  great  and
crowded  hall.  I  was  looking  towards  the  garden,  brightly  lighted  with  a
multitude  of  lamps.  Illuminated  fountains  were  playing  in  front  of  me,  and
groups  of  gentlemen  and  ladies  sauntered  up  and  down  the  paths.  The  cool
night  air  was  blowing  on  my  face,  and  I  had  a  delicious  feeling  of  pleasure
and  peace.  Two  gentlemen,  strangers  to  me,  stood  talking  on  the  gravel  a
few  paces  from  me.  I  heard  their  voices,  and  could  almost  catch  their  conver-
sation. Suddenly  my  brother  stepped  out  from  behind  them,  and  advanced
towards  me.  He  was  in  evening  dress,  like  all  the  rest,  and  was  the  very
image  of  buoyant  health.  I  was  much  surprised  to  see  him,  and,  going
forward  to  meet  him,  I  said:  "Hallo!  D.,  how  are  you  here?"  He  shook
me  warmly  by  the  hand,  and  replied:  "Did  you  not  know  I  have  been
wrecked  again  ?  "  At  these  words  a  deadly  faintness  came  over  me.  I  seemed
to  swim  away  and  sink  to  the  ground.  After  momentary  unconsciousness
I  awoke,  and  found  myself  in  my  bed.  I  was  in  a  cold  perspiration,  and
had  paroxysms  of  trembling,  which  would  not  be  controlled.  I  argued  with
myself  on  the  absurdity  of  getting  into  a  panic  over  a  dream,  but  all  to  no
purpose,  and  for  long  I  could  not  sleep.  Towards  morning  I  again  slumbered,
and  the  fear  passed  off  from  me.  On  Thursday,  December  3rd,  I  was  to
breakfast  with  a  friend,  at  his  hotel,  before  he  started  for  Scotland,  and  I
went  to  Euston  by  the  Metropolitan  Railway.  The  bookstalls  on  my  side  of
the  station  were  not  yet  opened,  but  across  the  line  the  boys  were  arranging
the  papers,  and  they  spread  out  the  placard  of  the  Daily  Telegraph.  In  large
letters  on  it  were  the  words  :  "  Terrible  disaster  at  sea.  Loss  of  a  steamship


364  APPENDICES  [735  A

and  sixty  lives."  I  felt  as  if  iced  water  had  been  poured  over  me,  and  the
dread  of  the  night  before  returned;  but  my  train  glided  up  to  the  platform,
and  I  could  not  get  a  paper.  The  gentleman  next  me  in  the  carriage  was
reading  the  Daily  Telegraph,  and  I  looked  over  his  shoulder,  and  saw,  under
a  sensational  heading,  the  words  :  "  By  the  arrival  in  the  Thames,  yesterday,
of  the  Antenor,  &c.";  but  the  motion  of  the  train  prevented  me  from  reading
properly,  and  1  thought  the  sentence  ran :  "  By  the  arrival  of  the  Thames,
news  of  the  Antenor,  &c.  &c."  I  therefore  gathered  that  the  Antenor  had
been  lost.  On  arriving  at  my  destination  I  got  the  Times,  and  looked  it  over
from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  but  it  contained  no  mention  of  the  shipwreck.
Later  on  I  went  to  my  office  and  began  my  work,  but  presently  one  of  the
messengers,  with  a  strange  look  in  his  face,  came  to  me  and  said  :  "  Is  it  true,
sir,  that  your  brother  has  been  lost  in  the  La  Plata  f  "  I  started  up  and  ran
to  the  Marine  Company  next  door,  and  there  the  very  worst  fears  were  con-
firmed. The  La  Plata  foundered  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay  at  about  noon  on  Sunday,
November  24th  [evidently  a  slip  for  29th,  see  below],  1874,  after  being  exposed
for  only  a  few  hours  to  a  terrific  gale.  No  satisfactory  reason  for  the
catastrophe  was  ever  forthcoming.  Why  a  well-found  and  powerful  steamer
should  have  gone  down  in  open  sea,  when  a  common  rowing-boat  should  have
survived,  is  a  mystery  which  remains  unsolved.  The  event  created  a  great
sensation  at  the  time,  and  a  long  Board  of  Trade  inquiry  was  held,  but  the
riddle  was  never  answered.

I  saw  some  of  the  survivors  of  the  crew,  and  learned  from  them  about  my
brother.  Although  the  weather  had  been  rough,  danger  was  not  feared  until
Sunday  morning,  when  water  began  to  rush  into  the  engine-room,  and  quickly
put  out  the  fires.  My  brother  toiled  with  the  sailors  to  get  steam  up  in  the
donkey-engine  on  deck  so  as  to  work  the  pumps,  and  he  nobly  encouraged
the  men.  This,  however,  proved  useless,  and  when  the  boat  pushed  off  from
the  ship,  the  last  seen  of  my  brother  was  that  he  was  helping  to  launch  the
life-raft.

The  La  Plata  foundered  at  about  noon  on  Sunday,  November  29th,  and
possibly  D.  perished  then  and  there.  But  he  may  possibly  have  survived  for
several  days.  He  was  of  strong  constitution ;  he  was  a  powerful  swimmer  ;  he
had  on  an  air-belt,  and  he  was  beside  the  life-raft  when  the  ship  went  down.
On  December  2nd,  two  sailors  were  picked  up  alive.  Half-immersed  in  the  ice-
cold  water,  they  had  clung  to  the  life-raft  and  drifted  about  the  Atlantic  for
three  whole  days.  I  add  this  last  note  to  show  that  it  is  just  possible  that  I  had
the  vision  of  my  brother  near  the  morning  of  his  death,  although  more  probably
he  died  three  days  before.

In  conclusion,  I  must  say  that  I  speak  of  a  "vision  "  because  the  whole  of
my  sensations  while  the  scene  was  passing  before  me,  and  subsequently,  were
quite  different  from  those  that  accompany  an  ordinary  dream.  Also  I  can  see
everything  now  in  my  mind  as  clearly  as  at  the  moment  when  I  awoke,  whereas
with  me  even  the  most  vivid  dreams  always  gradually  fade  away.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  King  says  : —

November  \$th,  1885.

The  vision  of  my  brother  was  quite  unique.  I  never  before  or  since  had  a
vision  of  a  person  whom  I  believed  to  be  in  the  flesh,  and  never  had  an  external
event  such  as  the  shipwreck  thus  conveyed  to  me.  Much  less  have  I  ever  had


736A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  365

a  vision  which  was  falsified  by  the  event.     Also  never  before  or  since  have  I
had  sensations  similar  to  those  that  accompanied  the  vision  of  my  brother.

GEORGE  KING.

The  first  announcement  of  the  wreck  of  the  La  Plata  appeared  in  the
Daily  Telegraph,  December  3rd,  1874,  and  in  the  same  issue  an  account
appears  of  a  conversazione  given  the  night  before  at  King's  College,
Strand,  by  Sir  Wm.  Thomson,  President  of  the  Society  of  Telegraph
Engineers.

On  December  loth,  in  the  same  paper,  a  telegram  is  printed  giving  an
account  of  the  rescue  of  the  boatswain  and  quartermaster  of  the  La  Plata,
who  were  found  clinging  to  some  wreckage  by  a  Dutch  cutter.  It  is  stated
that  the  steamer  foundered  on  November  2pth,  and  that  those  two  men
clung  to  the  wreckage  until  picked  up  at  10  A.M.  on  December  2nd.

The  La  Plata  left  Gravesend  for  Rio  Janeiro  on  November  26th,
1874,  and  foundered  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  as  we  learn  from  the  Marine
Department,  Board  of  Trade,  on  the  29th.  The  survivors  were  picked
up  by  the  Gare  Loch,  and  transferred  to  the  homeward-bound  ss.
Antenor,  which  arrived  with  them  and  the  first  news  in  the  Thames  on
December  2nd.

736  A.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  218.  The  following
account  was  written  out  by  me  on  December  22nd,  1888,  from  notes
taken  during  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Davies  the  same  day ;  and  was  after-
wards revised  and  signed  by  Mrs.  Davies.

About  twenty  years  ago  I  was  living  with  my  mother  and  brother  at  Islington.
Near  us  lived  a  family  whose  name  is  not  important  to  the  narrative.  One  of
their  daughters  married  a  Mr.  J.  W.,  who  went  to  India.  Mrs.  J.  W.  continued
living  at  her  father's  house.  Her  father,  however,  changed  his  residence,  and
as  Mr.  J.  W.'s  address  in  India  was  not  known  at  the  time,  Mrs.  J.  W.  could
not  inform  him  of  the  change  of  address.  The  house  where  she  was  living  with
her  father  when  her  husband  left  home  passed  to  a  family  whom  I  will  call
Brown,  with  whom  I  was  acquainted,  as  I  also  was  with  Mrs.  J.  W.  and  her
family.

One  evening  I  paid  a  visit  to  Mrs.  Brown,  and  she  gave  me  an  Indian  letter
which  had  arrived  for  Mrs.  J.  W.  at  the  house  now  occupied  by  the  Browns.
Mrs.  Brown  asked  me  to  transmit  this  letter  to  Mrs.  J.  W.  through  my  brother,
who  frequently  saw  a  brother  of  Mrs.  J.  W.'s.  There  had  thus  been  some  little
delay,  and  perhaps  slackness  in  getting  the  letter  sent  on  to  Mrs.  J.  W.  I  pro-
mised to  give  it  to  my  brother,  and  took  it  home.  It  was  a  dirty-looking  letter,
addressed  in  an  uneducated  handwriting,  and  of  ordinary  bulk.  I  placed  it  on
the  chimney-piece  in  our  sitting-room,  and  sat  down  alone.  I  expected  my
brother  home  in  an  hour  or  two.  The  letter,  of  course,  in  no  way  interested
me.  In  a  minute  or  two  I  heard  a  ticking  on  the  chimney-piece,  and  it  struck
me  that  an  old-fashioned  watch  which  my  mother  always  had  standing  in  her
bedroom  must  have  been  brought  downstairs.  I  went  to  the  chimney-piece,
but  there  was  no  watch  or  clock  there  or  elsewhere  in  the  room.  The  ticking,
which  was  loud  and  sharp,  seemed  to  proceed  from  the  letter  itself.  Greatly


366  APPENDICES  [736  A

surprised,  I  removed  the  letter  and  put  it  on  a  sideboard,  and  then  in  one  or  two
other  places;  but  the  ticking  continued,  proceeding  undoubtedly  from  where
the  letter  was  each  time.  After  an  hour  or  so  of  this  I  could  bear  the  thing  no
longer,  and  went  out  and  sat  in  the  hall  to  await  my  brother.  When  he  came
in  I  simply  took  him  into  the  sitting-room  and  asked  him  if  he  heard  anything.
He  said  at  once,  "  I  hear  a  watch  or  clock  ticking."  There  was  no  watch  or
clock,  as  I  have  said,  in  the  room.  He  went  to  where  the  letter  was  and
exclaimed,  "  Why,  the  letter  is  ticking."  We  then  listened  to  it  together,
moved  it  about,  and  satisfied  ourselves  that  the  ticking  proceeded  from  the
letter,  which,  however,  plainly  contained  nothing  but  a  sheet  of  paper.  The
impression  which  the  ticking  made  was  that  of  an  urgent  call  for  attention.
My  brother  took  the  letter  to  Mrs.  J.  W.  either  that  night  (it  was  very  late)  or
next  morning.  On  opening  it,  she  found  that  her  husband  had  suddenly  died
of  sunstroke,  and  the  letter  was  written  by  some  servant  or  companion  to
inform  her  of  his  death.  The  ticking  no  doubt  made  my  brother  and  myself
hand  on  the  letter  more  promptly  than  we  might  otherwise  have  done.

I  have  never  experienced  any  other  hallucination  of  the  senses.  I  once
heard  a  strong  push  at  the  street-door  at  the  minute  (for  I  looked  at  my  watch)
that  my  father  died  at  a  distance ;  but,  though  I  went  to  the  door  at  once  and
saw  no  one,  I  cannot,  of  course,  be  sure  that  some  passer-by  might  not  have
pushed  the  door  and  got  out  of  sight ;  for  the  house  was  in  a  street  with  many
passers.  I  have  also  heard  ticks  before  a  death ;  but  these  may  very  likely
have  been  caused  by  the  death-watch  insect ;  which  certainly  was  not  the  case
with  the  ticks  which  came  from  the  letter.  The  incident  of  the  letter  made  a
deep  impression  on  me.  (Signed)  ANNA  DAVIES.

Mr.  Davies,  brother  to  Mrs.  Davies  (who  married  a  gentleman  of  the
same  name),  gives  his  independent  recollection  as  follows : —

64  CHURCH  ROAD,  SOUTHGATE  ROAD,  N.,  February  i$th,  1889.

I  am  afraid  my  recollection  of  the  details  after  so  long  a  time  has  elapsed
is  rather  limited  and  somewhat  hazy,  so  that  if  my  sister  has  expanded
into  details,  and  her  version  should  slightly  differ  from  mine,  please  consider  that
I  bow  to  her  superior  memory,  and  accept  her  account  as  correct.  The  main
features  of  the  incident  are,  however,  as  nearly  as  I  can  recollect,  as  follows : —
One  night,  it  must  be  nearly,  if  not  quite,  thirty  years  ago,  I  returned  home
between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock,  and  my  sister  told  me  that  she  had  brought
home  from  the  house  of  a  friend  of  hers  a  letter  from  India,  addressed  to  a
Mrs.  Walker,  who  had  formerly  lived  at  the  house  the  letter  was  directed  to,
and  being  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Walker  (whose  brother  was  an  intimate  friend
of  mine),  I  was  asked  to  be  the  bearer  of  the  letter  to  her.  I  found  it  on  the
mantelshelf,  and  my  sister  and  myself  heard  very  distinctly  a  clear  ticking
noise,  as  loud  as,  and  similar  to,  that  of  a  small  clock,  which  we  spent  some
time  in  trying  to  account  for,  and  which  we  could  so  clearly  trace  to  the  vicinity
of  the  letter  that  it  seemed  to  proceed  from  the  letter  itself,  but  we  could  find
nothing  which  would  in  any  way  account  for  what  we  heard.  I  delivered  the
letter  to  my  friend  the  following  day  to  hand  to  his  sister,  Mrs.  Walker,  and
afterwards  heard  that  it  contained  the  news  of  the  decease  of  her  husband  in
India.  I  am  not  quite  sure  but  almost  so,  that  on  hearing  the  mysterious  noise
we  remarked  on  the  probable  contents  of  the  letter,  but  we  were  certainly


736B]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  367

struck  with  the  coincidence  of  the  noise  being  heard  whilst  the  letter  was  on  the
shelf  (and  apparently  proceeding  from  it)  and  discontinuing  on  its  removal.

I  have  no  means  of  fixing  the  date,  or  even  the  year,  as  Mrs.  Walker  and
her  brother  have  both  been  dead  for  some  years.  L.  A.  DAVIES.

736  B.  I  give  next  an  account  of  a  case  briefly  mentioned  by  Gurney
in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  690,  about  which  we  afterwards
obtained  further  evidence.  After  mentioning  two  other  cases  in  which
entries  in  the  diary  of  the  percipient— Mr.  Cameron  Grant— confirmed
his  recollection  of  strong  impressions  nearly  coincident  with  deaths,
Gurney  continues  : —

I  have  studied  in  Mr.  Grant's  diary  the  full  record  of  a  third  case  which
was  even  more  remarkable  than  the  first,  as  it  included  the  peculiarity  that,
for  some  time  after  his  first  impression,  he  felt  forcibly  impelled  to  draw  the
figure  of  the  person  who  died.  The  case  was  made  the  more  striking  to  me  by
the  fact  that  Mr.  Grant  was  so  certain  that  the  death  (the  time  of  which  he  had
only  very  vaguely  learnt)  must  have  coincided  in  date  with  his  impression,  that
he  had  actually  not  taken  the  trouble  to  verify  the  coincidence.  He  left  it  to
me  to  find  in  the  Times  obituary — as  he  confidently  foretold  that  I  should — that
the  death  (which  was  quite  unexpected)  occurred,  thousands  of  miles  from  the
place  where  he  was,  on  the  day  preceding  that  on  which  the  entry  in  his  diary,
relating  his  impression  of  the  previous  night,  was  written.  The  impression  of
that  night  did  not,  however,  bear  distinct  reference  to  the  particular  person
who  died,  but  was  a  more  general  sense  of  calamity.  Certain  reasons  which  at
present  make  it  desirable  not  to  publish  the  details  of  this  case  may  in  time
cease  to  exist.

Now,  on  a  fuller  inspection  of  Mr,  Grant's  voluminous  journal  (largely
a  business  record),  which  he  has  kindly  permitted  me  to  make,  it  appeared
that  the  impulse  to  draw  the  dying  man  was  the  most  marked  feature  in
the  whole  incident,  and  furthermore  that  this  impulse  came  on  some
months  after  the  death — but  on  the  night  previous  to  the  day  on  which
Mr.  Grant  saw,  in  a  casual  newspaper  received  in  Brazil,  the  announce-
ment of  his  friend's  demise  in  Scotland.1

The  possibility  of  a  telepathic  impulse  from  the  surviving  members  of
the  family  of  course  suggests  itself :  but  Mr.  Grant  was  in  a  wild  up-country
station  in  Brazil ;  and  it  seems  impossible  that  any  one  could  guess  at
what  date  the  news  would  reach  him.  The  rough  sketch  which  Mr.  Grant
was  impelled  to  make  contained  two  figures  (of  which  the  second  was  a
servant)  and  a  window  ;  and  it  truly  represented,  as  he  afterwards  learnt,
the  circumstances  of  the  death.

The  case  has  been  further  strengthened  by  permission  to  print  the
passages  from  Mr.  Grant's  diary,  and  by  interviews  of  my  own  with  the
widow  and  daughter  of  the  deceased  person,  Lord  Z.  (not  the  true  initial),
who  were  present  at  the  time  of  the  death.

1  I  am  not  sure  how  many  hours  the  impulse  lasted,  Mr.  Grant  having  been  obliged
to  return  to  Brazil  before  sending  me  a  copy  of  the  passage  in  his  journal.


368  APPENDICES  [736  B

The  following  is  Mr.  Grant's  statement,  made  to  me,  July  28th,  1889
(which  I  quote  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  212).

The  first  form  in  which  this  impression  came  to  me  was  that  of  deep
sympathy  for  [a  member  of  Lord  Z.'s  family].  After  this  had  lasted  for  some
time  I  found  myself  rudely  drawing  a  tall  man  stooping  forwards  on  to  another
man.  I  had  a  conviction  that  Lord  Z.  was  dead  —  that  the  falling  forward
indicated  death.  I  also  dimly  perceived  the  position  of  windows  behind  the
falling  figure,  though  I  did  not  draw  these.  I  wrote  to  my  mother  at  once  to
say  that  I  knew  that  Lord  Z.  was  dead.  [Letter  not  preserved.]  I  was  then
up  the  country  in  Brazil,  and  saw  few  papers.  I  heard  from  England  that
Lord  Z.  was  dead ;  but  (as  I  told  Mr.  Gurney)  did  not  look  for  date  in  papers,
and  did  not,  so  far  as  I  know,  hear  the  date  in  any  letter.

On  reaching  England  I  was  partially  hypnotised  by  a  physician  of  my
acquaintance  [name  given]  ;  but  did  not  lose  consciousness.  During  my
semi-trance  I  became  aware  that  I  was  seeing  the  room  and  windows  and  the
falling  figure  more  clearly  than  ever  before.  I  talked  of  this  scene  to  the
physician.  Afterwards  he  invited  me  to  look  in  a  crystal.  I  did  so ;  and  saw
the  same  room,  the  windows,  bed,  and  figure,  more  distinctly.

I  afterwards  went  to  stay  in  the  house  where  Lord  Z.  died.  As  soon  as  I
entered  I  asked  Lady  Z.  to  allow  me  to  describe  to  her  the  room  where  I  had
seemed  to  see  Lord  Z.  dying.  Lady  Z.  was  at  first  incredulous ;  but  on  my
describing  the  position  of  bed  and  windows  she  admitted  that  it  was  correct.
Lord  Z.  had  died  in  a  dressing-room  adjacent  to  his  bedroom.  The  temporary
bed  and  windows  were  exactly  as  I  had  seen  them.  He  had  fallen  forwards
into  the  arms  of  a  male  attendant,  dying  suddenly.

The  first  impression  of  the  death,  which  was  nearly  coincident,  was  on
December  24th,  1885  (date  verified  by  Mr.  Gurney).  Entry  in  diary
December  25th,  1885  :  "There  was  something  upon  my  mind  all  day  from
yesterday — a  sense  of  a  death  or  loss  of  some  one  dear  to  me.  I  spoke
to  E.  C.  [Mr.  Catlin,  the  manager,  who  wrote  in  corroboration]  about  it ;
and  I  don't  know  how  it  is,  but  as  I  wrote  the  above  [a  member  of  Lord
Z.'s  family]  has  been  constantly  in  my  thoughts."

Then  on  Tuesday,  January  26th,  1886,  is  an  entry — read  by  me  in
Mr.  Grant's  journal,  and  copied  for  me  by  him — as  follows  : —

"  Impression  at  about  one  o'clock  and  drawing  and  reasoning  therefrom  on
death."

January  'i'jth. — "  Very  tired,  but  did  not  sleep  a  wink  all  night.  I  am  sure
that  something  has  happened  to  [a  member  of  Lord  Z.'s  family].  I  heard
every  hour  strike,  and  kept  thinking  of  [all  the  members  of  the  family]  but  not
of  the  dear  old  gentleman  {i.e.,  imagining  them  in  sorrow,  but  not  Lord  Z.  him-
self]. I  got  up  and  wanted  to  draw  him.  His  features  seemed  before  me.  I
had  before  shown  Mr.  Catlin  a  face  in  the  Graphic  that  was  like  him,  also  that
of  a  dead  man.  I  had  the  greatest  difficulty  not  to  draw  his  portrait  with  his
head  forward  and  sunk  on  his  breast,  as  if  he  had  been  sitting  in  a  room  with  a
window  on  his  right  hand  and  an  old  man-servant ;  and  then  his  head  just
went  forward,  and  he  fell  asleep.  Weeks  ago  [i.e.,  December  25th]  I  thought
of  him — some  time  about  Christmas;  and  ever  since  I  have  been  feeling  [pity,
&c.,  for  members  of  family]."


736C]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  369

On  the  next  day,  Thursday,  January  28th,  1886,  Mr.  Grant  received
by  accident  a  Scotch  paper  in  which  Lord  Z.'s  death  was  mentioned,  but
apparently  without  the  precise  date.

I  have  received  a  letter  (which  I  have  unfortunately  mislaid)  from  Mr.
Catlin  corroborating  Mr.  Grant's  statements  as  to  his  having  shown  him
drawings  and  spoken  of  the  death  of  a  friend  at  home.

Lady  Z.  and  Miss  Z.  gave  me  in  April  1892  the  following  corrobora-
tion : —

Lord  Z.  died  December  24th,  1885,  in  a  dressing-room  adjoining  his  own
larger  room.  The  dressing-room  was  narrow,  with  a  window  at  one  end,  and  a
small  bed,  then  occupied  by  a  man-servant  who  attended  on  him.  Lord  Z.  had
entered  this  room  to  speak  to  the  servant,  when  he  fell  forward,  the  servant
catching  him  in  his  arms,  and  shortly  afterwards  breathed  his  last.  His  death
was  unexpected,  although  he  had  long  been  ill.  I  remember  that  Mr.  Cameron
Grant  visited  our  country  seat — where  this  occurred — for  the  first  time  some
months  after  Lord  Z.'s  death;  and  that  he  said  something  to  me  as  to  his
having  known  of  it,  or  recognised  the  scene  ;  but  I  cannot  now  remember  the
details.  (Signed)  [Lady  Z.]

I  remember  that  Mr.  Cameron  Grant,  before  going  upstairs,  when  he
arrived  on  the  visit  referred  to,  asked  whether  my  father  had  not  fallen  for-
wards into  the  arms  of  a  man  in  a  long  room  with  a  window  at  one  end  of  it.

(Signed)  [Miss  Z.]

This  case  should  be  studied  along  with  Mr.  Cameron  Grant's  other
records  of  experiences  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  pp.  688-690).

It  would  in  a  certain  way  explain  these  intimations  if  we  could  suppose
that  Lord  Z.  (who  was,  and  who  knew  Mr.  Grant  to  be,  much  interested
in  such  phenomena)  first  impressed  Mr.  Grant  at  the  time  of  his  own
death,  and  then  renewed  the  impression  when  he  knew,  in  some  incon-
ceivable manner,  that  Mr.  Grant  was  about  to  receive,  quite  casually,  a
newspaper  announcement  of  the  decease.  On  that  occasion  the  deceased
person  seems  to  have  been  able  to  impress  a  picture  of  the  scene  of
death  on  Mr.  Grant's  subliminal  mind ;  an  impression  which  worked
itself  out  in  the  rude  drawings,  as  a  motor  message,  and  afterwards  re-
turned both  as  a  vision  in  hypnotic  trance,  and  as  a  crystal-vision  in
the  waking  state.  Here,  however,  as  in  all  similar  cases,  we  cannot  ex-
clude the  possibility  of  a  wide  clairvoyance  on  the  percipient's  own  part.

736  C.  From  the  "Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  373.  In  the  following  case  the  hallucination
occurred  shortly  after  the  death, — perhaps  within  twenty-four  hours  of  it,
— and  the  apparition  indicated  leave-taking.  It  is  an  interesting  example
(the  only  one  in  the  Census)  of  a  primd  facie  veridical  hallucination
coinciding  with  the  arrival  of  a  letter  bearing  on  the  subject.  Another
remarkable  feature  in  the  case  is  the  persistent  repetition  of  the  percept.
The  account  was  written  by  Miss  E.  L.  M.  in  1889.

On  the  morning  of  January  I4th,  1876,  I  was  in  the  B.  schoolroom,  a  small
VOL.  n.  2  A


370  APPENDICES  [739  A

village  near  to  A.  in  Hants,  when  I  saw  what  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  favourite
cousin.  She  was  close  beside  me,  and  appeared  in  good  health,  as  I  had  every
reason  to  suppose  her  to  be.  I  should  here  explain  that  I  held  in  my  hand  a
letter  which  had  just  been  brought  to  me,  and  which  I  had  not  yet  opened,
telling  me  ;that  my  cousin  was  seriously  ill  with  scarlet  fever.  The  fact  was
that  at  the  time  she  was  actually  dead,  her  death  having  occurred  after  the
posting  of  the  letter.  I  was  waiting  for  children  to  assemble  in  school,
and  was  in  good  health  and  in  no  grief  or  anxiety.  I  knew  immediately  that
it  was  my  cousin  whom  I  saw,  and  believed  her  to  be  at  the  time  at  her
own  home.  I  could  not  understand  what  she  meant  by  saying  "  Good-bye,"
which  I  cannot  say  I  heard,  but  saw  by  the  movement  of  her  lips.

The  village  children  and  my  sister  [were  present].  The  former  I  have  no
reason  to  think  saw  anything,  and  my  sister  only  laughed  at  me.  I  continued
to  see  her  all  day,  and  when  indoors  my  sister  would  persist  in  strumming  on
the  piano,  although  I  remonstrated  with  her, — "  How  can  you  keep  on  with
that  noise  when  Jessie  is  dead  ?  "  I  received  a  letter  the  next  morning  inform,
ing  me  that  she  was  dead,  after  which  I  saw  her  only  at  intervals  that  day  and
part  of  the  next,  when  the  appearances  ceased.

Miss  M.  had  had  previously  another  veridical  experience,  described  in
the  "  Report,"  relating  to  the  death  of  an  aunt.

Miss  M.'s  sister  writes  : —

November  gfb,  1889.

I  distinctly  remember  the  circumstances  respecting  my  cousin  Jessie.  All
one  day  my  sister  was  telling  me  she  saw  her,  and  that  she  knew  she  was
dead,  and  we  had  a  letter  next  morning  with  the  news,  so  that  we  knew
before  the  letter  arrived.

I  have  asked  my  mother  about  it,  and  she  remembers  my  sister  telling  her
at  the  time.

739  A.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  175.  The  following  is
a  case  which  was  noted  at  the  time,  before  it  was  known  to  be  veridical.
It  occurred  to  the  Rev.  E.  K.  Elliott,  Rector  of  Worthing,  who  was
formerly  in  the  navy,  and  who  made  the  entry  in  his  diary  as  quoted
when  he  was  cruising  in  the  Atlantic  out  of  reach  of  post  or  telegraph.
The  diary  was  still  in  his  possession  when  we  received  the  account,  in
August  1895.

Extract  from  diary  written  out  in  Atlantic,  January  itfh,  1847: —

"  Dreamt  last  night  I  received  a  letter  from  my  uncle,  H.  E.,  dated  Janu-
ary 3rd,  in  which  news  of  my  dear  brother's  death  was  given.  It  greatly
struck  me."

My  brother  had  been  ill  in  Switzerland,  but  the  last  news  I  received  on
leaving  England  was  that  he  was  better.

The  "January  3rd"  was  very  black,  as  if  intended  to  catch  my  eye.

On  my  return  to  England  I  found,  as  I  quite  expected,  a  letter  awaiting  me
saying  my  brother  had  died  on  the  above  date.  E.  K.  ELLIOTT.

WORTHING.


739B]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  371

739  B.  In  the  next  case,  which  I  quote  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  v.  p.  409,  the  apparition  was  seen  several  weeks  after  the  death.
The  account  came  from  Mrs.  Clark,  8  South  View,  Forest  Hall,  Newcastle-

on-Tyne.

January  6tti,  1885.

I  send  you  a  short  account,  describing  what  I  experienced  at  the  time  of  the
apparition  of  my  friend,  who  was  a  young  gentleman  much  attached  to  myself,
and  who  would  willingly  (had  I  loved  him  well  enough)  have  made  me  his  wife.
I  became  engaged  to  be  married,  and  did  not  see  my  friend  (Mr.  Akhurst)  for
some  months,  until  within  a  week  of  my  marriage  (June  1878),  when  in  the
presence  of  my  husband  he  wished  me  every  happiness,  and  regretted  he  had
not  been  able  to  win  me.

Time  passed  on.  I  had  been  married  about  two  years  and  had  never  seen
Mr.  Akhurst,  when  one  day  my  husband  told  me  he  (Mr.  Akhurst)  was  in  New-
castle and  was  coming  to  supper  and  was  going  to  stay  the  night.  When  my
husband  and  he  were  talking,  he  said  my  husband  had  been  the  more  fortunate
of  the  two,  but  he  added  if  anything  happened  to  my  husband  he  could  leave
his  money  to  whom  he  liked  and  his  widow  to  him,  and  he  would  be  quite
content.  I  mention  this  to  show  he  was  still  interested  in  me.

Three  months  passed  and  baby  was  born.  When  she  was  about  a  week
old,  very  early  one  morning  I  was  feeding  her,  when  I  felt  a  cold  waft  of  air
through  the  room  and  a  feeling  as  though  some  one  touched  my  shoulder  ;  my
hair  seemed  to  bristle  all  over  my  head  and  I  shuddered.  Raising  my  eyes  to
the  door  (which  faced  me),  I  saw  Akhurst  standing  in  his  shirt  and  trousers
looking  at  me,  when  he  seemed  to  pass  through  the  door.  In  the  morning  I
mentioned  it  to  my  husband.  I  did  not  hear  of  Mr.  Akhurst's  death  for  some
weeks  after,  when  I  found  it  corresponded  with  that  of  the  apparition,  and
though  my  father  knew  of  it  before,  he  thought  in  my  weak  state  of  health  it
were  better  I  should  not  be  told.

He  was  found  lying  on  the  bed  with  his  shirt  and  trousers  on,  just  as  he
had  thrown  himself  down  after  taking  a  sleeping  draught.1

I  myself  am  quite  convinced  that  Mr.  Akhurst's  thoughts  had  been  so  con-
centrated upon  me,  before  the  draught  proved  fatal,  that  his  spirit  visited
me  on  its  way  to  that  glorious  land  where  it  shall  dwell  in  the  presence  of
Him  who  said,  "  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and
I  will  give  you  rest."

To  me  the  memory  of  Mr.  Akhurst  will  always  be  as  of  a  dear  brother
greatly  esteemed  and  deeply  regretted.  EMILY  CLARK.

Mrs.  Clark  adds  later : —

May  \yh,  1885.

My  husband  will  certify  as  to  my  mentioning  to  him  seeing  the  apparition
before  I  heard  of  Mr.  Akhurst's  death,  but  I  am  sorry  I  cannot  tell  you  where
it  happened,  nor  the  exact  date  of  the  death,  but  I  remember  when  we  heard
about  it  my  husband  and  I  traced  it  to  about  the  time  of  my  "vision."  .  .  .

July  2yd,  1885.

I  never  experienced  anything  of  the  kind  before.  I  think  Mr.  Akhurst's
death  happened  somewhere  in  Yorkshire.  What  makes  me  think  the  time

1  This,  as  will  be  seen,  was  probably  a  mistake,  and  it  seems  possible  that  the
reminiscence  of  the  Corsican  Brothers  may  have  helped  to  shape  the  hallucination.


372  APPENDICES  [739  C

corresponded  with  his  death,  was,  my  asking  how  long  ago  it  was  from  my
hearing  of  his  death,  and  the  actual  occurrence ;  and  then  knowing  the  time  of
my  little  girl's  birth,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  it  was  about  the  same  time.  I
think  this  is  all  the  information  I  can  give  you.  I  shall  ask  my  husband  to
send  you  a  few  lines  to-morrow.

Mr.  Edward  Clark,  solicitor,  County  Chambers,  Newcastle-on-Tyne,
writes : —

July  2#h,  1885.

At  the  request  of  my  wife,  Mrs.  Clark,  of  9  South  View,  Forest  Hall,  I  beg
to  inform  you  of  my  knowledge  of  the  supposed  apparition  of  Mr.  Akhurst.
Shortly  after  my  wife  had  been  confined  of  my  second  daughter,  about  the  end
of  September,  1880,  my  wife  one  morning  informed  me  she  had  seen  Akhurst
about  one  o'clock  that  morning.  I  of  course  told  her  it  was  nonsense,  but  she
persisted,  and  said  he  appeared  to  her  with  only  his  trousers  and  a  shirt  on,
and  the  remark  she  made  was  that  he  was  dressed  just  as  she  had  seen  him
in  the  Corsican  Brothers  (he  was  an  actor).  She  also  described  her  feelings
at  the  time.  I  tried  to  persuade  her  it  was  a  dream,  but  she  insisted  that  it
was  an  apparition.

As  near  as  I  can  remember,  about  six  months  after,  I  met  a  mutual  friend
of  Akhurst's  and  my  own,  and  in  conversation  I  inquired  after  Akhurst.  He
said,  "  Don't  you  know  he  is  dead  ?  "  I  said,  "  No,  when  did  he  die  ?  "  He
said,  "  I  don't  know  the  exact  date,  but  it  was  about  six  months  ago ; "  and
further  informed  me  that  he  died  about  one  o'clock  in  the  morning  in  the  dress
as  my  wife  described  him,  from  an  overdose  of  chloral.  I  have  endeavoured
to  see  my  friend  to  find  out  the  place  (Bradford,  I  think),  but  he  is  now  in
America.  His  name  is  John  Brown,  and  he  is  the  son  of  the  leader-writer  to
the  Chronicle  here.  If  I  meet  him  again  I  will  try  to  get  accurate  particulars
and  forward  them  to  you.

August  2ist,  1885.

.  .  .  My  wife  has,  I  find,  no  reason  to  think  she  has  been  mistaken  as  to  the
time  when  she  supposed  she  saw  W.  J.  Akhurst,  as  the  date  is  fixed  by  the
birth  of  my  second  little  girl,  which  took  place  in  September  1880.

In  the  Era  Almanac  for  1881,  the  obituary  for  1880,  p.  93,  gives  the
entry,  "  Akhurst,  Walter  James,  actor,  aged  twenty- four,  July  1 2th."

The  Era  newspaper  of  July  i8th,  1880,  gives  an  account  of  the
inquest.  Mr.  H.  W.  Akhurst  gave  evidence  to  the  effect  that  he  and
his  deceased  brother  went  to  the  chemist's  on  Saturday  (i.e.  loth),  and
procured  a  sleeping  draught.  Deceased  complained  of  pains  in  his
body  and  of  feeling  lonely.  The  next  day  (Sunday)  he  only  got  up  to
have  his  bed  made ;  Monday  he  died.  W.  H.  Cope,  surgeon,  attributed
death  to  suffocation  caused  by  heart  disease.  The  verdict  returned  was
"  Death  from  natural  causes."

739  C.  The  next  case,  which  I  quote  from  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  vol.  i.  p.  444,  was  received  towards  the  end  of  1882  from  Mr.  J.
G.  Keulemans,  who  has  already  been  mentioned  in  662  A.

In  December  1880  Mr.  Keulemans  was  living,  he  tells  us,  with  his
family  in  Paris.  The  outbreak  of  an  epidemic  of  small-pox  caused  him  to


740A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  373

remove  three  of  his  children,  including  a  favourite  little  boy  of  five,  to
London,  whence  he  received,  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  month,  several
letters  giving  an  excellent  account  of  their  health.

On  the  24th  of  January  1881,  at  half-past  seven  in  the  morning,  I  was
suddenly  awoke  by  hearing  his  voice,  as  I  fancied,  very  near  me.  I  saw  a
bright,  opaque,  white  mass  before  my  eyes,  and  in  the  centre  of  this  light  I  saw
the  face  of  my  little  darling,  his  eyes  bright,  his  mouth  smiling.  The  appari-
tion, accompanied  by  the  sound  of  his  voice,  was  too  short  and  too  sudden  to
be  called  a  dream :  it  was  too  clear,  too  decided,  to  be  called  an  effect  of
imagination.  So  distinctly  did  I  hear  his  voice  that  I  looked  round  the  room
to  see  whether  he  was  actually  there.  The  sound  I  heard  was  that  of  extreme
delight,  such  as  only  a  happy  child  can  utter.  I  thought  it  was  the  moment  he
woke  up  in  London,  happy  and  thinking  of  me.  I  said  to  myself,  *'  Thank  God,
little  Isidore  is  happy  as  always."

Mr.  Keulemans  describes  the  ensuing  day  as  one  of  peculiar  bright-
ness and  cheerfulness.  He  took  a  long  walk  with  a  friend,  with  whom
he  dined ;  and  was  afterwards  playing  a  game  of  billiards,  when  he  again
saw  the  apparition  of  his  child.  This  made  him  seriously  uneasy,  and  in
spite  of  having  received  within  three  days  the  assurance  of  the  child's
perfect  health,  he  expressed  to  his  wife  a  conviction  that  he  was  dead.
Next  day  a  letter  arrived  saying  that  the  child  was  ill ;  but  the  father
was  convinced  that  this  was  only  an  attempt  to  break  the  news ;  and,  in
fact,  the  child  had  died,  after  a  few  hours'  illness,  at  the  exact  time  of  the
first  apparition.

Mrs.  Keulemans  says  : —

May  29^,  1885.

I  remember  that,  the  day  when  little  Isidore  died,  my  husband  said  that  he
felt  strongly  impressed  that  there  was  something  wrong  with  the  little  boy  in
London.  It  was  in  the  evening  that  he  asked  me  whether  I  had  received  any
news  from  my  mother  about  Isidore.  I  replied  that  no  letter  had  come,  and
asked  him  why  he  wanted  to  know.  He  made  the  same  remark  as  before,  but
would  not  further  explain  himself.  I  tried  to  dispel  his  gloomy  forebodings  by
referring  to  a  letter  we  had  from  my  mother,  stating  that  Isidore  was  very
happy,  and  was  singing  all  day  long.  My  husband  did  not  seem  pacified.
When  the  letter  mentioning  his  illness  came,  my  husband  was  very  much
dejected,  and  told  me  that  it  was  no  use  'trying  to  make  a  secret  of  it,  as  he
knew  the  worst  had  happened.  He  said  afterwards  that  he  had  seen  a
vision.  A.  KEULEMANS.

740  A.  The  following  case  is  printed  in  full  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,
vol.  iv.  p.  68  (May  1889).  I  give  an  abstract  only  of  it  here.  The
narrative  comes  from  a  lady  known  to  me.  Miss  W.  begins  by  describing
the  death  of  her  father  on  November  i6th,  1862,  at  about  midnight,  in
the  presence  of  his  family.  She  says  : —

The  fire  (which  faced  the  foot  of  the  bed)  gave  a  steady  and  subdued  light,
and  there  was  only  one  lighted  candle  in  the  room.  [A  few  minutes  after


374  APPENDICES  [741 A

he  died,]  while  we  were  looking  on,  scarcely  realising  what  had  occurred,
suddenly  I  and  my  youngest  brother  simultaneously  whispered,  "  Look  !  "  and
we  both  beheld  distinctly  a  vaporous  luminosity  quivering  in  a  circle  over  my
father's  head.  It  was  as  if  the  breath  itself  had  become  radiant  and  hovered
over  the  prostrate  form.  .  .  .  None  of  the  others  saw  it.  ...  A  night  or  two
after  I  was  lying  awake,  when  all  at  once  I  saw  above  me  a  light,  similar  to  the
one  just  described,  only  larger  and  brighter.  [It]  did  not  last  more  than  a
brief  minute,  and  then  vanished  as  suddenly  as  it  appeared.  I  sat  up  in  bed
and  tried  to  discover  some  rational  cause  for  it,  but  could  not.  [Details  are
given,  showing  that  the  light  was  almost  certainly  hallucinatory.]

Miss  W.'s  brother  and  sister  signed  a  corroboratory  note,  stating  that
they  well  remembered  the  mention  of  the  incidents  at  the  time  of  their
occurrence.

This  impression  has  a  certain  analogy  with  that  of  Dr.  Wiltse  in  713  A.
It  cannot,  of  course,  be  maintained  that  an  experience  occurring  under
such  circumstances,  in  spite  of  its  collective  nature,  has  any  evidential
force ;  but  though  not  evidential,  it  may  yet  represent  a  reality,  clothed
in  a  symbolism  which  is  obviously  derived  from  tradition.

741  A.  From  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  vol.  i.  p.  446.  This  is  a  case  of  two  apparently  synchronous
"visions  of  consolation"  representing  the  same  deceased  person.  The
percipients  were  the  mother  and  husband  of  a  lady  who  had  been  dead
five  months.  She  died  in  December,  1879,  and  the  incidents  occurred
about  the  end  of  April  1880.  Mrs.  Crans,  the  mother,  was  then  residing
in  New  York,  and  her  son-in-law,  Mr.  C.  A.  Kernochan,  in  Central  City,
Dakota.  Mrs.  Crans  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  as  follows  : —

345  WEST  34TH  STREET,  NEW  YORK,/«/>/  i^th,  1888.

.  .  .  After  lying  down  to  rest,  I  remember  feeling  a  drifting  sensation,  of
seeming  almost  as  if  I  was  going  out  of  the  body.  My  eyes  were  closed ;  soon
I  realised  that  I  was,  or  seemed  to  be,  going  fast  somewhere.  All  seemed  dark
to  me ;  suddenly  I  realised  that  I  was  in  a  room  ;  then  I  saw  Charley  lying  in
a  bed  asleep ;  then  I  took  a  look  at  the  furniture  of  the  room,  and  distinctly  saw
every  article— even  to  a  chair  at  the  head  of  the  bed,  which  had  one  of  the
pieces  broken  in  the  back.  ...  In  a  moment  the  door  opened  and  my  spirit-
daughter  Allie  came  into  the  room  and  stepped  up  to  the  bed  and  stooped
down  and  kissed  Charley.  He  seemed  to  at  once  realise  her  presence,  and
tried  to  hold  her,  but  she  passed  right  out  of  the  room  about  like  a  feather  blown
by  the  wind ;  and  then,  after  a  moment,  she  came  back  again  [several  further
incidents  are  here  described].  Then  I  thought  I  would  open  my  eyes,  and  with
difficulty  I  got  my  eyes  open.  They  seemed  so  heavy  to  me,  but  when  I  suc-
ceeded in  opening  them  I  received  a  sudden  shock,  such  as  if  I  had  fallen  from
the  ceiling  to  the  floor.  It  frightened  and  woke  up  both  Mrs.  B.  and  my
daughter  [but  Mrs.  B.  has  been  lost  sight  of,  and  the  daughter  was  a  child  at
the  time],  who  asked  what  was  the  matter.  Of  course  I  told  them  my  experi-
ence, and  the  following  Sunday  I  wrote,  as  was  always  my  custom,  to  my  son-in-
law,  Charley,  telling  him  of  all  my  experience,  describing  the  room  as  I  saw  it
furnished.


742A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  375

It  took  a  letter  six  days  to  go  from  here  to  Dakota,  and  the  same  length
of  time,  of  course,  to  come  from  there  here  ;  and  at  the  end  of  six  days  judge  of
my  surprise  to  receive  a  letter  from  Charley  telling  me  thus  :  "  Oh,  my  darling
mamma  Crans  !  My  God !  I  dreamed  I  saw  Allie  last  Friday  night ! "  He  then
described  just  as  I  saw  her;  how  she  came  into  the  room  and  he  cried  and
tried  to  hold  her,  but  she  vanished  [with  other  details,  similar  to  those  of  Mrs.
Crans'  dream].  Then  at  the  end  of  six  days,  when  my  letter  reached  him,  and
he  read  of  my  similar  experience,  he  at  once  wrote  me  that  all  I  had  seen  was
correct,  even  to  every  article  of  furniture  in  the  room,  also  as  his  dream  had
appeared  to  him.  .  .  .  MRS.  N.  J.  CRANS.

The  letters  referred  to,  which  were  written  at  the  time  of  the  ex-
periences, had  unfortunately  not  been  preserved ;  but  Mr.  Kernochan
wrote  to  Dr.  Hodgson  as  follows : —

NEW  YORK,/«/>/  4^,  1888.

The  facts  written  you  this  day  by  Mrs.  N.  J.  Crans  in  regard  to  a  letter
written  to  me  one  Sunday  morning  in  the  year  1880,  and  one  written  by  me  on
the  same  date  to  her,  are  correct  in  every  particular.  I  was  then  living  in
Central  City,  Dakota,  boarding  at  the  American  house.  It  is  impossible  to
give  the  exact  date,  as  I  have  destroyed  the  letter,  for  which  I  regret.  I
think  it  was  about  the  last  of  April  1880.  ...  C.  A.  KERNOCHAN.

742  A.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  437.  The  account  is
given  by  Mrs.  Judd.

August  6tk,  1885.

My  grandmother  was  a  tall,  stately,  and  handsome  woman,  even  at  an
advanced  age.  She  was  one  of  the  Gastrells,  an  old  and  aristocratic  family.
Her  latter  years  were  spent  with  my  mother  (her  daughter),  and  in  her  eighty-
fourth  year  she  died.  She  had  suffered  long ;  she  had  attained  a  great  age ;
therefore,  though  we  missed  her,  our  grief  was  not  of  that  poignant  and
excessive  kind  which  produces  hallucination.

My  sister  and  myself  had  always  slept  in  a  room  adjoining  hers,  and — for
want  of  space  in  her  apartment — there  stood  by  our  bedside  a  large  old-
fashioned  clock,  which  had  been  presented  to  our  grandmother  on  her  wedding-
day.  More  precious  than  gold  was  this  old  clock  to  her  heart ;  "  by  it,"  she
often  said,  "  have  I  hundreds  of  times  watched  the  slow  hours  pass  in  my
early  married  days  when  my  husband  had  to  leave  me ;  by  it  have  I  timed  the
children's  return  from  school";  and  she  begged  us,  her  grandchildren,  to
leave  our  bedroom  door  unlocked  at  night  that  she  might  consult  the  old  clock
when  she  rose  each  morning.  We  have  often  opened  our  sleepy  eyes  at  four
on  a  summer  morning  and  smiled  to  see  the  stately  figure  already  there.  For
up  to  the  last  illness  she  retained  the  habits  of  her  youth,  and  rose  at  what  we
deemed  fearfully  primitive  hours.

About  three  weeks  after  her  death  I  awoke  one  morning  in  October,  and
saw  distinctly  the  well-known  tall  figure,  the  calm  old  face,  the  large  dark
eyes  uplifted  as  usual  to  the  face  of  the  old  clock.  I  closed  my  eyes  for  some
seconds,  and  then  slowly  reopened  them.  She  stood  there  still.  A  second
time  I  closed  my  eyes,  a  second  time  opened  them.  She  was  gone.

I  was  looked  upon  by  my  family  in  those  days,  and  particularly  by  the
sister  who  shared  my  room,  as  romantic.  Therefore  I  carefully  kept  to  myself
the  vision  of  the  morning  and  pondered  over  it  alone.


376  APPENDICES  [743  A

At  night,  however,  when  we  were  once  more  preparing  for  rest,  my  sister —
my  eminently  practical  and  unromantic  sister — spoke  to  me.  "  I  cannot  go  to
bed  without  telling  you  something,  only  don't  laugh,  for  I  am  really  frightened ;
I  saw  grandmamma  this  morning!"  I  was  amazed.  I  inquired  of  her  the
hour,  what  the  vision  was  like,  where  it  stood,  what  it  was  doing,  &c.,  and  I
found  that  in  every  respect  her  experience  was  similar  to  mine.  She  had
preserved  silence  all  day  for  fear  of  ridicule.

I  may  add  that  we  even  now  speak  of  this  incident  with  awe,  though  twenty
long  years  have  since  passed  over  our  heads,  and  we  invariably  end  by  saying,
each  of  us,  "  It  was  very  strange;  it  is  impossible  to  understand  it."

CAROLINE  JUDD.

In  reply  to  our  request  for  an  account  of  the  incident  from  the  other
percipient,  Mrs.  Judd  wrote  : —

72  UPPER  GLOUCESTER  PLACE,  DORSET  SQUARE.

I  send  you  herewith  all  that  my  sister,  Mrs.  Dear,  recalls  of  the  vision,
doubly  seen,  of  our  late  grandmother.  She  objects  to  the  weariness  of  com-
position, therefore  I  took  down  her  reminiscences,  and  she  signed  it  as  true.

CAROLINE  JUDD.

Some  years  ago,  a  few  months  after  the  death  of  my  grandmother,  I  awoke
in  the  dim  light  just  before  dawn,  to  see  an  appearance  exactly  like  her  standing
in  the  old  accustomed  place  from  whence,  when  alive,  she  was  wont  to  consult
an  old  clock,  her  own  property,  at  very  early  hours.  I  said  nothing  to  any  one
till  we  retired  again  for  the  night,  when  I  found  to  my  surprise,  my  sister,  who
slept  with  me,  had  seen  the  same  appearance  at  the  same  time.

MARY  DEAR.

Mrs.   Judd's    sister,   Miss   Harris,    confirms    the   above   account   as

follows : —

BEWEL,  ALFRICK,  NEAR  WORCESTER,  August  2otk  [1885].

Both  sisters  mentioned  seeing  my  grandmother  the  day  of  the  apparition
before  father  and  mother,  then  alive,  and  myself.  I  think  she  must  have  died
about  1866,  but  I  was  then  very  young,  and  can't  remember  exactly.  I  will  find
out  if  it  is  important,  but  my  sisters  have  often  mentioned  it  since.

ANNIE  HARRIS.

743  A.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  522,  footnote.  The
account  was  written  down,  a  few  months  after  the  occurrence,  from  the
dictation  of  the  percipient — Sister  Bertha,  Superior  of  the  House  of  Mercy
at  Bovey  Tracy,  Newton  Abbot — who  read  it  through  on  December  2pth,
1885,  pronounced  it  correct,  and  signed  it.

On  the  night  of  the  loth  of  November,  1861  (I  do  not  know  the  exact  hour),
I  was  up  in  my  bed  watching,  because  there  was  a  person  not  quite  well  in  the
next  room.  I  heard  a  voice,  which  I  recognised  at  once  as  familiar  to  me,  and
at  first  thought  of  my  sister.  It  said,  in  the  brightest  and  most  cheerful  tone,
"  I  am  here  with  you."  I  answered,  looking  and  seeing  nothing,  "  Who  are
you  ?  "  The  voice  said,  "  You  must  n't  know  yet."  I  heard  nothing  more,  and
saw  nothing,  and  am  certain  that  the  door  was  not  opened  or  shut.  I  was  not


744A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  377

in  the  least  frightened,  and  felt  convinced  that  it  was  Lucy's  [Miss  Lucy  Gambier
Parry's]  voice.  I  have  never  doubted  it  from  that  moment.  I  had  not  heard
of  her  being  worse ;  the  last  account  had  been  good,  and  I  was  expecting  to
hear  that  she  was  at  Torquay.  In  the  course  of  the  next  day  (the  I  ith),  mother
told  me  that  she  had  died  on  the  morning  of  the  loth,  rather  more  than  twelve
hours  before  I  heard  her  voice.

The  narrator  informs  us  that  she  has  never  in  her  life  experienced  any
other  hallucination  of  the  senses.  Mrs.  Gambier  Parry,  of  Highnam  Court,
Gloucester,  step-mother  and  cousin  of  the  "  Lucy  "  of  the  narrative,
writes : —

Sister  Bertha  (her  name  is  Bertha  Foertsch)  had  been  living  for  many  years
as  German  governess  to  Lucy  Anna  Gambier  Parry,  and  was  her  dearest  friend.
She  came  to  us  at  once  on  hearing  of  Lucy's  death,  and  told  me  of  the  mysterious
occurrence  of  the  night  before.

744  A.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  619.  This  case,  if
telepathically  originated,  is  an  interesting  instance  of  the  appearance  of  a
phantasm  to  certain  percipients  on  local,  not  personal,  grounds.  The
account  comes  from  Miss  Edith  Farquharson,  who  writes : —

June  1885.

In  the  year  1868,  No.  9  Drummond  Place,  Edinburgh,  was  in  the  occupa-
tion of  Mr.  Farquharson,  formerly  a  Judge  of  the  High  Court  of  Jamaica.  On
the  night  of  Good  Friday  in  that  year,  two  of  his  daughters,  Miss  Edith  Far-
quharson, her  sister  Marianne  [now  Mrs.  Henry  Murray],  and  a  little  cousin,
Agnes  Spalding,  aged  six  years,  were  sleeping  in  a  room  at  the  top  of  the
house.  About  11.45  P.M.,  the  two  sisters  were  awakened  by  hearing  loud
screams  from  the  child,  who  was  sleeping  on  a  mattress  placed  on  the  floor
beside  their  bed.  The  mattress  was  against  the  door  leading  into  a  dressing-
room  ;  this  door  was  locked  and  sealed  with  white  tapes  and  black  wax ;  it  had
been  thus  closed  by  a  member  of  the  family  to  whom  the  house  belonged
before  Mr.  Farquharson  entered  upon  his  tenancy.  The  death  of  the  head
of  the  family,  and  the  delicacy  of  health  of  one  of  the  daughters,  had  caused
them  to  wish  to  leave  Edinburgh  and  spend  the  winter  in  Torquay.

On  hearing  the  child's  screams  of  terror,  Miss  M.  F.  touched  her  sister  and
said,  "Do  you  hear  the  child  screaming?"  Miss  E.  F.  replied  that  she  did,
and  turned  her  head  round  to  listen  better.  When  the  child  was  asked  what
she  was  screaming  about,  she  said,  "I  am  wide  awake,  and  I  have  seen  a
figure  which  was  leaning  over  me,"  and  when  further  questioned  where  the
figure  went  to,  said,  "  Round  the  side  of  your  bed."

Miss  E.  F.,  when  she  turned  round,  saw  a  figure  slide  from  near  the  child's
bed  and  pass  along  the  foot  of  the  bed  whereon  she  and  her  sister  were.  (At
the  first  moment  she  thought  it  was  a  thief.)  The  latter,  on  hearing  her  say  in
French,  " // y  a  quelqu'un"  was  so  terrified  that  she  hid  her  head  under  the
bed-clothes.

Miss  E.  F.  describes  the  figure  as  being  dressed  in  a  rough  brown  shawl
held  tightly  round  the  bust,  a  wide-brimmed  hat,  and  a  veil.  When  the  child
was  questioned  afterwards  she  gave  the  same  account  of  the  costume.  Miss
E.  F.  says  that  after  passing  along  the  foot  of  the  bed  with  a  noiseless  gliding


378  APPENDICES  [744  A

motion,  the  figure  disappeared  into  the  darkness.  Except  the  door  which  was
locked  and  sealed,  the  only  door  of  exit  to  the  room  was  one  which  was  quite
close  to  the  bed ;  at  right  angles  with  the  door  and  with  the  head  of  the  bed
was  a  large  hanging  cupboard.

Both  the  ladies  got  up  instantly.  They  found  the  door  of  their  room  closed
as  they  had  left  it.  Their  brother's  room  was  next  to  theirs  ;  they  knocked  at
his  door  to  rouse  him,  at  the  same  time  keeping  a  sharp  look-out  on  the  door
of  their  own  room  to  see  that  no  one  escaped.  The  whole  party  then  made  a
thorough  search  in  the  room  and  cupboard,  found  nothing  disturbed,  and  once
more  retired  to  rest.  The  next  morning  the  page-boy  said  that  he  had  been
unable  to  sleep  all  night  on  account  of  the  sounds  he  heard  of  some  one
scratching  at  his  window.  He  declared  that  he  had  shied  all  his  boots  and
everything  he  could  lay  hold  of  in  the  direction  whence  the  noise  came,  but
without  effect.  He  could  stand  it  no  longer,  and  went  to  the  room  where  some
of  the  women  servants  slept,  begging  to  be  let  in.  They  had  heard  nothing,
however,  though  they,  like  himself,  slept  in  the  basement  of  the  house.

The  whole  family  were  hardly  assembled  on  the  Saturday  morning,  when
the  son-in-law  of  the  late  owner  of  the  house  arrived,  and  asked  to  see  Mr.
Farquharson.  He  wished  particularly  to  know  exactly  what  day  this  gentle-
man and  his  family  intended  leaving  the  house  (their  term  would  expire  the
following  week),  for  he  had  just  received  a  telegram  informing  him  that  his
sister-in-law  had  died  that  night,  and  they  were  anxious  to  bring  her  body  there
immediately  for  burial.

With  respect  to  this  last  paragraph,  the  narrator's  father  writes  : —

The  above  is  a  correct  statement  of  the  occurrence.

C.  M.  FARQUHARSON.
Miss  Farquharson  continues  : —

The  possible  solution  of  what  we  presume  to  have  been  an  apparition  of
this  lady  is,  that  the  bedroom  occupied  by  the  Misses  Farquharson  being  the
one  she  habitually  used,  in  her  dying  moments  she  desired  to  visit  it  once
more,  or  else  that  there  was  something  in  the  dressing-room  which  she
particularly  wished  for.  EDITH  A.  FARQUHARSON.

The  following  independent  account  is  from  Mrs.  Murray  : —

COBO,  GUERNSEY,  June  ztfh,  1885.

Our  home  was  in  Perthshire;  but  in  the  winter  of  1868  my  father  took  a
house  for  four  mouths  in  Drummond  Place,  No.  8  [?  9]  in  Edinburgh,  in  order
to  give  us  a  change.  The  house  belonged  to  General  Stewart,  who  had  a
delicate  daughter,  and  he  let  it,  to  take  the  daughter  to  Torquay  for  the  winter.
We  did  not  know  the  Stewarts,  so  our  imagination  could  not  have  assisted  in
any  way  to  account  for  the  curious  apparition  that  was  seen.  I  myself  did  not
see  it,  but  I  was  in  the  room  with  my  sister  and  little  cousin,  who  both  did.
My  belief  is  that  Providence  prevented  my  seeing  it,  as  I  am  of  a  very  nervous
temperament,  and  it  might  have  had  a  very  bad  effect  on  me  if  I  had.  Well,
the  apparition  took  place  on  Good  Friday  night  at  about  twelve  o'clock.  This
little  cousin,  who  was  only  about  six  years  old,  had  come  into  town  from  the
country,  and  as  our  house  was  very  full  she  had  a  shake-down  beside  our  bed
on  my  side.  I  was  the  first  to  be  awakened  by  hearing  her  calling  out  in  a


744A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  379

frightened  way.  So  I  said,  "  What  is  the  matter,  Addie  ?  "  "  Oh,"  she  said,
"  Cousin  Marianne,  I  am  so  frightened.  A  figure  has  been  leaning  over  me,
and  whenever  I  put  out  my  hands  to  push  it  off  it  leant  back  on  your  bed  !  "
At  this  I  was  alarmed  and  awoke  my  sister,  who  lifted  her  head  from  her  pillow
and  looked  up,  when  she  saw  a  figure  gliding  across  the  foot  of  our  bed
wrapped  in  a  shawl,  with  a  hat  and  veil  on.  She  whispered  to  me  in  French,
"//  y  a  quelqu'un"  thinking  it  was  a  thief,  whereat  we  both  jumped  out  of  bed
together  and  went  to  the  next  room  to  get  our  brother,  Captain  Farquharson.
His  bedroom  door  had  a  shaky  lock  which  made  a  noise,  so  he  had  barricaded  it
with  a  portmanteau.  While  he  was  coming  to  our  help,  we  kept  our  eyes  fixed
on  our  door  in  case  any  one  should  have  escaped,  but  we  saw  nothing,  and  after
our  all  searching  every  corner  of  the  bedroom  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that
no  one  had  been  there,  for  everything  was  intact.  We  then  questioned  little
Addie  as  to  what  she  had  seen,  and  what  the  figure  was  like.  She  described  it
as  that  of  a  lady  with  a  shawl  on  and  a  hat,  and  a  veil  over  her  face,  and  said
that  as  I  spoke  she  had  gone  across  the  foot  of  the  bed  in  the  same  direction
that  my  sister  had  seen  her  go.  This  child,  I  must  tell  you,  had  been  most
carefully  brought  up  by  her  mother,  and  was  not  allowed  to  read  even  fairy
tales  for  fear  of  having  foolish  ideas  in  her  head,  which  makes  the  thing  more
remarkable,  for  she  had  certainly  never  heard  of  a  ghost.  .  .  .

Then  the  next  morning  we  were  relating  our  adventures,  when  a  ring  came
to  the  door,  and  the  servant  said  a  gentleman  wanted  to  speak  to  my  father.
This  gentleman  was  a  Mr.  Findlay,  who  had  married  a  Miss  Stewart.  He
came  to  ask  when  we  were  to  leave,  for  he  knew  it  was  about  the  time,  as  he
had  received  a  telegram  that  morning  to  say  that  Miss  Stewart  had  died  in
Torquay  during  the  night,  and  they  wanted  to  bring  her  body  to  Edinburgh.
We  heard  afterwards  from  friends  of  the  Stewarts  that  the  bedroom  we  had
had  been  hers.  I  forgot  to  mention  that  the  child's  bed  lay  across  the  door
of  a  small  room  which  had  been  locked  up  by  the  Stewarts,  and  they  had  put
tapes  across  and  sealed  them  with  black  wax.

We  have  none  of  us  ever  had  any  hallucinations  either  before  or  after  this
strange  affair.  MARIANNE  MURRAY.

We  find  from  the  Scotsman  and  the  Edinburgh  Courant  that  Miss
Stewart  died  on  April  n,  1868,  the  day  following  Good  Friday.  If  the
death  took  place  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  after  midnight,  "  during  the
night  "  would  of  course  be  the  natural  expression.

The  above  account  was  first  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  soon  after
which  we  received  a  letter  from  a  lady  who  stated  that  she  had  heard  of
the  incident  "just  as  related  in  the  Journal"  within  a  few  days  of  its
occurrence  from  some  cousins  of  the  Miss  Farquharsons,  who  had  been
told  by  the  house-agent  that  the  description  of  the  lady  in  the  large  hat
and  veil  exactly  resembled  Miss  Stewart.  Mrs.  Murray,  however,  says  :
"  I  do  not  think  any  of  us  mentioned  it  to  Mr.  Boyd  [the  agent] .  I  have
no  reason  to  believe  that  the  dress  of  the  figure  was  in  any  way  char-
acteristic of  Miss  Stewart."  Thus  it  appears  that  the  resemblance  of  the
figure  seen  to  the  lady  who  died  is  entirely  problematic.  Its  association
with  her  depends  only  on  the  coincidence  of  its  appearance  in  her  old
home  on  the  night  of  her  death.  It  must  also  be  observed  that  in  this


38o  APPENDICES  [744  B

case  the  apparition  was  seen  shortly  before  the  death,  though  it  seems  to
belong  to  the  same  general  category  as  the  other  cases  in  this  section.

744  B.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  57.  The  following  in-
cident occurred  to  a  gentleman  personally  known  to  me.  The  initials  here
given  are  not  the  true  ones.  On  October  i2th,  1888,  Mr.  J.  gave  me  viva
voce  the  following  account  of  his  experience  in  the  X.  Library,  in  1884,
which  I  took  down  from  memory  next  day,  and  which  he  revised  and
corrected : —

In  1880  I  succeeded  a  Mr.  Q.  as  librarian  of  the  X.  Library.  I  had  never
seen  Mr.  Q.,  nor  any  photograph  or  likeness  of  him,  when  the  following  in-
cidents occurred.  I  may,  of  course,  have  heard  the  library  assistants  describe
his  appearance,  though  I  have  no  recollection  of  this.  I  was  sitting  alone  in
the  library  one  evening  late  in  March,  1884,  finishing  some  work  after  hours,
when  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me  that  I  should  miss  the  last  train  to  H.,  where
I  was  then  living,  if  I  did  not  make  haste.  It  was  then  10.55,  and  the  last  train
left  X.  at  11.5.  I  gathered  up  some  books  in  one  hand,  took  the  lamp  in  the
other,  and  prepared  to  leave  the  librarian's  room,  which  communicated  by  a
passage  with  the  main  room  of  the  library.  As  my  lamp  illumined  this  passage,
I  saw  apparently  at  the  further  end  of  it  a  man's  face.  I  instantly  thought  a
thief  had  got  into  the  library.  This  was  by  no  means  impossible,  and  the
probability  of  it  had  occurred  to  me  before.  I  turned  back  into  my  room,  put
down  the  books,  and  took  a  revolver  from  the  safe,  and,  holding  the  lamp
cautiously  behind  me,  I  made  my  way  along  the  passage — which  had  a  corner,
behind  which  I  thought  my  thief  might  be  lying  in  wait— into  the  main  room.
Here  I  saw  no  one,  but  the  room  was  large  and  encumbered  with  bookcases.
I  called  out  loudly  to  the  intruder  to  show  himself  several  times,  more  with  the
hope  of  attracting  a  passing  policeman  than  of  drawing  the  intruder.  Then  I
saw  a  face  looking  round  one  of  the  bookcases.  I  say  looking  round,  but  it
had  an  odd  appearance  as  if  the  body  were  in  the  bookcase,  as  the  face  came
so  closely  to  the  edge  and  I  could  see  no  body.  The  face  was  pallid  and
hairless,  and  the  orbits  of  the  eyes  were  very  deep.  I  advanced  towards  it,  and
as  I  did  so  I  saw  an  old  man  with  high  shoulders  seem  to  rotate  out  of  the  end
of  the  bookcase,  and  with  his  back  towards  me  and  with  a  shuffling  gait  walk
rather  quickly  from  the  bookcase  to  the  door  of  a  small  lavatory,  which  opened
from  the  library  and  had  no  other  access.  I  heard  no  noise.  I  followed  the
man  at  once  into  the  lavatory  ;  and  to  my  extreme  surprise  found  no  one  there.
I  examined  the  window  (about  14  in.  X  12  in.),  and  found  it  closed  and  fastened.
I  opened  it  and  looked  out.  It  opened  into  a  well,  the  bottom  of  which,  ten
feet  below,  was  a  sky-light,  and  the  top  open  to  the  sky  some  twenty  feet  above.
It  was  in  the  middle  of  the  building,  and  no  one  could  have  dropped  into  it
without  smashing  the  glass  nor  climbed  out  of  it  without  a  ladder — but  no  one
was  there.  Nor  had  there  been  anything  like  time  for  a  man  to  get  out  of  the
window,  as  I  followed  the  intruder  instantly.  Completely  mystified,  I  even
looked  into  the  little  cupboard  under  the  fixed  basin.  There  was  nowhere
hiding  for  a  child,  and  I  confess  I  began  to  experience  for  the  first  time  what
novelists  describe  as  an  "  eerie  "  feeling.

I  left  the  library,  and  found  I  had  missed  my  train.

Next  morning  I  mentioned  what  I  had  seen  to  a  local  clergyman,  who  on
hearing  my  description,  said,  u  Why,  that's  old  Q.!  "  Soon  after  I  saw  a  photo-


745A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  381

graph  (from  a  drawing)  of  Q.,  and  the  resemblance  was  certainly  striking.  Q.
had  lost  all  his  hair,  eyebrows  and  all,  from  (I  believe)  a  gunpowder  accident.
His  walk  was  a  peculiar,  rapid,  high-shouldered  shuffle.  Later  inquiry  proved
he  had  died  at  about  the  time  of  year  at  which  I  saw  the  figure.

I  have  no  theory  as  to  this  occurrence,  and  have  never  given  special  atten-
tion to  such  matters.  I  have  only  on  one  other  occasion  seen  a  phantasmal
figure  [that  of  his  mother,  seen  when  he  was  a  boy  of  ten].

When  I  saw  the  figure  of  [Q.]  I  was  in  good  health  and  spirits.

The  evidential  value  of  the  above  account  is  enhanced  by  the  fact  that
the  principal  assistant  in  the  library,  Mr.  R.,  and  a  junior  clerk,  Mr.  P.,
independently  witnessed  a  singular  phenomenon,  thus  described  by  Mr.  R.
in  1889  :—

A  few  years  ago  I  was  engaged  in  a  large  building  in  the ,  and  during

the  busy  times  was  often  there  till  late  in  the  evening.  On  one  particular
night  I  was  at  work  along  with  a  junior  clerk  till  about  I  r  P.M.,  in  the  room
marked  A  on  the  annexed  sketch  [sketch  omitted].  All  the  lights  in  the  place
had  been  out  for  hours  except  those  in  the  room  which  we  occupied.  Before
leaving  we  turned  out  the  gas.  We  then  looked  into  the  fireplace,  but  not  a
spark  was  to  be  seen.  The  night  was  very  dark,  but  being  thoroughly  accus-
tomed to  the  place  we  carried  no  light.  On  reaching  the  bottom  of  the  stair-
case (B),  I  happened  to  look  up  ;  when,  to  my  surprise,  the  room  which  we  had
just  left  appeared  to  be  lighted.  I  turned  to  my  companion  and  pointed  out
the  light,  and  sent  him  back  to  see  what  was  wrong.  He  went  at  once  and  I
stood  looking  through  the  open  door,  but  I  was  not  a  little  astonished  to  see
that  as  soon  as  he  got  within  a  few  yards  of  the  room  the  light  went  out  quite
suddenly.  My  companion,  from  the  position  he  was  in  at  the  moment,  could  not
see  the  light  go  out,  but  on  his  reaching  the  door  everything  was  in  total  dark-
ness. He  entered,  however,  and  when  he  returned,  reported  that  both  gas  and
fire  were  completely  out.  The  light  in  the  daytime  was  got  by  means  of  a  glass
roof,  there  being  no  windows  on  the  sides  of  the  room,  and  the  night  in  ques-
tion was  so  dark  that  the  moon  shining  through  the  roof  was  out  of  the  ques-
tion. Although  I  have  often  been  in  the  same  room  till  long  after  dark,  both
before  and  since,  I  have  never  seen  anything  unusual  at  any  other  time.

Mr.  P.  endorses  this :  "  I  confirm  the  foregoing  statement."
Mr.  R.  states  that  he  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination.  The
light  was  seen  after  the  phantom ;  but  those  who  saw  the  light  were  not
aware  that  the  phantom  had  been  seen,  for  Mr.  J.  mentioned  the  circum-
stance only  to  his  wife  and  to  one  other  friend  (who  has  confirmed  to  us
the  fact  that  it  was  mentioned  to  him),  and  he  was  naturally  particularly
careful  to  give  no  hint  of  the  matter  to  his  assistants  in  the  library.

745  A.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  no.  The  narrative  is
written  by  General  Sir  Arthur  Becher,  of  St.  Faith's  Mede,  Winchester.

April  \\th,  1884.

General  Sir  A.  Becher,  who  held  a  high  appointment  on  the  Staff  in  India,
went,  accompanied  by  his  son  and  A.D.C.,  to  the  Hill  Station  of  Kussowlie,


382  APPENDICES  [745  A

about  March  1867,  to  examine  a  house  he  had  secured  for  his  family  to  reside
in  during  the  approaching  hot  season.  They  both  slept  in  the  house  that  night.
During  the  night  the  General  awoke  suddenly  and  saw  the  figure  of  a  native
woman  standing  near  his  bed,  and  close  to  an  open  door  which  led  into  a  bath-
room. He  called  out,  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  and  jumped  out  of  bed,  when  the
figure  retreated  into  the  bath-room,  and  in  following  it  the  General  found  the
outer  door  locked  and  the  figure  had  disappeared.

He  went  to  bed  again,  and  in  the  morning  he  wrote  in  pencil  on  a  door-post,
"  Saw  a  ghost,"  but  he  did  not  mention  the  circumstance  to  his  wife.

A  few  days  after,  the  General  and  his  family  took  possession  of  the  house
for  the  season,  and  Lady  Becher  used  the  room  the  General  had  slept  in  for  her
dressing-room.  About  7  P.M.  on  the  first  evening  of  their  arrival,  Lady  Becher
was  dressing  for  dinner,  and  on  going  to  a  wardrobe  (near  the  bath-room  door)
to  take  out  a  dress,  she  saw,  standing  close  by  and  within  the  bath-room,  a
native  woman,  and,  for  the  moment  thinking  it  was  her  own  ayah,  asked  her
"what  she  wanted,"  as  Lady  Becher  never  allowed  a  servant  in  her  room  while
dressing.  The  figure  then  disappeared  by  the  same  door  as  on  the  former
occasion,  which,  as  before,  was  found  locked!  Lady  Becher  was  not  much
alarmed,  but  felt  that  something  unusual  had  occurred,  and  at  dinner  mentioned
the  event  to  the  General  and  his  son,  when  the  General  repeated  what  had
occurred  to  him  on  the  former  occasion.  That  same  night  their  youngest  son,
a  boy  about  eight  years  of  age,  was  sleeping  in  the  same  room  as  his  father
arid  mother,  his  bed  facing  an  open  door  leading  into  the  dressing-room  and
bath-room,  before  mentioned,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  night  the  boy  started  up
in  his  bed  in  a  frightened  attitude  and  called  out,  "  What  do  you  want,  ayah?
what  do  you  want?"  in  Hindustani,  evidently  seeing  a  female  figure  in  the
dressing-room  near  his  bed.  His  mother  quieted  him  and  he  fell  asleep,  and
the  figure  was  not  seen  by  us  on  that  occasion,  nor  was  it  ever  again  seen,
though  we  lived  for  months  in  the  house.  But  it  confirmed  our  feeling  that
the  same  woman  had  appeared  to  us  all  three,  and  on  inquiry  from  other  occu-
pants we  learned  that  it  was  a  frequent  apparition  on  the  first  night  or  so  of  the
house  being  occupied.

A  native  Hill,  or  Cashmere  woman,  very  fair  and  handsome,  had  been
murdered  some  years  before  in  a  hut  a  few  yards  below  the  house,  and
immediately  under  the  door  leading  into  the  bath  and  dressing-room,  through
which,  on  all  three  occasions,  the  figure  had  entered  and  disappeared.  My  son
sleeping  in  another  side  of  the  house  never  saw  it.

I  could  give  the  names  of  some  other  subsequent  occupants  who  have  told
us  much  the  same  story.

Subsequently  Sir  Arthur  Becher  writes  : —

WINCHESTER,  May  i\th,  1884.

I  write  to  say  Lady  Becher  does  not  desire  to  write  anything  more  person-
ally on  the  subject  of  the  "  Ghost  Story  "  I  before  detailed,  as  she  says  my
account  of  it  was  given  in  connection  with  and  entirely  in  accordance  with  her
recollection  of  the  circumstances.  The  woman  appeared  to  me  in  the  night,
and  in  the  ordinary  light  of  a  room  without  any  blinds  or  shutters.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  he  further  tells  us  that  the  bath-room  door  was
locked  on  the  inside ;  that  the  rooms  were  on  the  ground  floor ;  but  that


745B]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  383

there  was  no  exit  but  by  the  doors  referred  to.     Also  that  the  child  had
certainly  not  heard  of  the  ghost  before  he  saw  it.

745  B.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  178.  The  following
narrative  was  sent  to  us  with  the  true  names,  but  with  a  request  to  conceal
them,  and  some  local  details,  on  account  of  the  painful  nature  of  the
incident  described.  Our  informant,  whom  I  will  call  Mrs.  M.,  writes
under  date  December  i5th,  1891.

Before  relating  my  experience  of  having  seen  a  ghost,  I  should  like  my
readers  thoroughly  to  understand  that  I  had  not  the  slightest  idea  that  the
house  in  which  my  husband  and  I  were  living  was  haunted,  or  that  the  family
residing  there  for  many  years  before  us  had  had  any  family  troubles.  The
house  was  delightfully  situated  [&c.].  The  house  being  partly  new  and  partly
old,  we  occupied  the  old  part  for  our  sleeping  apartments.  There  were  two
staircases  leading  to  them,  with  a  landing  and  window,  adjoining  a  morning
sitting-room.  One  night  on  retiring  to  my  bedroom  about  1 1  o'clock,  I  thought
I  heard  a  peculiar  moaning  sound,  and  some  one  sobbing  as  if  in  great  distress
of  mind.  I  listened  very  attentively,  and  still  it  continued  ;  so  I  raised  the  gas
in  my  bedroom,  and  then  went  to  the  landing  window  of  which  I  have  spoken,
drew  the  blind  aside  ;  and  there  on  the  grass  was  a  very  beautiful  young  girl  in
a  kneeling  posture  before  a  soldier,  in  a  general's  uniform,  sobbing,  and  clasp-
ing her  hands  together,  entreating  for  pardon ;  but,  alas  !  he  only  waved  her
away  from  him.  So  much  did  I  feel  for  the  girl,  that  without  a  moment's
hesitation  I  ran  down  the  staircase  to  the  door  opening  upon  the  lawn,  and
begged  her  to  come  in  and  tell  me  her  sorrow.  The  figures  then  disappeared  !
Not  in  the  least  nervous  did  I  feel  then  ; — went  again  to  my  bedroom,  took  a
sheet  of  writing-paper  and  wrote  down  what  I  had  seen.  [Mrs.  M.  has  found
and  sent  us  this  paper.  The  following  words  are  written  in  pencil  on  a  half
sheet  of  notepaper:  "  March  13th,  1886.  Have  just  seen  visions  on  lawn  :— a
soldier  in  general's  uniform,— a  young  lady  kneeling  to  him.  11.40  P.M."]
My  husband  was  away  from  home  when  this  event  occurred,  but  a  lady  friend
was  staying  with  me,  so  I  went  to  her  bedroom  and  told  her  that  I  had  been
rather  frightened  with  some  noises  ;— could  I  stay  with  her  a  little  while  ?  A  few
days  afterwards  I  found  myself  in  a  very  nervous  state  ;  but  it  seemed  so
strange  that  I  was  not  frightened  at  the  time.

It  appears  the  story  is  only  too  true.  The  youngest  daughter  of  this  very
old,  proud  family  had  had  an  illegitimate  child ;  and  her  parents  and  relatives
would  not  recognise  her  again,  and  she  died  broken-hearted.  The  soldier  was
a  near  relative  (also  a  connection  of  my  husband's)  ;  and  it  was  in  vain  she
tried  to  gain  his— the  soldier's— forgiveness.  [In  a  subsequent  letter  Sir  X.  Y.'s
career  is  described.  He  was  a  distinguished  officer.]

So  vivid  was  my  remembrance  of  the  features  of  the  soldier  that  some
months  after  the  occurrence,  when  I  happened  to  be  calling  with  my  husband  at
a  house  where  there  was  a  portrait  of  him,  I  stepped  before  it  and  said :  "  Why,
look !  There  is  the  General !  "  And  sure  enough  it  was.

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mrs.  M.  writes  :—

I  did  see  the  figures  on  the  lawn  after  opening  the  door  leading  on  to  the
lawn ;  and  they  by  no  means  disappeared  instantly,  but  more  like  a  dissolving
view,  viz.,  gradually ;  and  I  did  not  leave  the  door  until  they  had  passed  away.


384  APPENDICES  [745  C

It  was  impossible  for  any  real  persons  to  act  such  a  scene.  .  .  .  The  General
was  born  and  died  in  [the  house  where  I  saw  him].  ...  I  was  not  aware  that  the
portrait  of  the  General  was  in  that  room  [where  I  saw  it] ;  it  was  the  first  time
I  had  been  in  that  room.  The  misfortune  to  the  poor  girl  happened  in  1847
or  1848.

Mrs.  M.  then  mentions  that  a  respectable  local  tradesman,  hearing  of
the  incident,  remarked :  "  That  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  to  see  her
about  the  place,  poor  soul !  She  was  a  badly  used  girl."

Mr.  M.  writes  as  follows,  under  date  December  23rd,  1891  : —

I  have  seen  my  wife's  letter  in  regard  to  the  recognition  of  Sir  X.  Y.'s  picture

at .     Nothing  was  said  by  me  to  her  on  the  subject ;  but  knowing  the

portrait  to  be  a  remarkably  good  likeness  I  proposed  calling  at  the  house
[which  was  that  of  a  nephew  of  Sir  X.  Y.'s],  being  anxious  to  see  what  effect  it
would  have  on  my  wife.  Immediately  on  entering  the  room  she  almost
staggered  back,  and  turned  pale,  saying — looking  hard  at  the  picture — "  Why,
there's  the  General !  "  .  .  .  Being  a  connection  of  the  family,  I  knew  all  about
the  people,  but  my  wife  was  then  a  stranger,  and  I  had  never  mentioned  such
things  to  her ;  in  fact,  they  had  been  almost  forgotten.

This  case  may  remind  us  of  Gurney's  description  of  a  somewhat  similar
vision  (that  quoted  in  733  B),  a  suggesting  the  survival  of  a  mere  image,
— what  I  have  termed  a  veridical  after-image, — of  past  events  or  emotions
with  no  active  counterpart  in  the  present.  We  are,  indeed,  always  un-
certain as  to  the  degree  of  the  deceased  person's  active  participation  in
post-mortem  phantasms, — as  to  the  relation  of  such  manifestations  to  the
central  current  of  his  continuing  individuality.  But  it  is  in  dealing  with
these  persistent  pictures  of  a  bygone  earth-scene  that  this  perplexity
reaches  its  climax.  They  may,  as  I  have  already  said,  be  the  mere
dreams  of  the  dead ; — affording  no  true  indication  of  the  point  which
the  deceased  person's  knowledge  or  emotion  has  really  reached.

745  C.  In  each  of  the  two  next  cases  the  interval  after  death  was
considerable,  and  the  percipient  was  an  absolute  stranger  to  the  deceased.
This  condition  must,  of  course,  usually  involve  the  disadvantage  that  the
identification  of  the  appearance  with  a  particular  person  can  be  based
only  on  the  percipient's  subsequent  description  of  what  he  had  seen.
But  in  the  case  which  I  shall  quote  first,  this  sort  of  identification  was
reinforced  by  the  percipient's  recognition  of  a  photograph  of  the  deceased.
The  account,  taken  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  416,  comes  from
Mr.  John  E.  Husbands,  of  Melbourne  House,  Town  Hall  Square,
Grimsby.

September  \$th>  1886.

DEAR  SIR, — The  facts  are  simply  these.  I  was  sleeping  in  a  hotel  in
Madeira  in  January  1885.  It  was  a  bright  moonlight  night.  The  windows
were  open  and  the  blinds  up.  I  felt  some  one  was  in  my  room.  On  opening
my  eyes,  I  saw  a  young  fellow  about  twenty-five,  dressed  in  flannels,  standing
at  the  side  of  my  bed  and  pointing  with  the  first  finger  of  his  right  hand  to  the


745C]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  385

place  I  was  lying.  I  lay  for  some  seconds  to  convince  myself  of  some  one
being  really  there.  I  then  sat  up  and  looked  at  him.  1  saw  his  features  so
plainly  that  I  recognised  them  in  a  photograph  which  was  shown  me  some
days  after.  I  asked  him  what  he  wanted  ;  he  did  not  speak,  but  his  eyes  and
hand  seemed  to  tell  me  I  was  in  his  place.  As  he  did  not  answer,  I  struck  out
at  him  with  my  fist  as  I  sat  up,  but  did  not  reach  him,  and  as  I  was  going
to  spring  out  of  bed  he  slowly  vanished  through  the  door,  which  was  shut,
keeping  his  eyes  upon  me  all  the  time.

Upon  inquiry  I  found  that  the  young  fellow  who  appeared  to  me  died  in
that  room  I  was  occupying.  .  .  .  JOHN  E.  HUSBANDS.

The  following  letters  are  from  Miss  Falkner,  of  Church  Terrace,
Wisbech,  who  was  resident  at  the  hotel  when  the  above  incident
happened.

October  StA,  1886.

The  figure  that  Mr.  Husbands  saw  while  in  Madeira  was  that  of  a  young
fellow  who  died  unexpectedly  months  previously,  in  the  room  which  Mr.
Husbands  was  occupying.  Curiously  enough,  Mr.  H.  had  never  heard  of  him
or  his  death.  He  told  me  the  story  the  morning  after  he  had  seen  the  figure,
and  I  recognised  the  young  fellow  from  the  description.  It  impressed  me
very  much,  but  I  did  not  mention  it  to  him  or  any  one.  I  loitered  about  until
I  heard  Mr.  Husbands  tell  the  same  tale  to  my  brother;  we  left  Mr.  H.  and
said  simultaneously,  "  He  has  seen  Mr.  D."

No  more  was  said  on  the  subject  for  days;  then  I  abruptly  showed  the
photograph.  Mr.  Husbands  said  at  once,  "  That  is  the  young  fellow  who
appeared  to  me  the  other  night,  but  he  was  dressed  differently  " — describing  a
dress  he  often  wore — "  cricket  suit  (or  tennis)  fastened  at  the  neck  with  sailor
knot."  I  must  say  that  Mr.  Husbands  is  a  most  practical  man,  and  the  very
last  one  would  expect  "  a  spirit  "  to  visit.  K.  FALKNER.

October  2oth,  1886.

I  enclose  you  photograph  and  an  extract  from  my  sister-in-law's  letter,
which  I  received  this  morning,  as  it  will  verify  my  statement.  Mr.  Husbands
saw  the  figure  either  the  3rd  or  4th  of  February  1885.

The  people  who  had  occupied  the  rooms  had  never  told  us  if  they  had  seen
anything,  so  we  may  conclude  they  had  not.  K.  FALKNER.

The  following  is  Miss  Falkner's  copy  of  the  passage  in  the  letter  : —

"  You  will  see  at  back  of  Mr.  du  F 's  photo  the  date  of  his  decease

[January  2Qth,  1884];  and  if  you  recollect  'the  Motta  Marques  '  had  his  rooms
from  the  February  till  the  May  or  June  of  1884,  then  Major  Money  at  the
commencement  of  1885  season.  Mr.  Husbands  had  to  take  the  room  on
February  2nd,  1885,  as  his  was  wanted.  I  am  clear  on  all  this,  and  remember
his  telling  me  the  incident  when  he  came  to  see  my  baby."

Gurney  adds : —

I  have  received  a  full  account  of  this  case,  viva  voce,   from   both  Mr.

Husbands  and  Miss  Falkner.     They  are  both  thoroughly  practical,  and  as  far

removed  as  possible  from  a  superstitious  love  of  marvels  ;  nor  had  they  any

previous  interest  in  this  or  any  other  class  of  abnormal   experiences.     So  far

VOL.  n.  2   B


386  APPENDICES  [745  T>

as  I  could  judge,  Mr.  Husbands' view  of  himself  is  entirely  correct— that  he
is  the  last  person  to  give  a  spurious  importance  to  anything  that  might  befall
him,  or  to  allow  facts  to  be  distorted  by  imagination.  As  will  be  seen,  his
account  of  his  vision  preceded  any  knowledge  on  his  part  of  the  death  which
had  occurred  in  the  room.  He  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination  of  the
senses.

Another  case  much  resembling  this,  but  in  which  the  evidence  for
identification  of  the  figure  is  weaker,  is  that  of  Mrs.  Lewin,  in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  462.

745  D.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  466.  In  the  following
case  it  is  possible  that  a  real  person  may  have  been  mistaken  for  an
apparition,  but  the  details,  as  reported,  tell  strongly  against  this  view.
The  account  is  given  by  Mrs.  Clerke,  68  Redcliffe  Square,  S.W.

1884.

In  the  autumn  of  1872,  I  stayed  at  Sorrento  with  my  two  daughters,  and
established  myself  for  some  months  at  the  Hotel  Columella,  which  stands  on
the  high  road,  within  half  a  mile  of  the  town.  My  suite  of  apartments  con-
sisted  of  a  large  drawing-room,  ante-room,  and  three  bedrooms  ;  it  was  shaped
like  the  letter  U,  and  each  end  opened  on  a  large  terrace.  The  hotel  was-
kept  by  two  men,  Rafaelle  and  Angelo,  and  the  service  of  the  rooms  was  con-
ducted by  their  wives,  a  family  arrangement  which  worked  harmoniously  for
the  guests.

On  the  evening  in  question  we  left  the  dining-room  before  the  tea  was
finished,  anxious,  after  the  heat  of  the  day,  to  enjoy  the  freshness  and  beauty
of  the  terrace.  After  a  few  moments,  I  returned  to  my  bedroom  to  fetch  a
candlestick  and  a  shawl,  and  so  much  disliked  going  that  I  loitered  un-
reasonably after  I  said  I  would  go.  I  entered  the  ante-room  and  passed
through  the  long  drawing-room,  its  porcelain  tiling  echoing  my  steps  with  a
sharp  creak,  till  I  reached  my  bedroom  door.  One  side  of  the  door  stood  open;
it  was  a  doorway  divided  in  two,  or  as  the  French  say,  a  deux  battants,  and  I
resolved  not  to  close  it,  as  I  perceived  everything  had  been  put  in  order  for
the  night

I  got  my  shawl  and  my  candlestick,  and  was  preparing  to  return  through
the  drawing-room,  when,  on  turning  towards  the  half-open  door,  I  saw  it  filled
by  the  figure  of  an  old  woman.  She  stood  motionless,  silent,  immovable,
framed  by  the  doorway,  with  an  expression  of  despairing  sadness,  such  as  I
had  never  seen  before.  I  don't  know  why  I  was  frightened,  but  some  idea  of
its  being  an  imbecile  or  mad  woman  flashed  through  my  mind,  and  in  an
unreasoning  panic  I  turned  from  the  drawing-room  door,  with  its  melancholy
figure,  and  fled  through  the  bedrooms  to  the  terrace.  My  daughter,  on  hearing-
of  my  fright,  returned  to  the  rooms,  but  all  was  in  its  wonted  stillness ;  nothing
was  to  be  seen.

The  next  morning  I  spoke  to  the  women  of  the  house  of  the  old  woman
who  had  come  to  my  room,  as  I  thought  she  might  be  in  some  way  connected
with  the  establishment,  and  they  were  dismayed  at  my  account  of  her,  and
assured  me  that  there  was  no  one  answering  the  description  in  the  house,
perceived  there  was  much  consternation  caused  by  my  narration,  but  paid  little
attention  to  it  at  the  time.


745  D]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  387

A  fortnight  afterwards  we  had  a'visit  from  the  parish  priest,  a  friend  of  our
landlord,  and  the  spiritual  adviser  of  the  family.  At  a  loss  for  conversation,  I
told  him  of  my  visitor,  who  arrived  punctually  at  8  o'clock,  "  fora  del  de/unii"
The  padre  listened  to  me  with  the  greatest  gravity,  and  said,  after  a  pause : —
"  Madam,  you  have  accurately  described  the  old  mistress  of  this  house,  who
died,  six  months  before  you  came,  in  the  room  over  yours.  The  people  of  the
hotel  have  been  already  with  me  about  it ;  it  has  caused  them  much  anxiety
lest  you  should  leave,  and  they  recognised  in  your  description  the  old  padrona,
as  she  was  called."

This  explained  to  me  various  presents  of  fruit  and  special  attentions  I  had
received.  Nothing  more  came  of  it,  and  I  saw  the  apparition  no  more.  In
our  walks  we  looked  for  even  some  semblance  of  the  dress  in  which  the  woman
appeared,  but  never  saw  it.  Short  as  my  glance  towards  her  was,  I  could  have
painted  her  likeness  had  I  been  an  artist.  She  was  pale,  of  the  thick  pallor  of
age,  cold  grey  eyes,  straight  nose,  thick  bands  of  yellowish  grey  hair  crossing
her  forehead.  She  wore  a  lace  cap  with  the  border  closely  quilted  all  round,  a
white  handkerchief  crossed  over  her  chest,  and  a  long  white  apron.  Her  face
was  expressionless,  but  fixed  and  sad.  I  could  not  think  she  had  any  know-
ledge of  where  she  was,  or  who  stood  before  her,  and  certainly,  for  breaking
through  the  barrier  of  the  unseen,  it  was  a  most  objectless  visit.

I  ought  to  mention  that  I  had  no  knowledge  of  there  having  been  such  a
person  in  existence  until  her  likeness  stood  at  my  bedroom  door.

KATE  M.  CLERKE.

In  another  letter  Mrs.  Clerke  states  that  as  far  as  she  knew,  the  appari-
tion had  not  been  seen  again,  but  that  the  women  of  the  house  were  afraid
afterwards  of  entering  her  room  alone.  She  adds  : —

The  peculiarity  of  it  is  my  literally  describing  a  person  whom  I  had  never
seen  or  known  about.  Every  one  was  overwhelmed  by  the  portraiture,  even  a
lady  who  had  seen  the  old  mistress.

Mr.  Podmore  adds  the  following  notes  of  an  interview  with  Mrs.
Clerke.

August  i$th,  1884.

Called  on  Mrs.  Clerke  to-day.  She  told  me  that  she  had  never  believed  in
ghosts  before,  and  now  believed  in  very  few  besides  her  own.  She  was  quite
sure  that  the  description  she  gave  of  the  figure  was  detailed  enough  to  be
recognised.  Indeed,  the  dress  as  she  saw  it,  though  like  that  actually  worn
by  the  old  mistress,  was  not  a  common  one  in  the  district.  Mrs.  Clerke  never
saw  one  at  all  like  it  in  Italy.  When  she  saw  the  figure,  the  dress  struck  her
a?  being  like  that  of  an  old  Irish  nurse  of  hers,  and  she  told  her  daughter  so,
when  she  rejoined  them,  adding  that  the  face  was  quite  unlike  the  nurse's.
Miss  Clerke  confirmed  this  statement  to  me.

Mrs.  Clerke  admitted  that  it  would  have  been  quite  possible  for  the  figure
which  she  saw,  had  it  been  that  of  a  real  woman,  to  have  escaped.  She  is,
however,  quite  convinced  that  she  saw  a  ghost ;  partly  because  of  the  re-
semblance, partly  because  of  the  unreasonable  terror  which  seized  her  when
she  saw  the  figure,  for  she  is  not  a  nervous  woman  naturally.

There  were  no  noises  or  other  disturbances  in  the  house  during  their  stay.

F.  P.


388  APPENDICES  [747  A

747  A.  The  next  case  (taken  from  the/^z/r/z^/S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  27)
is  an  instance  of  a  kind  of  auditory  hallucination,  the  hearing  of  music,
that  seems  to  occur  much  more  rarely  than  the  hearing  of  voices.  Some
similar  cases — also  associated  with  deaths — were  published  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living.  (See  vol.  ii.  pp.  221  and  223.)  The  fact  that  the  sounds
were  heard  collectively  suggests  at  first  sight  that  they  may  have  been
real — an  explanation  which  it  is  always  more  difficult  to  exclude  in  auditory
than  in  visual  cases.  But  the  whole  circumstances,  when  closely  examined,
make  this  explanation  an  extremely  unlikely  one.

The  following  account  was  given  by  Miss  Home,  daughter  of  the
percipient,  in  a  letter  to  which  Mrs.  Home's  signature  was  afterwards
added,  so  that  the  account,  though  written  in  the  third  person,  is  really
a  first-hand  one.

508  UNION  STREET,  ABERDEEN,  November  25^,  1890.

It  is  nearly  thirty  years  ago  now,  but  it  is  as  vividly  impressed  on  her
memory,  as  if  it  had  happened  yesterday.

She  was  sitting  in  the  dining-room  (in  a  self-contained  house),  which  was
behind  the  drawing-room,  with  Jamie,  my  eldest  brother,  on  her  knee,  who
was  then  a  baby  scarcely  two  years  old.  The  nurse  had  gone  out  for  the
afternoon,  and  there  was  no  one  in  the  house  except  the  maid  downstairs.
The  doors  of  the  dining-room  and  drawing-room  both  happened  to  be  open
at  the  time.  All  at  once  she  heard  the  most  divine  music,  very  sad  and  sweet,
which  lasted  for  about  two  minutes,  then  gradually  died  away.  My  brother
jumped  from  mamma's  knee,  exclaiming  "  Papa !  papa,"  and  ran  through  to
the  drawing-room.  Mamma  felt  as  if  she  could  not  move  and  rang  the  bell
for  the  servant,  whom  she  told  to  go  and  see  who  was  in  the  drawing-room.
When  she  went  into  the  room,  she  found  my  brother  standing  beside  the  piano
and  saying  "  No  papa ! "  Why  the  child  should  have  exclaimed  these  words
was  that  papa  was  very  musical,  and  used  often  to  go  straight  to  the  piano
when  he  came  home.  Such  was  the  impression  on  mamma  that  she  noted  the
time  to  a  minute,  and  six  weeks  after  she  received  a  letter  saying  her  sister  had
died  at  the  Cape,  and  the  time  corresponded  exactly  to  the  minute  that  she
had  heard  the  music.  I  may  tell  you  that  my  aunt  was  a  very  fine  musician.

[Miss]  EMILY  M.  HORNE.
(Signed)    December  iith,  1890.     [MRS.]  ELIZA  HORNE.

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  Miss  Home  wrote  : —

December  nth,  1890.

I  am  sorry  to  say  the  note,  which  mamma  took  at  the  time,  has  been  lost,
though  she  had  it  for  more  than  twenty  years  after  the  event  occurred.

The  name  of  my  aunt  was  Mary  Sophia  Ingles,  she  died  on  the  2oth
February  1861,  at  Durban,  Natal.  .  .  .  Mamma  bids  me  say  that  her  note
corresponded  not  only  to  the  hour  but  to  the  minute  of  her  sister's  death.

This  account  is  followed  in  the  same  Journal  by  another  case  of  a
collective  hallucination  of  music  heard  a  few  hours  after  the  funeral  of
a  musician.

751  A.     The  following  case  is  in  some  respects  one  of  the  most  remark-


751  A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  389

able  and  best  authenticated  instances  of  "  haunting"  on  record,  although,
as  will  be  seen,  the  evidence  for  the  identity  of  the  apparition  is  incon-
clusive. The  case  was  fully  described  in  a  paper  entitled  "  Record  of  a
Haunted  House,"  by  Miss  R.  C.  Morton,  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.
pp.  311-332.  Besides  the  account  of  the  principal  percipient,  MissR.  C.
Morton,  the  paper  contains  independent  first-hand  statements  from  six
other  witnesses, — a  friend,  Miss  Campbell,  a  sister  and  brother  of  Miss
Morton's  who  lived  in  the  house,  and  a  married  sister  who  visited  there,
and  two  former  servants;  also  plans  of  the  whole  house.  For  the  full
details  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  the  original  paper ;  I  have  space  here
only  for  abbreviated  extracts  from  Miss  Morton's  account.

An  account  of  the  case  first  came  into  my  hands  in  December  1884,
and  this  with  Miss  Morton's  letters  to  her  friend,  Miss  Campbell,  are
the  earliest  written  records.  On  May  ist,  1886,  I  called  upon  Captain
Morton  at  the  "haunted  house,"  and  afterwards  visited  him  at  intervals,
and  took  notes  of  what  he  told  me.  I  also  saw  Miss  Morton  and  Miss
E.  Morton,  and  the  two  former  servants  whose  accounts  are  given  in
Miss  Morton's  paper.  The  phenomena  as  seen  or  heard  by  all  the
witnesses  were  very  uniform  in  character,  even  in  the  numerous  instances
where  there  had  been  no  previous  communication  between  the  percipients.
Miss  Morton  is  a  lady  of  scientific  training,  and  was  at  the  time  her
account  was  written  (in  April,  1892)  preparing  to  be  a  physician.  The
name  "  Morton "  is  substituted  for  the  real  family  name.  With  that
exception  the  names  and  initials  are  the  true  ones.

After  describing  the  house  and  garden,  Miss  Morton  proceeds  : —

It  was  built  about  the  year  1860;  the  first  occupant  was  Mr.  S.,  an  Anglo-
Indian,  who  lived  in  it  for  about  sixteen  years.  During  this  time,  in  the  month
of  August,  year  uncertain,  he  lost  his  wife,  to  whom  he  was  passionately
attached,  and  to  drown  his  grief  took  to  drinking.  About  two  years  later,  Mr.
S.  married  again.  His  second  wife,  a  Miss  I.  H.,  was  in  hopes  of  curing  him
of  his  intemperate  habits,  but  instead  she  also  took  to  drinking,  and  their
married  life  was  embittered  by  constant  quarrels,  frequently  resulting  in  violent
scenes.  The  chief  subjects  of  dispute  were  the  management  of  the  children
(two  girls,  and  either  one  or  two  boys,  all  quite  young)  of  the  first  Mrs.  S.,  and
the  possession  of  her  jewellery,  to  preserve  which  for  her  children,  Mr.  S.  had
some  of  the  boards  in  the  small  front  sitting-room  taken  up  by  a  local  carpenter
and  the  jewels  inserted  in  the  receptacle  so  formed.  Finally,  a  few  months
before  Mr.  S.'s  death,  on  July  i4th,  1876,  his  wife  separated  from  him  and
went  to  live  in  Clifton.  She  was  not  present  at  the  time  of  his  death,  nor,
as  far  as  is  known,  was  she  ever  at  the  house  afterwards.  She  died  on
September  23rd,  1878.

After  Mr.  S.'s  death  the  house  was  bought  by  Mr.  L.,  an  elderly  gentleman,
who  died  rather  suddenly  within  six  months  of  going  into  it.  The  house  then
remained  empty  for  some  years — probably  four.

During  this  time  there  is  no  direct  evidence  of  haunting,  but  when  inquiry
was  made  later  on  much  hearsay  evidence  was  brought  forward.  In  April
1882,  the  house  was  let  by  the  representatives  of  the  late  Mr.  L.  to  Captain


390  APPENDICES  [751  A

Morton,  and  it  is  during  his  tenancy  (not  yet  terminated)  that  the  appearances
recorded  have  taken  place.

The  family  consists  of  Captain  M.  himself ;  his  wife,  who  is  a  great  invalid  ;
neither  of  whom  saw  anything  ;  a  married  daughter,  Mrs.  K.,  then  about
twenty-six,  who  was  only  a  visitor  from  time  to  time,  sometimes  with,  but  more
often  without,  her  husband;  four  unmarried  daughters,  myself,  then  aged
nineteen,  who  was  the  chief  percipient  and  now  give  the  chief  account  of  the
apparition;  E.  Morton,  then  aged  eighteen;  L.  and  M.  Morton,  then  fifteen
and  thirteen ;  two  sons,  one  of  sixteen,  who  was  absent  during  the  greater  part
of  the  time  when  the  apparition  was  seen ;  the  other,  then  six  years  old.

My  father  took  the  house  in  March  1882,  none  of  us  having  then  heard  of
anything  unusual  about  the  house.  We  moved  in  towards  the  end  of  April,
and  it  was  not  until  the  following  June  that  I  first  saw  the  apparition.

I  had  gone  up  to  my  room,  but  was  not  yet  in  bed,  when  I  heard  some  one
at  the  door,  and  went  to  it,  thinking  it  might  be  my  mother.  On  opening  the
door,  I  saw  no  one ;  but  on  going  a  few  steps  along  the  passage,  I  saw  the
figure  of  a  tall  lady,  dressed  in  black,  standing  at  the  head  of  the  stairs.  After
a  few  moments  she  descended  the  stairs,  and  I  followed  for  a  short  distance,
feeling  curious  what  it  could  be.  I  had  only  a  small  piece  of  candle,  and  it
suddenly  burnt  itself  out;  and  being  unable  to  see  more,  I  went  back  to
my  room.

The  figure  was  that  of  a  tall  lady,  dressed  in  black  of  a  soft  woollen  material,
judging  from  the  slight  sound  in  moving.  The  face  was  hidden  in  a  hand-
kerchief held  in  the  right  hand.  This  is  all  I  noticed  then;  but  on  further
occasions,  when  I  was  able  to  observe  her  more  closely,  I  saw  the  upper  part
of  the  left  side  of  the  forehead,  and  a  little  of  the  hair  above.  Her  left  hand
was  nearly  hidden  by  her  sleeve  and  a  fold  of  her  dress.  As  she  held  it  down
a  portion  of  a  widow's  cuff  was  visible  on  both  wrists,  so  that  the  whole  im-
pression was  that  of  a  lady  in  widow's  weeds.  There  was  no  cap  on  the  head
but  a  general  effect  of  blackness  suggests  a  bonnet,  with  long  veil  or  a  hood.

During  the  next  two  years — from  1882  to  1884 — I  saw  the  figure  about
half-a-dozen  times ;  at  first  at  long  intervals,  and  afterwards  at  shorter,  but  I
only  mentioned  these  appearances  to  one  friend,  who  did  not  speak  of  them  to
any  one.  During  this  period,  as  far  as  we  know,  there  were  only  three  appear-
ances to  any  one  else.

1.  In  the  summer  of  1882  to  my  sister,  Mrs.  K.,  when  the  figure  was  thought
to  be  that  of  a  Sister  of  Mercy  who  had  called  at  the  house,  and  no  further
curiosity  was  aroused.     She  was  coming  down  the  stairs  rather  late  for  dinner
at  6.30,  it  being  then  quite  light,  when  she  saw  the  figure  cross  the  hall  in  front
of  her,  and  pass  into  the  drawing-room.     She  then  asked  the  rest  of  us,  already
seated  at  dinner,  "  Who  was  that  Sister  of  Mercy  whom  I  have  just  seen  going
into  the  drawing-room  ? "     She   was   told  there  was  no  such  person,  and  a
servant  was  sent  to  look;  but  the  drawing-room  was  empty,  and  she  was  sure
no  one  had  come  in.     Mrs.  K.  persisted  that  she  had  seen  a  tall  figure  in  black,
with  some  white  about  it  j  but  nothing  further  was  thought  of  the  matter.

2.  In  the  autumn  of  1883  it  was  seen  by  the  housemaid  about  10  P.M.,  she
declaring  that  some  one  had  got  into  the  house,  her  description  agreeing  fairly
with  what  I  had  seen;  but  as  on  searching  no  one  was  found,  her  story  received
no  credit.

3.  On  or  about  December  i8th,  1883,  it  was  seen  in  the  drawing-room  by


751A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  391

-my  brother  and  another  little  boy.  They  were  playing  outside  on  the  terrace
when  they  saw  the  figure  in  the  drawing-room  close  to  the  window,  and  ran  in
to  see  who  it  could  be  that  was  crying  so  bitterly.  They  found  no  one  in
•the  drawing-room,  and  the  parlour-maid  told  them  that  no  one  had  come  into
the  house.

After  the  first  time,  I  followed  the  figure  several  times  downstairs  into  the
drawing-room,  where  she  remained  a  variable  time,  generally  standing  to  the
•right  hand  side  of  the  bow  window.  From  the  drawing-room  she  went  along
the  passage  towards  the  garden  door,  where  she  always  disappeared.

The  first  time  I  spoke  to  her  was  on  January  29th,  1884.  "  I  opened  the
drawing-room  door  softly  and  went  in,  standing  just  by  it.  She  came  in  past
•me  and  walked  to  the  sofa  and  stood  still  there,  so  I  went  up  to  her  and  asked
her  if  I  could  help  her.  She  moved,  and  I  thought  she  was  going  to  speak,
but  she  only  gave  a  slight  gasp  and  moved  towards  the  door.  Just  by  the  door
I  spoke  to  her  again,  but  she  seemed  as  if  she  were  quite  unable  to  speak.  She
•walked  into  the  hall,  then  by  the  side  door  she  seemed  to  disappear  as  before."
(Quoted  from  a  letter  written  on  January  3ist.)  In  May  and  June,  1884,  I
tried  some  experiments,  fastening  strings  with  marine  glue  across  the  stairs  at
different  heights  from  the  ground — of  which  I  give  a  more  detailed  account
later  on.

I  also  attempted  to  touch  her,  but  she  always  eluded  me.  It  was  not  that
there  was  nothing  there  to  touch,  but  that  she  always  seemed  to  be  beyond
me,  and  if  followed  into  a  corner,  simply  disappeared.

During  these  two  years  the  only  noises  I  heard  were  those  of  slight  pushes
against  my  bedroom  door,  accompanied  by  footsteps  ;  and  if  I  looked  out  on
hearing  these  sounds,  I  invariably  saw  the  figure.  "  Her  footstep  is  very  light,
you  can  hardly  hear  it,  except  on  the  linoleum,  and  then  only  like  a  person
walking  softly  with  thin  boots  on."  (Letter  on  January  3 1  st,  1 884. )  The  appear-
ances during  the  next  two  months — July  and  August,  1884 — became  much  more
frequent;  indeed  they  were  then  at  their  maximum,  from  which  time  they  seem
gradually  to  have  decreased,  until  now  they  seem  to  have  ceased.

Of  these  two  months  I  have  a  short  record  in  a  set  of  journal  letters  written
at  the  time  to  a  friend.  On  July  2ist  I  find  the  following  account.  "  I  went
into  the  drawing-room,  where  my  father  and  sisters  were  sitting,  about  nine  in
the  evening,  and  sat  down  on  a  couch  close  to  the  bow  window.  A  few  minutes
after,  as  I  sat  reading,  I  saw  the  figure  come  in  at  the  open  door,  cross  the
room  and  take  up  a  position  close  behind  the  couch  where  I  was.  I  was
astonished  that  no  one  else  in  the  room  saw  her,  as  she  was  so  very  distinct  to
me.  My  youngest  brother,  who  had  before  seen  her,  was  not  in  the  room.
She  stood  behind  the  couch  for  about  half-an-hour,  and  then  as  usual  walked
to  the  door.  I  went  after  her,  on  the  excuse  of  getting  a  book,  and  saw  her
pass  along  the  hall,  until  she  came  to  the  garden  door,  where  she  disappeared.
I  spoke  to  her  as  she  passed  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  but  she  did  not  answer,
although  as  before  she  stopped  and  seemed  as  though  about  to  speak."  On
July  3 ist,  some  time  after  I  had  gone  up  to  bed,  my  second  sister  E.,  who  had
remained  downstairs  talking  in  another  sister's  room,  came  to  me  saying  that
some  one  had  passed  her  on  the  stairs.  I  tried  then  to  persuade  her  that  it
was  one  of  the  servants,  but  next  morning  found  it  could  not  have  been  so,  as
none  of  them  had  been  out  of  their  rooms  at  that  hour,  and  E.'s  more  detailed
description  tallied  with  what  I  had  already  seen.


392  APPENDICES  [751  A

On  the  night  of  August  ist,  I  again  saw  the  figure.  I  heard  the  footsteps
outside  on  the  landing  about  2  A.M.  I  got  up  at  once,  and  went  outside.
She  was  then  at  the  end  of  the  landing  at  the  top  of  the  stairs,  with  her  side
view  towards  me.  She  stood  there  some  minutes,  then  went  downstairs,
stopping  again  when  she  reached  the  hall  below.  I  opened  the  drawing-room
door  and  she  went  in,  walked  across  the  room  to  the  couch  in  the  bow  window,
stayed  there  a  little,  then  came  out  of  the  room,  went  along  the  passage,
and  disappeared  by  the  garden  door.  I  spoke  to  her  again,  but  she  did  not
answer.

On  the  night  of  August  2nd  the  footsteps  were  heard  by  my  three  sisters
and  by  the  cook,  all  of  whom  slept  on  the  top  landing — also  by  my  married
sister,  Mrs.  K.,  who  was  sleeping  on  the  floor  below.  They  all  said  the  next
morning  that  they  had  heard  them  very  plainly  pass  and  repass  their  doors.
The  cook  was  a  middle-aged  and  very  sensible  person ;  on  my  asking  her  the
following  morning  if  any  of  the  servants  had  been  out  of  their  rooms  the  night
before,  after  coming  up  to  bed,  she  told  me  that  she  had  heard  these  footsteps
before,  and  that  she  had  seen  the  figure  on  the  stairs  one  night  when  going
down  to  the  kitchen  to  fetch  hot  water  after  the  servants  had  come  up  to  bed.
She  described  it  as  a  lady  in  widow's  dress,  tall  and  slight,  with  her  face  hidden
in  a  handkerchief  held  in  her  right  hand.  Unfortunately  we  have  since  lost
sight  of  this  servant ;  she  left  us  about  a  year  afterwards  on  her  mother's  death,
and  we  cannot  now  trace  her.  She  also  saw  the  figure  outside  the  kitchen
windows  on  the  terrace-walk,  she  herself  being  in  the  kitchen ;  it  was  then
about  eleven  in  the  morning,  but  having  no  note  of  the  occurrence,  I  cannot
now  remember  whether  this  appearance  was  subsequent  to  the  one  above
mentioned.

These  footsteps  are  very  characteristic,  and  are  not  at  all  like  those  of  any
of  the  people  in  the  house ;  they  are  soft  and  rather  slow,  though  decided  and
even.  My  sisters  would  not  go  out  on  the  landing  after  hearing  them  pass,
nor  would  the  servants,  but  each  time  when  I  have  gone  out  after  hearing  them,
I  have  seen  the  figure  there.

On  August  5th  I  told  my  father  about  her  and  what  we  had  seen  and  heard.
He  was  much  astonished,  not  having  seen  or  heard  anything  himself  at  that
time — neither  then  had  my  mother,  but  she  is  slightly  deaf,  and  is  an  invalid.
He  made  inquiries  of  the  landlord  (who  then  lived  close  by)  as  to  whether  he
knew  of  anything  unusual  about  the  house,  as  he  had  himself  lived  in  it  for  a
short  time,  but  he  replied  that  he  had  only  been  there  for  three  months,  and
had  never  seen  anything  unusual.  .  .  .

On  the  evening  of  August  nth  we  were  sitting  in  the  drawing-room  with
the  gas  lit  but  the  shutters  not  shut,  the  light  outside  getting  dusk,  my  brothers
and  a  friend  having  just  given  up  tennis,  finding  it  too  dark ;  my  eldest  sister,
Mrs.  K.,  and  myself  both  saw  the  figure  on  the  balcony  outside,  looking  in  at
the  window.  She  stood  there  some  minutes,  then  walked  to  the  end  and  back
again,  after  which  she  seemed  to  disappear.  She  soon  after  came  into  the
drawing-room,  when  I  saw  her,  but  my  sister  did  not.  The  same  evening
my  sister  E.  saw  her  on  the  stairs  as  she  came  out  of  a  room  on  the  upper
landing.

The  following  evening,  August  I2th,  while  coming  up  the  garden,  I  walked
towards  the  orchard,  when  I  saw  the  figure  cross  the  orchard,  go  along  the
carriage  drive  in  front  of  the  house,  and  in  at  the  open  side  door,  across  the


751  A]  TO     CHAPTER    VII  393

hall  and  into  the  drawing-room,  I  following.  She  crossed  the  drawing-room
and  took  up  her  usual  position  behind  the  couch  in  the  bow  window.  My
father  came  in  soon  after,  and  I  told  him  she  was  there.  He  could  not  see  the
figure,  but  went  up  to  where  I  showed  him  she  was.  She  then  went  swiftly
round  behind  him,  across  the  room,  out  of  the  door,  and  along  the  hall,
disappearing  as  usual  near  the  garden  door,  we  both  following  her.  We
looked  out  into  the  garden,  having  first  to  unlock  the  garden  door,  which  my
father  had  locked  as  he  came  through,  but  saw  nothing  of  her.

On  August  1 2th,  about  8  P.M.,  and  still  quite  light,  my  sister  E.  was  singing
in  the  back  drawing-room.  I  heard  her  stop  abruptly,  come  out  into  the  hall,
and  call  me.  She  said  she  had  seen  the  figure  in  the  drawing-room  close
behind  her  as  she  sat  at  the  piano.  I  went  back  into  the  room  with  her  and
saw  the  figure  in  the  bow  window  in  her  usual  place.  I  spoke  to  her  several
times,  but  had  no  answer.  She  stood  there  for  about  ten  minutes  or  a  quarter
of  an  hour;  then  went  across  the  room  to  the  door,  and  along  the  passage,
disappearing  in  the  same  place  by  the  garden  door.

My  sister  M.  then  came  in  from  the  garden,  saying  she  had  seen  her
coming  up  the  kitchen  steps  outside.  We  all  three  then  went  out  into  the
garden,  when  Mrs.  K.  called  out  from  a  window  on  the  first  storey  that  she  had
just  seen  her  pass  across  the  lawn  in  front  and  along  the  carriage  drive  towards
the  orchard.  This  evening,  then,  altogether  four  people  saw  her.  My  father
was  then  away,  and  my  youngest  brother  was  out.

On  the  morning  of  August  I4th  the  parlour-maid  saw  her  in  the  dining-
room,  about  8.30  A.M.,  having  gone  into  the  room  to  open  the  shutters.  The
room  is  very  sunny,  and  even  with  all  the  shutters  closed  it  is  quite  light,  the
shutters  not  fitting  well,  and  letting  sunlight  through  the  cracks.  She  had
opened  one  shutter,  when,  on  turning  round,  she  saw  the  figure  cross  the  room.
We  were  all  on  the  look-out  for  her  that  evening,  but  saw  nothing;  in  fact,
whenever  we  had  made  arrangements  to  watch,  and  were  especially  expecting
her,  we  never  saw  anything.  This  servant,  who  afterwards  married,  was  inter-
viewed by  Mr.  Myers  at  her  own  house.  .  .  .

On  August  i  pth  we  all  went  to  the  seaside,  and  were  away  a  month,  leaving
three  servants  in  the  house.

-.  When  we  came  back  they  said  that  they  had  heard  footsteps  and  noises
frequently,  but  as  the  stair-carpets  were  up  part  of  the  time  and  the  house  was
empty,  many  of  these  noises  were  doubtless  due  to  natural  causes,  though  by
them  attributed  to  the  figure.

The  cook  also  spoke  of  seeing  the  figure  in  the  garden,  standing  by  a  stone
vase  on  the  lawn  behind  the  house.

During  the  rest  of  that  year  and  the  following,  1885,  the  apparition  was
frequently  seen  through  each  year,  especially  during  July,  August,  and
September.  In  these  months  the  three  deaths  too|c  place,  viz. : — Mr.  S.,  on
July  i4th,  1876;  the  first  Mrs.  S.  in  August,  and  the  second  Mrs.  S.  on
September  23rd.

The  apparitions  were  of  exactly  the  same  type,  seen  in  the  same  places  and
by  the  same  people,  at  varying  intervals.

The  footsteps  continued,  and  were  heard  by  several  visitors  and  new
servants  who  had  taken  the  places  of  those  who  had  left,  as  well  as  by  myself,
four  sisters  and  brother;  in  all  by  about  twenty  people,  many  of  them  not
having  previously  heard  of  the  apparition  or  sounds.


394  APPENDICES  [751  A

Other  sounds  were  also  heard  in  addition  which  seemed  gradually  to  increase
in  intensity.  They  consisted  of  walking  up  and  down  on  the  second-floor
landing,  of  bumps  against  the  doors  of  the  bedrooms,  and  of  the  handles  of  the
doors  turning.  .  .  .

During  this  year,  at  Mr.  Myers's  suggestion,  I  kept  a  photographic  camera
constantly  ready  to  try  to  photograph  the  figure,  but  on  the  few  occasions  I
was  able  to  do  so,  I  got  no  result ;  at  night,  usually  only  by  candle-light,  a
long  exposure  would  be  necessary  for  so  dark  a  figure,  and  this  I  could  not
obtain.  I  also  tried  to  communicate  with  the  figure,  constantly  speaking  to
it  and  asking  it  to  make  signs,  if  not  able  to  speak,  but  with  no  result.  I  also
tried  especially  to  touch  her,  but  did  not  succeed.  On  cornering  her,  as  I  aid
once  or  twice,  she  disappeared.

Some  time  in  the  summer  of  this  year  (1886),  Mrs.  Twining,  our  regular
charwoman,  saw  the  figure,  while  waiting  in  the  hall  at  the  door  leading  to  the
kitchen  stairs,  for  her  payment.  Until  it  suddenly  vanished  from  her  sight,
as  no  real  figure  could  have  done,  she  thought  it  was  a  lady  visitor  who  had
mistaken  her  way.  Mr.  Myers  interviewed  her  on  December  29th,  1889,  and
has  her  separate  account.

On  one  night  in  July  1886  (my  father  and  I  being  away  from  home),  my
mother  and  her  maid  heard  a  loud  noise  in  an  unoccupied  room  over  their
heads.  They  went  up,  but  seeing  nothing  and  the  noise  ceasing,  they  went
back  to  my  mother's  room  on  the  first  storey.  They  then  heard  loud  noises  from
the  morning-room  on  the  ground  floor.  They  then  went  half-way  downstairs,
when  they  saw  a  bright  light  in  the  hall  beneath.  Being  alarmed,  they  went
tip  to  my  sister  E.,  who  then  came  down,  and  they  all  three  examined  the
doors,  windows,  &c.,  and  found  them  all  fastened  as  usual.  My  mother  and
her  maid  then  went  to  bed.  My  sister  E.  went  up  to  her  room  on  the  second
storey,  but  as  she  passed  the  room  where  my  two  sisters  L.  and  M.  were
sleeping,  they  opened  their  door  to  say  that  they  had  heard  noises,  and  also
seen  what  they  described  as  the  flame  of  a  candle,  without  candle  or  hand
visible,  cross  the  room  diagonally  from  corner  to  door.  Two  of  the  maids
opened  the  doors  of  their  two  bedrooms,  and  said  that  they  had  also  heard
noises;  they  all  five  stood  at  their  doors  with  their  lighted  canales  for  some
little  time.  They  all  heard  steps  walking  up  and  down  the  landing  between
them ;  as  they  passed  they  felt  a  sensation  which  they  described  as  "  a  cold
wind,"  though  their  candles  were  not  blown  about.  They  saw  nothing.  The
steps  then  descended  the  stairs,  re-ascended,  again  descended,  and  did  not
return.

In  the  course  of  the  following  autumn  we  heard  traditions  of  earlier
haunting,  though,  unfortunately,  in  no  case  were  we  .able  to  get  a  first-hand
account.  .  .  .

We  also  now  heard  from  a  carpenter  who  had  done  jobs  in  the  house  in
Mrs.  S.'s  time,  that  Mrs.  S.  had  wished  to  possess  herself  of  the  first  Mrs.  S.'s
jewels.  Her  husband  had  called  him  in  to  make  a  receptacle  under  the  boards
in  the  -morning-room  on  the  ground-floor,  in  which  receptacle  he  placed  the
jewels,  and  then  had  it  nailed  down  and  the  carpet  replaced.  The  carpenter
showed  us  the  place.  My  father  made  him  take  up  the  boards ;  the  receptacle
was  there,  but  empty.  .  .  .

During  the  next  two  years,  1887  to  1889,  the  figure  was  very  seldom  seen,
though  footsteps  were  heard ;  the  louder  noises  had  gradually  ceased.  From


751A]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  395

1889  to  the  present,  1892,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  figure  has  not  been  seen  at  all ;
the  lighter  footsteps  lasted  a  little  longer,  but  even  they  have  now  ceased.  The
figure  became  much  less  substantial  on  its  later  appearances.  Up  to  about
1886  it  was  so  solid  and  life-like  that  it  was  often  mistaken  for  a  real  person.
It  gradually  became  less  distinct.  At  all  times  it  intercepted  the  light ;  we
have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  if  it  cast  a  shadow.

Proofs  of  Immateriality.

1.  I  have  several  times  fastened  fine  strings  across  the  stairs  at  various
heights  before  going  to  bed,  but  after  all  others  have  gone  up  to  their  rooms.
These  were  fastened  in  the  following  way  :  I  made  small  pellets  of  marine  glue,
into  which  I  inserted  the  ends  of  the  cord,  then  stuck  one  pellet  lightly  against
the  wall  and  the  other  to  the  banister,  the  string  being  thus  stretched  across
the  stairs.     They  were  knocked  down  by  a  very  slight  touch,  and  yet  would
not  be  felt  by  any  one  passing  up  or  down  the  stairs,  and  by  candle-light  could
not  be  seen  from  below.     They  were  put  at  various  heights  from  the  ground
from  six  inches  to  the  height  of  the  banisters,  about  three  feet.     I  have  twice
.at  least  seen  the  figure  pass  through  the  cords,  leaving  them  intact.

2.  The  sudden  and  complete  disappearance  of  the  figure,  while  still  in  full
view.

3.  The  impossibility  of  touching  the  figure.     I  have  repeatedly  followed  it
into  a  corner,  when  it  disappeared,  and  have  tried  to  suddenly  pounce  upon  it,
but  have  never  succeeded  in  touching  it  or  getting  my  hand  up  to  it,  the  figure
eluding  my  touch.

4.  It  has  appeared  in  a  room  with  the  doors  shut.

On  the  other  hand,  the  figure  was  not  called  up  by  a  desire  to  see  it,  for
on  every  occasion  when  we  had  made  special  arrangements  to  watch  for  it,
we  never  saw  it.  On  several  occasions  we  have  sat  up  at  night  hoping  to  see
it,  but  in  vain, — my  father,  with  my  brother-in-law,  myself  with  a  friend  three
or  four  times,  an  aunt  and  myself  twice,  and  my  sisters  with  friends  more  than
once ;  but  on  none  of  these  occasions  was  anything  seen.  Nor  have  the
appearances  been  seen  after  we  have  been  talking  or  thinking  much  of  the
figure.

The  figure  has  been  connected  with  the  second  Mrs.  S. ;  the  grounds  for
which  are : —

1.  The  complete  history  of  the  house  is  known,  and  if  we  are  to  connect
the  figure  with  any  of  the  previous  occupants,  she  is  the  only  person  who  in
any  way  resembled  the  figure.

2.  The  widow's  garb  excludes  the  first  Mrs.  S.

3.  Although  none  of  us  had  ever  seen  the  second  Mrs.  S.,  several  people
who  had  known  her  identified  her  from  our  description.     On  being  shown  a
photo-album  containing  a  number  of  portraits,  I  picked  out  one  of  her  sister
as  being  most  like  that  of  the  figure,  and  was  afterwards  told  that  the  sisters
were  much  alike.

4.  Her  step-daughter  and  others  told  us  that  she  especially  used  the  front
drawing-room  in  which  she  continually  appeared,  and  that  her  habitual  seat
was  on  a  couch  placed  in  a  similar  position  to  ours.

5.  The  figure  is  undoubtedly  connected  with  the  house,  none  of  the  perci-
pients having  seen  it  anywhere  else,  nor  had  any  other  hallucination.

In  writing  the  above  account,  my  memory  of  the  occurrences  has  been


396  APPENDICES  [751 B

largely  assisted  by  reference  to  a  set  of  journal  letters  written  [to  Miss
Campbell]  at  the  time,  and  by  notes  of  interviews  held  by  Mr.  Myers  with  my
father  and  various  members  of  our  family.  R.  C.  MORTON.

Of  the  accounts  given  by  the  other  witnesses,  I  quote  only  part  of
Miss  Campbell's  statement,  as  follows  : —

77  CHESTERTON  ROAD,  NORTH  KENSINGTON,  W.,
March  31  j/,  1892.

...  On  the  night  on  which  Miss  Morton  first  spoke  to  the  figure,  as  stated
in  her  account,  I  myself  saw  her  telepathically.  I  was  in  my  room  (I  was  then
residing  in  the  North  of  England,  quite  one  hundred  miles  away  from  Miss
Morton's  home),  preparing  for  bed,  between  twelve  and  half-past,  when  I
seemed  suddenly  to  be  standing  close  by  the  door  of  the  housemaid's  cupboard,
so  facing  the  short  flight  of  stairs  leading  to  the  top  landing.  Coming  down
these  stairs,  I  saw  the  figure,  exactly  as  described,  and  about  two  steps  behind
Miss  Morton  herself,  with  a  dressing-gown  thrown  loosely  round  her,  and
carrying  a  candle  in  her  hand.  A  loud  noise  in  the  room  overhead  recalled
me  to  my  surroundings,  and  although  I  tried  for  some  time  I  could  not  resume
the  impression.  The  black  dress,  dark  head-gear,  widow's  cuffs  and  hand-
kerchief were  plainly  visible,  though  the  details  of  them  were  not  given  me  by
Miss  Morton  till  afterwards,  when  I  asked  her  whether  she  had  not  seen  the
apparition  on  that  night.  (Signed)  CATHERINE  M.  CAMPBELL.

To  this  account  Miss  Morton  adds  : —

Miss  Campbell  was  the  friend  to  whom  I  first  spoke  of  the  apparition.  She
suggested  to  me  that  when  next  I  saw  her  I  should  speak ;  but  of  course  she
had  no  idea  when  this  would  be.  She  wrote  an  account  to  me  the  next  day  of
what  she  had  seen,  and  asked  me  if  I  had  not  seen  the  figure  that  night;  but
naturally  did  not  know  that  I  had  done  so,  until  she  received  my  reply.  Miss
Campbell  asks  me  to  say  that  this  is  the  only  vision  she  has  had,  veridical  or
otherwise.

751  B.  In  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  146,  November  1893,  an
account  was  given  by  Miss  M.  W.  Scott,  of  Lessudden  House,  St.
Boswell's,  Roxburghshire,  of  an  apparition  seen  several  times  by  herself,
and  occasionally  by  others,  on  a  country  road  near  her  home.  Her  first
experience  was  in  May  1892,  when,  walking  down  a  short  incline  on  her
way  home,  she  saw  a  tall  man  dressed  in  black  a  few  yards  in  front  of  her.
He  turned  a  corner  of  the  road,  being  still  in  view  of  her,  and  there
suddenly  disappeared.  On  following  him  round  the  corner,  Miss  Scott
found  a  sister  of  hers,  also  on  her  way  home,  who  had  just  seen  a  tall  man
dressed  in  black,  whom  she  took  for  a  clergyman,  coming  to  meet  her  on
the  road.  She  looked  away  for  a  moment,  and  on  looking  towards  him
again  could  see  no  one  anywhere  near.  Miss  Scott  on  overtaking  her
found  her  looking  up  and  down  the  road  and  into  the  fields  in  much
bewilderment.  It  appeared  that  they  had  not  seen  the  man  at  exactly
the  same  moment  nor  in  exactly  the  same  place,  but  from  their  description
of  the  surroundings  it  seems  impossible  that  it  could  have  been  a  real
person,  who  had  contrived  to  get  away  unnoticed.


751  B]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  397

In  July  of  the  same  year  at  about  the  same  place,  Miss  Scott,  walking
with  another  of  her  sisters,  saw  a  dark  figure  approaching  them,  dressed  in
black,  with  a  long  coat,  gaiters  and  knee-breeches,  a  wide  white  cravat
and  low- crowned  hat ;  the  sister  also  saw  the  upper  part  of  the  figure,
which  seemed  to  fade  away  into  the  bank  by  the  side  of  the  road  as  they
looked  at  it.

Again,  in  June  1893,  walking  alone  on  the  road  in  the  morning,  Miss
Scott  saw  a  dark  figure  some  way  in  front,  which  she  recognised  as  the
apparition  when  she  got  nearer  to  it.  She  made  a  determined  effort
to  overtake  it,  but  could  not  get  nearer  than  a  few  yards,  as  it  then
seemed  to  float  or  skim  away.  At  length,  however,  it  stopped,  turned
round  and  faced  her ;  then  moved  on  a  few  steps,  and  turned  and  looked
back  again,  finally  fading  from  her  view  by  a  hedge.  She  was  able  to
notice  fully  the  details  of  the  dress, — knee-breeches,  black  silk  stock-
ings and  shoe-buckles, — like  the  dress  of  Scottish  clergymen  about  a
century  ago.

The  apparition  was  also  said  to  have  been  seen  at  different  times  by
some  children  and  other  persons  in  the  neighbourhood ;  but  of  this  no
first-hand  accounts  were  forthcoming.  There  was  also  a  legend  that  a
child  had  been  murdered  close  by ;  "  but,"  Miss  Scott  wrote,  "  this  fact  is
quite  beyond  the  recollection  of  the  oldest  inhabitant  of  the  neighbourhood,"
and  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  it  was  invented  to  account  for  the  ghost.

We  received  later  several  other  accounts  of  a  similar  apparition  having
been  seen  by  various  persons  at  different  times  in  the  same  place ;  and  in
the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  299-306,  all  the  further  evidence  on  the
subject  that  had  reached  us  up  to  that  date  (October  1900)  was  printed.
I  proceed  to  quote  some  of  this.

Miss  Louisa  Scott — the  sister  who  shared  Miss  M.  W.  Scott's  first
experience — wrote  as  follows  : —

LESSUDDEN  HOUSE,  ST.  BOSWELL'S,  August  \^th,  1894.

...  A  young  lady,  who  is  a  governess  in  this  neighbourhood,  told  me  this
afternoon  of  a  meeting  she  had  had  with  [the  ghost]  this  spring.  She  was
returning  home  along  the  haunted  road  at  about  a  quarter-past  four  in  the
afternoon,  when  she  was  attracted  by  seeing  in  front  of  her  a  rather  tall  old
man,  dressed  in  a  long  black  cloak,  with  one  cape  which  came  to  a  little
below  his  shoulders  ;  his  hat,  as  on  the  occasions  when  my  sisters  and  I  saw
him,  was  low-crowned,  and  the  brim  slouched  over  his  eyes.  My  informant
was  much  interested  in  this  peculiar-looking  person,  and  did  not  take  her
eyes  off  him,  whilst  she  watched  him  walk  backward  and  forward  between
the  turn  of  the  road  and  a  heap  of  stones  about  a  hundred  yards  lower
down ;  he  repeated  this  six  times,  the  last  time  stopping  as  if  he  were
speaking  to  a  man  who  was  cutting  the  hedge  at  the  time.  What  struck
Miss  Irvine  as  peculiar  was  that  the  man  who  was  hedge-cutting  did  not
look  round,  and  seemed  quite  unconscious  of  the  other's  presence.  Miss
Irvine  walked  on,  and  was  going  to  pass  the  old  man,  when,  to  her  astonish-
ment, he  vanished  when  she  was  only  about  three  yards  from  him.  .  .  .


APPENDICES  [751 B

Miss  Irvine  sent  soon  after  her  own  account  of  her  experience.  By  an
unfortunate  accident,  the  first  sheet  of  her  letter  was  lost ;  but  the  latter
part  is  as  follows  : —

GREYCROOK,  ST.  BOSWELL'S,  ROXBURGHSHIRE.

This  seemed  to  me  stranger  than  ever  and  I  wondered  what  I  had  seen,  for
he  was  nowhere  in  the  field.  On  returning  home  I  described  the  old  gentle-
man to  some  friends  who  were  likely  to  know  if  a  person  answering  my  descrip-
tion lived  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  was  told,  "No."  He  was  dressed  rather
like  a  clergyman,  wore  a  long  black  cloak  with  cape  and  slouched  hat,  his
hands  in  his  coat  pockets.  I  had  never  seen  anything  of  the  kind  before,
though  I  had  frequently  walked  the  same  road  and  at  all  hours.  This  happened
about  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  I  have  not  again  seen  him.  .  .  .

MARY  BLAMIRE  IRVINE.

In  August  1898,  Miss  M.  W.  Scott  wrote  that  about  a  fortnight  earlier,
when  coming  down  the  "  haunted  "  road  in  the  dusk,  she  had  heard  foot-
steps walking  beside  her,  but  could  see  nothing.  She  had  also  seen  the
apparition  again  in  the  spring  of  1897.  She  described  this  in  December
1899,  as  follows  : —

.  .  .  My  sister  and  myself  were  paying  an  afternoon  visit  at  a  friend's  house
situated  near  the  haunted  road,  and  having  rather  overstayed  our  time,  the
dusk  was  just  beginning  to  fall  .  .  . ;  it  being  then  suggested  that  we  should
take  a  shorter  cut  home,  we  gladly  availed  ourselves  of  the  permission  to  walk
through  the  park  and  wood  which  open  out  of  and  enter  the  evil-reputed  road.
Upon  coming  to  the  end  of  the  park,  there  is  a  small  gate  and  narrow
pathway,  separated  from  the  road  by  a  hedge  and  some  trees ;  the  space
between  being  only  a  few  yards,  a  pedestrian  on  the  other  side  is  distinctly
visible.  At  the  other  end  of  the  wood,  again,  there  is  another  gate,  which
[leads  to]  the  small  incline  and  angle  of  the  road,  and,  looking  either  way,
the  whole  expanse  is  clearly  defined.  Just  about  this  time  we  had  nothing
supernatural  in  our  thoughts  and  were  talking  and  laughing  gaily  together.
Suddenly  .  .  .  our  conversation  seemed  gradually  to  cease,  for  when  we  were
quite  half-way  down  the  wood,  I  noticed  a  man's  figure  walking  alongside
of  me  between  the  hedge  on  the  other  side,  which,  either  real  or  unreal,  I  was
determined  not  to  lose  sight  of.  ...  In  a  moment  I  recognised  the  ghastly
featyres  of  the  apparition.  I  cannot  tell  how  he  was  clothed,  or  if  he  wore  a
hat;  my  eyes  seemed  fixed  only  on  the  profile  from  just  below  the  forehead.
Instinctively  I  felt  he  moved  beside  me,  but  heard  no  sound  or  footsteps  of
any  kind.  My  sister  saw  nothing,  and  not  being  equal  to  the  occasion,  I
made  no  remark,  until  we  had  almost  reached  the  end  of  the  boundary,  then
exclaimed  in  French,  "L'hommeJ"  At  that  moment  the  ghost  must  have
vanished,  for  when  we  opened  the  gate  to  pass  through  not  a  living  soul
was  there  ;  had  it  been  a  person  of  either  sex,  we  were  perfectly  certain  to
have  met.  It  was  very  strange  my  companion  should  perceive  nothing
unusual,  though  she  remarked  about  me  "  staring  into  space."  It  is  quite
impossible  to  account  for  this  phantom— it  is  no  illusion  formed  by  a  dis-
ordered brain  or  based  upon  imagination  or  defective  light  ;  the  sun  had
certainly  set,  the  dusk  slightly  fallen,  but  giving  quite  sufficient  power  for  mutual
recognitions.  The  man  had  walked  calmly  on,  looking  straight  in  front  of  him,
never  appearing  to  notice  anything,  as  though  engaged  in  deep  meditation.


751  B]  TO    CHAPTER    VII  399

On  August  i  yth,  1900,  Miss  Scott  wrote  to  say  that  she  had  recently
seen  the  apparition  twice,  the  most  recent  occasion  having  been  "  only
last  night."  She  describes  it  as  follows  : —

July  24^,  1900. — I  am  writing  to  let  you  know  the  dates  that  I  have  again
seen  the  apparition.  ...  On  the  evening  of  July  24th  I  was  standing  speaking
to  a  friend,  exactly  upon  the  part  known  as  the  property  of  that  "  mysterious  he."
I  had  forgotten  the  very  existence  of  our  supernatural  neighbour,  and  while  we
conversed  upon  indifferent  subjects,  I  inadvertently  glanced  carelessly  down
the  expanse  beyond,  when  I  perceived  the  tall  black  figure  walking  on  in
advance  with  his  back  towards  us.  How  he  came  to  be  there  I  had  not  the
faintest  idea,  not  having  remarked  his  advent.  I  made  no  comment  to  my
companion,  but,  wishing  her  a  hasty  adieu,  hurried  away  as  quickly  as  possible
to  try  and  make  up  upon  him,  but  he  instantly  vanished — there  was  no  one  to
be  seen  either  high  or  low.  It  was  just  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  as  I  heard
the  hour  chime  in  the  village  almost  at  the  same  time.  He  was  dressed  in  the
same  way,  namely,  all  in  black,  and  was  only  proceeding  about  twenty  yards
away.  .  .  .

My  second  illustration  of  last  night,  August  i6th,  1900,  can  tell  you  some-
thing more  definite  than  the  previous  one,  for  I  certainly  believe  the  man  to  be
a  clergyman  of  the  ancient  school,  but  why  this  "  Father  of  the  Church  "
frequents  that  road  is  an  unexplained  mystery.  On  this  occasion  the  outline  of
his  head  and  shoulders  were  completely  visible — all  black,  with  a  wide  white
muffler-looking  thing  wound  round  his  throat;  his  hair  seems  light,  face  clean-
shaven and  very  pale,  but  he  was  not  quite  near  enough  for  the  features  to-
become  clearly  defined  ;  the  hat  looked  like  an  ordinary  clerical  wide-awake,
only  the  crown  seemed  much  higher  than  those  used  in  the  present  day.  The
lower  part  of  his  body  [was]  overshadowed,  as  he  was  advancing  towards  me
up  the  incline,  while  I  was  on  the  level  above.

There  was  a  man  with  a  pony  and  trap  cutting  grass  by  the  roadside
within  a  few  feet  of  where  I  saw  the  apparition  appear,  who  had  his  back  to
the  worker ;  yet  the  most  wonderful  part  of  it  all  is  that  when  I  questioned  the
man  he  declared  he  had  seen  "no  one."  "But,"  I  said,  "he  was  close  beside
you."  He  still  declared  he  saw  "no  person  there,"  so  I  let  the  matter  endr
though  I  expect  that  he,  like  the  whole  village,  knows  well  the  reputation  of
the  road,  for  he  looked  slightly  nervous  and  remarked,  "  It  was  not  a  safe  place
to  come  down  alone.  ..."  M.  W.  SCOTT.

In  the  above  case  it  will  be  seen  that  there  is  no  evidence  whatever
for  the  identity  of  the  apparition  ;  the  whole  force  of  the  case  rests  on  the
repetition  of  the  appearance,  and  its  being  seen  independently  by  several
different  persons.  A  good  many  other  cases  of  the  same  general  type
have  appeared  in  the  Proceedings  and  Journal  S.P.R.  I  may  refer  as  an
example  to  that  recorded  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dauntesey  in  the  Journal,
vol.  vii.  p.  329.  Another  very  complete  and  typical  instance  of  what  is
commonly  called  "  haunting," — consisting  of  unexplained  noises,  generally
heard  by  all  within  earshot  and  continued  at  intervals  through  a  series  of
years,  in  the  course  of  which  various  visual  phantasms  were  seen  by
different  people, — was  the  Willington  Mill  case,  an  account  of  which  was
given  by  Mr.  Procter  in  the  Journal,  vol.  v.  pp.  331-352.


[811  A


APPENDICES

TO

CHAPTER  VIII

811  A.  The  following  is  a  typical  case  of  automatic  drawing,  recorded
at  a  time  when  the  subject  of  automatism  was  almost  unknown,  not
only  to  the  educated  layman  but  also  to  psychologists  and  physiologists.
I  quote  the  account  from  Spirit  Drawings:  a  Personal  Narrative,  by
W.  M.  Wilkinson.  Second  edition  (1864),  pp.  9-11.

In  August,  1856,  a  heavy  and  sudden  affliction  came  upon  us,  in  the
removal  of  a  dear  boy — our  second  son — into  the  spiritual  world.  He  had
passed  about  eleven  years  in  this  world  of  ours,  and  was  taken  from  us  in  the
midst  of  the  rudest  health,  to  commence  his  spirit-life  under  the  loving  care  of
his  Heavenly  Father.

Some  weeks  afterwards  his  brother,  then  about  twelve  years  old,  went  on  a
short  visit  to  Reading,  and  whilst  there,  amused  himself  as  boys  of  his  age  are
used  to  do.  One  morning  he  had  a  piece  of  paper  before  him,  and  a  pencil  in
his  hand,  with  which  he  was  about  to  draw  some  child's  picture ;  when
gradually  he  found  his  hand  filling  with  some  feeling  before  unknown  to  him,
and  then  it  began  to  move  involuntarily  upon  the  paper,  and  to  form  letters,
words,  and  sentences.  The  feeling  he  described  as  of  a  pleasing  kind,  entirely
new  to  him,  and  as  if  some  power  was  within  him  apart  from  his  own  mind,
and  making  use  of  his  hand.  The  handwriting  was  different  to  his  own,  and
the  subject-matter  of  the  writing  was  unknown  to  him  till  he  read  it  with
curiosity  as  it  was  being  written.

On  frequent  occasions,  whilst  on  this  visit,  his  hand  was  similarly  moved  in
writing ;  and  afterwards  he  went  to  stay  with  some  other  friends  in  Bucking-
hamshire, with  whom  he  did  not  make  a  trial  of  this  new  power ;  but  on  his
return  home,  after  some  weeks'  absence,  we,  for  about  two  months,  watched,
with  deep  emotion,  the  movement  of  his  hand  in  writing;  for  sometimes,  when
he  wished  to  write,  his  hand  moved  in  drawing  small  flowers,  such  as  exist  not
here;  and  sometimes,  when  he  expected  to  draw  a  flower,  the  hand  moved
into  writing.  The  movement  was,  in  general,  most  rapid,  and  unlike  his  own
mode  of  writing  or  drawing ;  and  he  had  no  idea  of  what  was  being  produced,
until  it  was  in  process  of  being  done.  Often,  in  the  middle  of  writing  a
sentence,  a  flower  or  diagram  would  be  drawn,  and  then  suddenly  the  hand
would  go  off  in  writing  again.

I  have  not  mentioned  the  nature,  or  subject-matter  of  the  words  thus
written  ;  nor  is  it  in  this  place  necessary  to  do  so,  further  than  this,  that  they
purported  to  be  chiefly  communications  from  his  brother,  our  dear  departed


815A]  TO     CHAPTER    VIII  401

child,  and  were  all  of  a  religious  character,  speaking  of  his  own  happy  state,
and  of  the  means  by  which  similar  happiness  is  alone  to  be  attained  by  those
who  remained  here  to  fight  out  their  longer  battle  of  life.

A  few  weeks  later  the  boy's  mother,  who  had  never  learnt  to  draw,
found  that  she  possessed  the  same  faculty,  and  by  devoting  about  an  hour
a  day  to  the  practice,  produced  a  large  series  of  drawings  of  flowers,
geometrical  forms,  and  various  objects  which  her  family  regarded  as
symbolical.  They  often  obtained  also  automatic  writing  purporting  to
come  from  the  dead  child  and  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  drawings.
The  latter  developed  into  architectural  sketches  and  landscapes,  and  Mrs.
Wilkinson  gradually  began  to  paint,  as  well  as  draw,  automatically.  Mr.
Wilkinson  also  developed  the  faculty  of  automatic  writing  and  drawing.

815  A.  The  following  account  is  extracted  from  Mr.  Andrew  Lang's
"The  Voices  of  Jeanne  d'Arc "  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.
pp.  198-212.

Mr.  Lang  gives  evidence  taken  from  the  Proces  of  her  trial  at  Rouen
and  other  original  sources  which  he  mentions.  Her  own  account  given
at  her  trial  was  that  her  "  voices  "  were  first  heard  when  she  was  about
thirteen — telling  her  to  behave  well  and  go  to  church,  and  afterwards
they  used  to  tell  her  to  go  into  France  to  her  mission.  Jeanne  kept
objecting  that  she  was  a  poor  girl  who  could  not  ride,  or  lead  in  war,  and
resisted  the  voices  with  all  her  energy.

Turning  to  the  Maid's  own  evidence  in  court,  we  must  remember  that  she
was  most  averse  to  speaking  at  all,  that  she  often  asked  leave  to  wait  for  advice
and  permission  from  her  voices  before  replying,  that  on  one  point  she  con-
stantly declared  that,  if  compelled  to  speak,  she  would  not  speak  the  truth.  This
point  was  the  King's  secret.  There  is  absolutely  contemporary  evidence,  from
Alain  Chartier,  that,  before  she  was  accepted,  she  told  Charles  something  which
filled  him  with  surprise,  joy,  and  belief.  (Proch  V.,  131 .  Letter  of  July,  1429.)
The  secret  was  connected  with  Charles's  doubts  of  his  own  legitimacy,  and
Jeanne  at  her  trial  was  driven  to  obscure  the  truth  in  a  mist  of  allegory,  as,
indeed,  she  confessed.  [The]  tale  of  an  angel  and  a  crown  was  mere  allegory.
Jeanne's  extreme  reluctance  to  adopt  even  this  loyal  and  laudable  evasion  is
the  measure  of  her  truthfulness  in  general.  Still,  she  did  say  some  words
which,  as  they  stand,  it  is  difficult  to  believe,  to  explain,  or  to  account  for.
She  asserted  that  she  knew  the  Dauphin,  on  their  first  meeting,  by  aid  of  her
voices.  (I.  56.)  She  declared  that  the  Dauphin  himself  "multas  habuit
revelationes  et  apparitiones  pulchras."  In  its  literal  sense,  there  is  no  evidence
for  this,  but  rather  the  reverse.  She  may  mean,  "  revelations  "  through  herself,
or  may  refer  to  some  circumstance  unknown.  "  Those  of  my  party  saw  and
knew  that  voice,"  she  said,  but  later  would  only  accept  them  as  witnesses  if
they  were  allowed  to  come  and  see  her.  (I.  57.)

This  is  the  most  puzzling  point  in  Jeanne's  confession.  She  had  no  motive
for  telling  an  untruth,  unless  she  hoped  that  these  remarks  would  establish  the
objectivity  of  her  visions.  Of  course,  one  of  her  strange  experiences  may  have
occurred  in  the  presence  of  Charles  and  his  court,  and  she  may  have  believed
that  they  shared  in  it.

VOL.  IT.  2  C


402  APPENDICES  [815  A

She  said  that  she  heard  the  voice  daily  in  prison,  "  and  stood  in  sore  need
of  it."  The  voice  bade  her  remain  at  St.  Denis  (after  the  repulse  from  Paris,  in
September  1429),  but  she  was  not  allowed  to  remain.

On  the  next  day  (the  third  of  the  trial)  she  told  Beaupere  that  she  was
fasting  since  yesterday  afternoon.  "  Yesterday  she  had  heard  the  voices  in  the
morning,  at  vespers,  and  at  the  late  ringing  for  Ai>e  Maria,  and  she  heard
them  much  more  frequently  than  she  mentioned.'1  "  Yesterday  she  had  been
asleep  when  the  voice  aroused  her.  She  sat  up  and  clasped  her  hands,  and
the  voice  bade  her  answer  boldly.  Other  words  she  half  heard  before  she  was
quite  awake,  but  failed  to  understand."

She  denied  that  the  voices  ever  contradicted  themselves.  On  this  occasion,
as  not  having  received  leave  from  her  voices,  she  refused  to  say  anything  as  to
her  visions.

At  the  next  meeting  she  admitted  having  heard  the  voices  in  court,  but  in
court  she  could  not  distinguish  the  words,  owing  to  the  tumult.  She  had  now,
however,  leave  to  speak  more  fully.  The  voices  were  those  of  St.  Catherine
and  St.  Margaret.  They  were  crowned  with  fair  crowns,  as  she  had  said  at
Poictiers  two  years  before.  Seven  years  ago  (that  is,  when  she  was  twelve)
she  first  saw  the  saints.  On  the  attire  of  the  saints  she  had  not  leave  to  speak.
They  were  preceded  by  St.  Michael  "  with  the  angels  of  Heaven."  "  I  saw
them  as  clearly  as  I  see  you,  and  I  used  to  weep  when  they  departed,  and
would  fain  that  they  should  have  taken  me  with  them.".

As  to  the  famous  sword  at  Fierbois,  she  averred  that  she  had  been  in  the
church  there,  on  her  way  to  Chinon,  that  the  voices  later  bade  her  use  a  sword
which  was  hidden  under  earth,— she  thinks  behind,  but  possibly  in  front  of  the
altar, — at  Fierbois.  A  man  unknown  to  her  was  sent  from  Tours  to  fetch  the
sword,  which  after  search  was  found,  and  she  wore  it.

Asked  whether  she  had  prophesied  her  wound  by  an  arrow  at  Orleans,  and
her  recovery,  she  said  "Yes."

This  prediction  is  singular  in  that  it  was  recorded  before  the  event.  The
record  was  copied  into  the  registre  of  Brabant,  from  a  letter  written  on  April
22nd,  1429,  by  a  Flemish  diplomatist,  De  Rotselaer,  then  at  Lyons.1  De
Rotselaer  had  the  prophecy  from  an  officer  of  the  court  of  the  Dauphin.  The
prediction  was  thus  noted  on  April  22nd,  the  event  occurred  on  May  7th.  On
the  fifth  day  of  the  trial  Jeanne  announced  that,  before  seven  years  were  gone,
the  English  would  lose  a  dearer  gage  than  Orleans ;  "  this  I  know  by  revelation,
and  am  wroth  that  it  is  to  be  so  long  deferred."  As  prophecies  go,  their  loss
of  Paris  (1436)  corresponds  very  well  to  the  Maid's  announcement.  Asked,  on
March  ist,  whether  her  liberation  was  promised,  she  said,  "Ask  me  in  three
months,  and  I  will  tell  you."  In  three  months  exactly  her  stainless  soul
was  free.

She  had  once  disobeyed  her  voices,  when  they  forbade  her  to  leap  from  the
tower  of  Beaurevoir.  She  leaped,  but  they  forgave  her,  and  told  her  that
Compiegne  (where  she  was  captured  on  May  23rd,  1430)  would  be  relieved
"before  Martinmas."  It  was  relieved  on  October  26th,  after  a  siege  of  five
months.  She  told  the  touching  story  of  how,  at  Melun,  on  April  1430,  the
voices  had  warned  her  that  she  would  be  taken  prisoner  before  midsummer ;
how  she  had  prayed  for  death,  or  for  tidings  as  to  the  day  and  hour.  But  no
tidings  were  given  to  her,  and  her  old  belief,  often  expressed,  that  she  "  should


1  Proch,  IV.,  425.


i


815A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  403

last  but  one  year  or  little  more,"  was  confirmed.  The  Due  d'Alen9on  had
heard  her  say  this  several  times ;  for  the  prophecy  at  Melun  we  have  only  her
own  word.

She  was  now  led  into  the  allegory  about  the  Angel  (herself)  and  the  Crown
(the  coronation  at  Rheims).  This  allegory  was  fatal,  but  does  not  bear  on  her
real  belief  about  her  experiences.  She  averred,  returning  to  genuine  con-
fessions, that  her  voices  often  came  spontaneously ;  if  they  did  not,  she
summoned  them  by  a  simple  prayer  to  God.  She  had  seen  the  angelic  figures
moving,  invisible  save  to  her,  among  men.  The  voices  had  promised  her  the
release  of  Charles  d'Orleans,  but  time  had  failed  her.  This  was  as  near  a  con-
fession of  failure  as  she  ever  made,  till  the  day  of  her  burning ;  if  she  really
made  one  then.  But  here,  as  always,  she  had  predicted  that  she  would  do  this
or  that  if  she  were  sans  empeschement.  She  had  no  revelation  bidding  her
attack  Paris  when  she  did,  and  after  the  day  at  Melun,  she  submitted  to  the
advice  of  the  other  captains.  By  the  way,  if  this  be  so,  not  she,  but  the
captains,  displayed  the  strategy  admired  by  Captain  Marin  in  the  Oise  cam-
paign of  1430.  As  to  her  release,  she  was  only  bidden  "to  bear  all  cheerfully;
be  not  vexed  with  thy  martyrdom,  thence  shalt  thou  come  at  last  into  the
kingdom  of  Paradise."

For  the  rest,  Jeanne  recanted  her  so-called  recantation,  averring  that  she
was  unaware  of  the  contents  or  full  significance  of  the  document.  Her  voices
recalled  her  to  her  duty,  for  them  she  went  to  the  stake,  and,  as  I  have  shown,
if  there  was  a  moment  of  wavering  on  the  day  of  her  doom,  her  belief  in  the
objective  reality  of  the  phenomena  remained  firm,  and  she  recovered  her  faith
in  the  agony  of  her  death.

Of  external  evidence  as  to  these  experiences,  the  best  is  probably  that  of
d'Aulon,  the  Maitre  d'Hotel  of  the  Maid,  and  her  companion  through  her
whole  career.  He  and  she  were  reposing  in  the  same  room  at  Orleans,  her
hostess  being  in  the  chamber  (May  1429),  and  d'Aulon  had  just  fallen  asleep,
when  the  Maid  awoke  him  with  a  cry.  Her  voices  bade  her  go  against  the
English,  but  in  what  direction  she  knew  not.  In  fact,  the  French  leaders  had
begun,  without  her  knowledge,  an  attack  on  St.  Loup,  whither  she  galloped
and  took  the  fort  (Proofs  III.  212).  It  is,  of  course,  very  possible  that  the  din  of
onset,  which  presently  became  audible,  had  vaguely  reached  the  senses  of  the
Maid.  Her  page  confirms  d'Aulon's  testimony.

D'Aulon  states  that  when  the  Maid  had  any  martial  adventure  in  prospect,
she  told  him  that  her  "  counsel  "  had  given  her  this  or  that  advice.  He  ques-
tioned her  as  to  the  nature  of  this  "counsel."  She  said  "she  had  three
councillors,  of  whom  one  was  always  with  her,  a  second  went  and  came  to  her,
and  the  third  was  he  with  whom  the  others  deliberated."  D'Aulon  "was  not
worthy  to  see  this  counsel."  From  the  moment  when  he  heard  this,  d'Aulon
asked  no  more  questions.  Dunois  also  gave  some  evidence  as  to  the  "  counsel."
At  Loches,  when  Jeanne  was  urging  the  journey  to  Rheims,  Harcourt  asked
her,  before  the  King,  what  the  nature  {modus)  of  the  council  was  ;  how  it  com-
municated with  her.  She  replied  that  when  she  was  met  with  incredulity,  she
went  apart  and  prayed  to  God.  Then  she  heard  a  voice  say,  Fille  De,  va,
va,  va,je  serai  a  ton  aide,  va  /  "  And  when  she  heard  that  voice  she  was  right
glad,  and  would  fain  be  ever  in  that  state."  "  As  she  spoke  thus,  ipsa  miro
modo  exsultabat,  levando  suos  oculos  ad  calum"  (III.,  12).  Finally,  that
Jeanne  maintained  her  belief  to  the  moment  of  her  death,  we  learn  from  the


404  APPENDICES  [817  A

priest,  Martin  Ladvenu,  who  was  with  her  to  the  last  (III.,  170).  There  is
no  sign  anywhere  that  at  the  moment  of  an  "  experience,"  the  Maid's  aspect
seemed  unusual,  or  uncanny,  or  abnormal,  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  were  in
her  company.

These  depositions  were  given  twenty  years  later  (1452-56),  and,  of  course,
allowance  must  be  made  for  weakness  of  memory  and  desire  to  glorify  the
Maid.  But  there  is  really  nothing  of  a  suspicious  character  about  them.  In
fact  the  "growth  of  legend"  was  very  slight,  and  is  mainly  confined  to  the
events  of  the  martyrdom,  the  White  Dove,  the  Name  of  Christ  blazoned  in
flame,  and  so  forth.  It  should  also  have  been  mentioned  that  at  the  taking  of
St.  Pierre  de  Moustier  (November  1429),  Jeanne,  when  deserted  by  her  forces,
declared  to  d'Aulon  that  she  was  "  not  alone,  but  surrounded  by  fifty  thousand
of  her  own."  The  men  therefore  rallied  and  stormed  the  place.

This  is  the  sum  of  the  external  evidence  as  to  the  phenomena.  I  have  already
indicated  what  is  known  as  to  the  mental  and  physical  characteristics  of  the
Maid.  Her  extreme  temperance  should  also  perhaps  be  remembered.

As  to  the  contents  of  the  communications  to  Jeanne,  they  were  certainly
sane,  judicious,  and  heroic.  M.  Quicherat  (Aper$us  Nouveaux,  p.  61)  distin-
guishes three  classes  of  abnormally  conveyed  knowledge,  all  on  unimpeachable
evidence.

(1)  Thought-reading^  as  in  the  case  of  the  King's  secret;  she  repeated  to
him  the  words  of  a  prayer  which  he  had  made  mentally.

(2)  Clairvoyance,  as  exhibited  in  the  affair  of  the  sword  of  Fierbois.

(3)  Prescience,  as  in  the  prophecy  of  her  arrow-wound  at  Orleans.     Accord-
ing to  her  confessor,  Pasquerel,  she   repeated   the  prophecy   and   indicated
the  spot  in  which  she  would  be  wounded  (under  the  right  shoulder)  on  the  night
of  May  6th.     But  this  is  later  evidence  given  in  the  Trial  of  Rehabilitation.

To  these  we  might  add  the  view,  from  Vaucouleurs,  a  hundred  leagues
away,  of  the  defeat  at  Rouvray ;  the  prophecy  that  she  "  would  last  but  a  year
or  little  more;  "  the  prophecy,  at  Melun,  of  her  capture;  the  prophecy  of  the
relief  of  Compiegne;  and  the  strange  affair  of  the  bon  conduit  at  the  battle  of
Pathay.1  For  several  of  these  predictions  we  have  only  the  Maid's  word,  but,
to  be  plain,  we  can  scarcely  have  more  unimpeachable  testimony.

817  A.  From  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  S.P.R.,  vol.  i.  p.  397.
Mr.  M.  writes  to  Professor  Royce  as  follows  : —

BOSTON,  Nov.  i6tA,  1886.

Some  years  ago,  perhaps  eight  or  nine,  while  in  a  city  of  Rhode  Island  on
business,  my  house  being  then,  as  now,  in  Boston,  I  received  news  which  was
most  unexpected  and  distressing  to  me,  affecting  me  so  seriously  that  I  retired
to  my  room  at  the  hotel,  a  large  square  room,  and  threw  myself  upon  my  bed,
face  downward,  remaining  there  a  long  time  in  great  mental  distress.  The
acuteness  of  the  feeling  after  a  time  abating,  I  left  the  room.  I  returned  next
day  to  Boston  and  the  day  after  that  received  a  short  letter  from  the  person
whose  statement  I  enclose  herewith,  and  dated  at  the  town  in  western  New
York  from  which  her  enclosed  letter  comes.  The  note  begged  me  to  tell
her  without  delay  what  was  the  matter  with  me  "  on  Friday  at  two  o'clock,"
the  very  day  and  hour  when  I  was  affected  as  I  have  described.

1  IV.,  371,  372.     Here  the  authority  is  Monstrelet,  a  Burgundian.


817  B]  TO     CHAPTER    VIII  405

This  lady  was  a  somewhat  familiar  acquaintance  and  friend,  but  I  had  not
heard  from  her  for  many  months  previous  to  this  note  and  I  do  not  know
that  any  thought  of  her  had  come  into  my  mind  for  a  long  time.  I  should
still  further  add  that  the  news  which  had  so  distressed  me  had  not  the  slightest
connection  with  her.

I  wrote  at  once,  stating  that  she  was  right  as  to  her  impression  (she  said  in
her  letter  that  she  was  sure  I  was  in  very  great  trouble  at  the  time  mentioned)
and  expressed  my  surprise  at  the  whole  affair.  .  .  .  (Signed)  M.

The  accompanying  statement  from  N.,  who  is  a  physician  by  profession
and  writes  from  New  York  State,  is  as  follows : —

{Postmarked,  Aug.  i&h,  1886.]

In  the  convalescence  from  a  malarial  fever  during  which  great  hyperassthesia
of  brain  had  obtained,  but  no  hallucinations  or  false  perceptions,  I  was  sitting
alone  in  my  room  looking  out  of  the  window.  My  thoughts  were  of  indifferent
trivialities;  after  a  time  my  mind  seemed  to  become  absolutely  vacant;  my
eyes  felt  fixed,  the  air  seemed  to  grow  white.  I  could  see  objects  about  me,
but  it  was  a  terrible  effort  of  will  to  perceive  anything.  I  then  felt  great  and
painful  sense  as  of  sympathy  with  some  one  suffering,  who  or  where  I  did  not
know.  After  a  little  time  I  knew  with  whom,  but  how  I  knew  I  cannot  tell ;
for  it  seemed  some  time  after  this  knowledge  of  personality  that  I  saw  distinctly
in  my  brain,  not  before  my  eyes,  a  large  square  room,  evidently  in  a  hotel,  and
saw  the  person  of  whom  I  had  been  conscious,  lying  face  downward  on  the  bed
in  the  throes  of  mental  and  physical  anguish.  I  felt  rather  than  heard  sobs
and  grieving,  and  felt  conscious  of  the  nature  of  the  grief  subjectively ;  its
objective  cause  was  not  transmitted  to  me.  Extreme  exhaustion  followed  the
experience,  which  lasted  forty  minutes  intensely  and  then  very  slowly  wore
away.  Let  me  note:  (i)  I  had  not  thought  of  the  person  for  some  time  and
there  was  no  reminder  in  the  room ;  (2)  the  experience  was  remembered  with
more  vividness  than  that  seen  in  the  normal  way,  while  the  contrary  is  true
of  dreams;  (3)  the  natural  order  of  perception  was  reversed;  i.e.  the  emotion
came  first,  the  sense  of  a  personality  second,  the  vision  or  perception  of  the
person  third.  .  .  .  (Signed)  N.

Mr.  M.  was  unfortunately  not  able  to  find  the  letters  that  passed
between  him  and  his  friend  at  the  time.

817  B.     From  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  33.

In  this  case  the  conscious  desire  of  the  agent  seems  to  have  been  the
predetermining  cause  of  the  percipient's  impression.

The  percipient,  Mrs.  Hadselle,  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  as  follows : —

28  BRADFORD  STREET,  PITTSFIELD,  MASS.,  May  2%th,  1888.

Less  that  two  years  ago  a  curious  thing  happened  to  me.  I  had  been  in
Wash.  Co.,  N.Y.,  giving  half  a  dozen  readings,  and  was  on  my  way  to  Williams-
town,  where  I  had  spent  a  part  of  the  summer,  and  where  much  of  my  worldly
goods,  in  the  shape  of  wearing  apparel,  was  safely  stowed  in  my  room  at  the
"  Mansion  House."  With  ticket  purchased,  I  was  serenely  seated  in  the  car,
box,  bundle,  and  bag  beside  me,  the  conductor's  "  All  aboard "  was  at  that
instant  in  my  ears,  when  I  sprang  to  my  feet  with  the  force  of  an  inward  com-


406  APPENDICES  [817  C

mand,  "Change  your  ticket  and  go  to  Elizabeth  (N.J.).     Change  your  ticket

and  go  to  Elizabeth.     Change  your "     Here  a  gentleman  in  the  opposite

seat — an  utter  stranger — rose  and  said:  "Madam,  have  you  forgotten  some-
thing, can  I  help  you?"  I  said:  "Do  you  think  the  train  will  wait  for  me  to
change  my  ticket  ?  "  For  there  appeared  to  be  no  alternative.  As  I  spoke  I
moved  towards  the  platform ;  he  followed,  and  seeing  that  the  office  was  but  a
few  steps  distant  said :  "  Go,  I'll  see  that  you  are  not  left."  I  did  go,  and  in  a
moment  more  was  on  my  way  to  Elizabeth,  though  I  had  not  before  even  thought
of  such  a  thing.  Next  morning,  on  reaching  my  friend's  house,  she  threw  her
arms  about  me  and  sobbed  out :  "  Oh,  I  have  wanted  you  so."  Then  she  led
me  to  a  room  where  an  only  and  beloved  sister  lay  in  life's  last  battle.  In  an
hour  it  was  ended.

My  poor  grief-stricken  friend  declared  then — declares  now — that  my  sudden
change  of  purpose  was  a  direct  answer  to  her  repeated  though  unspoken  de-
mand for  my  presence.  And  who  shall  say  it  was  not?  I  wish  to  add  that
while  I  had  learned  by  letter  of  the  sister's  illness  of  a  chronic  disorder,  I  did
not  suppose  her  case  hopeless;  indeed,  from  the  fact  that  no  tidings  had
reached  me  lately,  was  hoping  that  she  was  on  the  road  to  recovery,  and  had  I
been  questioned  concerning  her  that  loth  of  November  1886,  should  have  re-
plied confidently,  "  She  will  without  doubt  last  through  the  winter."  My  friend,
by  the  way,  is,  much  more  than  I,  a  believer  in  psychical  phenomena.

(Signed)        C.  A.  C.  HADSELLE.

Dr.  Hodgson  writes  : —

Mrs.  G. — the  friend  referred  to — has  sent  me  her  corroboration,  dated
March  5th,  1890.  The  date  of  the  incident,  she  states,  was  November  nth,
1886.  She  says  :—

"  I  had  not  expected  Mrs.  H.  ;  did  not  at  that  time  know  where  she  was,
so  could  not  have  summoned  her  had  I  wished  to  do  so, — but  in  my  trouble
there  grew  upon  me  a  great  desire  for  her  presence,  and  I  said  many  times,  *  If
she  would  only  come.  If  she  were  only  here. '

"  My  sister's  failure  at  the  last  was  somewhat  rapid,  but  of  this  Mrs.  H.  knew
nothing,  and  when  she  told  me  of  her  sudden  change  of  purpose,  hundreds  of
miles  away,  I  said :  *  The  impulse  was  sent  you  in  answer  to  my  wish,'  or  words
to  that  effect."

The  gentleman  who  helped  Mrs.  Hadselle  to  change  her  ticket,  the
Rev.  James  Wilson,  then  of  Greenwich,  N.Y.,  writes  in  answer  to  Dr.

Hodgson's  inquiries : —

March  20th,  1890.

I  recollect  the  circumstance  of  "  assisting  a  lady  "  at  Greenwich  ticket  office,
who  exchanged  her  ticket  at  the  last  moment,  because  of  a  change  of  purpose ;
and  it  was  in  November  1886.  She  sent  me  a  few  lines  afterwards,  detailing
certain  facts  touching  a  sick  friend  at  the  point  of  her  destination — not  clearly
recalled  at  this  moment.  J.  T.  WILSON.

817  C.     From  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  35.
Mrs.  Hadselle  sent  at  the  same  time  as  the  above  another  narrative,  of
which  she  said  : —

I  send  you  with  this  a  bit  of  experience  which  I  had  years  ago — so  long  ago,
indeed,  as  the  time  Dr.  Holland  edited  the  Springfield  Republican.  He  wrote


817  C]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  407

me  that  the  "  Warning  "  was  copied  from  Maine  to  California,  and  that  he  re-
ceived many  letters  asking  if  it  was  authentic.  To  this  he  could  safely  reply,  as
I  was  an  old-time  contributor  to  that  and  other  leading  journals.  A  local  paper
lately  copied  it.  Many  of  the  then  witnesses  have,  with  Dr.  Holland  and  my
darling  Eddie  (Kleber  Loomis  Hadselle),  gone  over  to  the  "  great  majority,"
but  there  are  several  still  living  who  remember  the  episode,  and  no  one  of  my
acquaintances  doubts  or  thinks  the  sketch  overdrawn.

[The  account  is  taken  from  the  Berkshire  County  Eagle,  May  loth,  1888,
Pittsfield,  Mass.,  and  is  there  headed  "  The  Unspoken  Warning— A  Mother's
Experience."  As  above  implied,  the  account  itself  is  nearly  contemporary  with
the  incident,  being  here  quoted  from  a  reprint,  which  the  author  accepts  as
correct : — ]

One  bitter  cold  day  in  winter  a  merry  party  of  us,  nestled  down  under  furry
robes,  went  to  meet  an  appointment  with  a  friend  living  a  few  miles  distant,
with  whom  we  were  to  spend  the  afternoon  and  in  the  evening  attend  a  concert
to  be  held  near  by.  The  sleighing  was  delightful,  the  air  keen  and  inspiriting,
the  host  and  hostess  genial  as  the  crackling  fires  in  the  grates,  and  the  invited
guests,  of  whom  there  were  many  besides  ourselves,  in  that  peculiar  visiting
trim  which  only  old-time  friends,  long  parted,  can  enjoy.  Restraint  was  thrown
aside;' we  cracked  jokes;  we  chattered  like  magpies,  and  not  a  little  of  the
coming  concert,  which  promised  a  rare  treat  to  our  unsophisticated  ears.  All
went  merry  as  a  marriage  bell,  and  merrier  than  some,  till  just  before  tea,  when
I  was  seized  with  a  sudden  and  unaccountable  desire  to  go  home,  accompanied
by  a  dread  or  fear  of  something,  I  knew  not  what,  which  made  the  return  ap-
pear, not  a  matter  of  choice,  but  a  thing  imperative.  I  tried  to  reason  it  away,
to  revive  anticipations  of  the  concert ;  I  thought  of  the  disappointment  it  would
be  to  those  who  came  with  me  to  give  it  up,  and  running  over  in  my  mind  tbe
condition  in  which  things  were  left  at  home,  could  find  no  ground  for  alarm.

For  many  years  a  part  of  the  house  had  been  rented  to  a  trusty  family;  our
children  were  often  rocked  in  the  same  cradle,  and  half  of  the  time  ate  at  the
.same  table;  locks  and  bolts  were  things  unused,  and  in  deed  as  in  word  we
were  neighbours.  In  their  care  had  been  left  a  boy  of  ten  years,  the  only  one
of  the  family  remaining  at  home,  who  knew  that  when  he  returned  from  school
he  was  expected  to  bring  in  wood  and  kindlings  for  the  morning  fire,  take  supper
alone,  or  with  little  Clara  E.,  as  he  chose,  and  otherwise  pass  the  time  as  he
pleased,  only  that  he  must  not  go  into  the  street  to  play,  or  on  to  the  pond  to
skate.  He  had  been  left  many  times  in  this  way,  and  had  never  given  occasion
for  the  slightest  uneasiness;  still,  as  this  nameless  fear  grew  upon  me,  it  took
the  form  of  a  conviction  that  danger  of  some  sort  threatened  this  beloved  child.

I  was  rising  to  go  and  ask  Mr.  A.  to  take  me  home,  when  some  one  said,
"  You  are  very  pale ;  are  you  ill  ?  "  "  No,"  I  answered,  and  dropping  back  in  the
chair,  told  them  how  strangely  I  had  been  exercised  for  the  last  few  minutes  ;
adding,  "  I  really  must  go  home."  There  was  a  perfect  chorus  of  voices  against
•it,  and  for  a  little  time  I  was  silenced,  though  not  convinced.  Some  one  laid  the
matter  before  Mr.  A.,  who  replied,  "  Nonsense;  Eddie  is  a  good  boy  to  mind,
will  do  nothing  in  our  absence  that  he  would  not  do  if  we  were  there,  and  is
enjoying  himself  well  at  this  moment,  I'll  warrant."  This  answer  was  brought
to  me  in  triumph,  and  I  resolved  to  do  as  they  said,  "  not  to  think  about  it."
But  at  tea  my  trembling  hand  almost  refused  to  carry  food  to  my  lips,  and  I
found  it  utterly  impossible  to  swallow  a  mouthful.  A  death-like  chill  crept  over


408  APPENDICES  [817  C

me,  and  I  knew  that  every  eye  was  on  me  as  I  left  the  room.  Mr.  A.  rose,  say-
ing in  a  changed  voice  and  without  ceremony,  "  Make  haste;  bring  the  horse
round,  we  must  go  right  away.  I  never  saw  her  in  such  a  state  before;  there
is  something  in  it."  He  followed  me  to  the  parlour,  but  before  he  could  speak
I  was  pleading  as  for  dear  life  that  not  a  moment  be  lost  in  starting  for  home.
"  I  know,"  said  I,  "it  is  not  all  imagination,  and  whether  it  is  or  not  I  shall
certainly  die  if  this  dreadful  incubus  is  not  removed  shortly."

All  was  now  confusion ;  the  tea-table  deserted,  the  meal  scarce  tasted  ;  and
my  friends,  alarmed  as  much  at  my  looks  as  at  my  words,  were  as  anxious  to
hurry  me  off  as  they  had  been  before  to  detain  me.  To  me  those  terrible
moments  seemed  hours,  yet  I  am  assured  that  not  more  than  half-an-hour
elapsed  from  the  time  my  fears  first  found  expression  before  we  were  on  the
road  toward  home.  A  horse  somewhat  noted  for  fleetness  was  before  us,  and
with  only  two  in  the  cutter — the  rest  stayed  to  concert,  and  made  Mr.  A.  promise
that  if  nothing  had  happened  we  would  return — went  over  the  road  at  a  rapid
pace.  I  knew  from  the  frequent  repetition  of  a  peculiar  signal  that  the  beast
was  being  urged  to  his  best,  yet  I  grew  sick  with  impatience  at  the  restraint.
I  wanted  to  fly.  All  this  while  my  fears  had  taken  no  definite  shape.  I  only
knew  that  the  child  was  in  danger,  and  felt  impelled  to  hurry  to  the  rescue.
Only  once  was  the  silence  broken  in  that  three-mile  journey,  and  that  was  when
the  house  was  in  full  view.  I  said,  "  Thank  God,  the  house  is  not  on  fire."
"  That  was  my  own  thought,"  said  Mr.  A.,  but  there  was  no  slackening  of  speed.

On  nearing  home  a  cheerful  light  was  glimmering  from  Mrs.  E.'s  window ;
before  the  vehicle  had  fairly  stopped  we  were  clear  of  it,  and  opening  the  door,
said  in  the  same  breath,  "  Where's  Eddie  ?  "  "  Eddie  ?  why,  he  was  here  a  little
while  ago,"  answered  Mrs.  E.,  pleasantly  striving  to  dissipate  the  alarm  she  saw
written  on  our  countenances.  "  He  ate  supper  with  the  children,  and  played
awhile  at  marbles ;  then  spoke  of  Libby  Rose  having  a  new  picture  book,  and
that  he  wanted  to  see  it.  You'll  find  him  over  there."  With  swift  steps  Mr.  A.
crossed  the  street  to  the  place  mentioned,  but  returned  with  "  He  has  not  been
there."  Eddie  was  remarkably  fond  of  skating,  and  my  next  thought  was  that
he  had  been  tempted  to  disobedience.  I  said  calmly,  "  We  will  go  to  the  pond."
I  was  perfectly  collected ;  I  could  have  worked  all  night  without  fatigue  with
the  nerves  in  that  state  of  tension  ;  but  Mr.  A.  said,  "  No,  you  must  go  in  and
lie  down.  Eddie  is  safe  enough,  somewhere  about  the  village.  I'll  go  and  find
him."  But  there  was  nothing  in  the  tone  as  in  the  words  to  reassure  me.

As  he  spoke  he  crossed  the  hall  to  our  own  room  and  turned  the  knob.
The  door  was  locked.  What  could  that  mean?  Eddie  was  either  on  the
inside  or  had  taken  the  key  away  with  him.  Mr.  A.  ran  round  to  a  window
with  a  broken  spring  which  could  be  opened  from  the  outside.  It  went  up
with  a  clang,  but  a  dense  volume  of  smoke  drove  him  back.  After  an  instant
another  attempt  was  made,  and  this  time,  on  a  lounge  directly  under  the
window,  he  stumbled  on  the  insensible  form  of  little  Eddie,  smothered  in
smoke.  Limp  and  apparently  lifeless,  he  was  borne  into  the  fresh  cold  air,  and
after  some  rough  handling  was  restored  to  consciousness.

Eddie  said,  on  returning  from  school  he  made  a  good  fire,  and  as  the  wood
was  snowy  thought  he  would  put  it  in  the  oven  to  dry;  something  he  had
never  done  before.  Then  on  leaving  Mrs.  E.'s  room  he  went  in  for  an  apple
before  going  to  see  Libby  Rose's  picture  book,  and  it  seemed  so  nice  and  warm
he  thought  he  would  lie  down  awhile.  He  could  give  no  explanation  as  to


817D]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  409

what  prompted  him  to  turn  the  key:  it  was  the  first  and  last  time;  but  this
could  have  made  no  difference  in  the  result,  for  no  one  would  have  discovered
the  smoke  in  time  to  save  his  life.  The  wood  in  the  oven  was  burned  to  ashes,
but  as  the  doors  were  closed  there  was  no  danger  of  falling  embers  setting  the
house  on  fire ;  and  had  we  stayed  to  the  concert  everything  would  have  been
as  when  we  left,  except  that  little  Eddie's  voice  would  never  more  have  made
music  for  our  ears.  Every  one  said  that  with  a  delay  of  five  or  even  three
minutes  we  should  have  been  too  late.

(Signed)        MRS.  C.  A.  C.  HADSELLE.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Hadselle  informed  Dr.  Hodgson  that  the
event  took  place  about  1854,  Eddie  being  then  nine  or  ten  years  old.
Mr.  A.  is  no  longer  living,  but  the  lady  at  whose  house  the  party  met,  on
being  asked  by  Mrs.  Hadselle  what  she  could  remember  of  the  circum-
stances, wrote  : —

ALBANY,  N.  Y.,  January  6th,  1891.

I  remember  distinctly  the  incident  described  by  Mrs.  Hadselle  in  her  sketch,
"An  Unspoken  Warning."  It  was  at  my  house  that  the  little  party  gathered
for  the  old-fashioned  afternoon  visit  and  tea.  I  remember  well  her  strange  con-
dition, arising  from  anxiety  over  the  child,  which  had  been  left  at  home.  The
statement  made  by  her  I  believe  to  be  true.  M.  W.  ROGERS.

817  D.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  136.  The  following
account  was  sent  to  me  by  Lady  de  Vesci  in  May  1891.  Whether
the  impulse  to  telegraph  was  really  connected  with  the  dying  lady's
condition  we  cannot,  of  course,  say,  but  the  coincidence  was  cer-
tainly remarkable.

May  24//&,  1891.

Madame  X.  was  a  very  remarkable  woman,  and  I  was  most  deeply
attached  to  her.  She  had  had  great  troubles  and  difficulties  in  her  life,  an
unhappy  marriage,  and  two  sons  who  were  entirely  educated  by  her.  When
they  came  to  London  as  clerks  in  the  city  she  followed  them  to  make  a  home
for  them  there ;  but  as  one  was  soon  sent  out  to  work  at  Hong-Kong  and  the
other  to  a  business  at  Bahia,  she  sought  employment  for  herself  in  London  and
came  to  us  as  governess  in  1864.  In  1869  she  became  ill,  and  spent  the  winter
alone  at  Bournemouth.  She  and  I  wrote  constantly  to  each  other,  and  when
she  moved  to  Norwood  for  the  summer  of  1870  my  eldest  brother  and  I  went
often  to  spent  long  afternoons  with  her.  He  died  that  summer,  and  although
she  had  not  left  her  sofa  for  months  she  came  at  once  to  see  me  when  she
heard  of  our  great  sorrow ;  the  doctor  said  he  had  never  seen  such  an  indomit-
able spirit  as  she  showed  through  her  illness,  and  when  in  the  spring  of  1871
Sir  J.  Burrows  told  her  that  she  had  not  many  months  to  live  she  resolved  to
go  out  to  Hong-Kong  and  see  her  eldest  son  once  more.  It  was  not  thought
that  she  would  survive  the  voyage.  Our  deep  love  for  each  other  was  un-
changeable, and  this  final  farewell  was  a  great  grief  to  us  both.  She  reached
Hong- Kong  and  spent  the  last  eighteen  months  of  her  life  with  her  son  there.
I  heard  from  her  by  every  mail.

In  1872  I  married,  and  shortly  afterwards  we  were  quartered  at  the  Curragh.
It  was  from  there  that  I  sent  the  telegram  which  she  received  less  than  twenty-
four  hours  before  her  death.  Until  two  years  ago  I  had  in  my  possession  a


410  APPENDICES  [818  A

few  faint  lines  written  by  her  on  blue  foreign  paper,  saying  she  had  received  my
message  and  that  her  "  fever  dreams  "  were  filled  with  memories  of  our  happy
days  together  at  Cannes  and  elsewhere.  Her  son  is  now  dead.  He  came  to
see  me  in  '76,  and  told  me  that  my  telegram  had  made  his  mother  very  happy.

The  impulse  that  made  me  communicate  with  her  on  that  particular  day
was  a  very  strong  one.  It  came  to  me  suddenly  and  not  in  consequence  of  any
increased  anxiety  from  news  received.  On  the  contrary,  the  accounts  were
quite  satisfactory.  I  had  heard  from  her  by  the  mail  a  few  days  before.  I
asked  my  husband  to  go  with  me  to  the  Curragh  Post-Office  as  I  wished  to  find
out  the  cost  of  a  telegram  to  China,  and  he  accompanied  me  to  the  Post-Office,
and  we  were  told  it  would  cost  £5  to  send  twelve  words  or  so,  I  think.  I  at
once  wrote  and  sent  the  message  containing  a  few  words  of  loving  greeting.
These  words  she  received  and  acknowledged  only  a  few  hours  before  her  death.

EVELYN  DE  VESCI.

Lord  de  Vesci  adds  : —

I  certify  that  the  account  given  by  Lady  de  Vesci  is  correct  and  accurate.

DE  VESCI.
June  2nd,  1891.

818  A.  From  a  paper  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  entitled  "  Some  Experiments
on  the  Supernormal  Acquisition  of  Knowledge,"  in  the  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  191.

In  these  cases  a  piece  of  information  not  consciously  possessed  at  the
moment  is  conveyed  to  the  conscious  intelligence  by  means  of  an  apparent
mechanical  difficulty,  which  on  examination  turns  out  not  to  exist.  The  in-
formation thus  obtained  is  usually  negative ;  that  is,  this  apparent  mechanical
difficulty  prevents  my  doing  something  unnecessary  or  undesirable,  which  I
should  know  to  be  such  if  I  thought  about  it,  but  which  from  thoughtlessness  I
am  on  the  point  of  doing.  An  illustration  will  make  my  meaning  clearer.

Constantly,  when  using  my  typewriter,  it  has  happened  to  me  to  find  a  diffi-
culty in  pressing  a  key,  so  great  a  difficulty  as  to  oblige  me  to  look  to  see  what
is  wrong.  I  then  see  that  what  is  wrong  is  that  my  finger  was  on  the  wrong
key,  but  there  is,  in  fact,  no  difficulty  whatever  in  depressing  the  key  if  I  deter-
mine to  do  so.  The  effect  of  this  apparent  mechanical  difficulty  is  to  draw  my
attention  in  time  to  the  mistake  I  am  on  the  point  of  making.  .  .  .

[Again,]  I  wrote,  in  the  afternoon,  five  letters,  and  then  stretched  out  my  left
hand  to  the  stationery  case  to  take  the  necessary  envelopes.  I  wanted  five,
and  as  I  can  usually  take  a  small  number  without  error  expected  to  take
five.  But  I  did  not  get  enough ;  I  found  that  I  only  had  three,  and  tried  to
take  a  couple  more.  But  one  of  these  two  slipped  through  my  fingers,  and  I
only  held  one.  I  was  quite  vexed  at  my  maladroitness,  gave  up  a  further
attempt  for  the  present  and  proceeded  to  fold  my  letters,  put  them  into
envelopes,  and  address  them.  When  I  came  to  the  fifth  letter,  I  remembered
that  I  had  an  envelope  ready  addressed  for  this  letter,  as  I  had  written  the
night  before,  but  torn  up  the  letter  after  receiving  a  letter  by  the  late  post,
which  decided  me  to  wait  for  fuller  information.  I  had  kept  the  envelope,
and  it  was  actually  lying  on  my  table  while  I  was  trying  to  take  the  five
envelopes.  I  may  have  seen  it,  but  if  I  did,  it  was  unconsciously ;  it  was  only
when  I  found  that  I  could  not  get  five  envelopes  that  I  discovered  that  I  did
not  require  more  than  four.


819A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  411

818  B.     From  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  344.

The  following  is  a  case  in  which,  as  I  conceive,  the  subliminal  self
has  observed  what  the  supraliminal  has  failed  to  notice,  and  has  gene-
rated a  hallucination,  in  order  to  check  the  mistaken  action  to  which  that
inadvertence  was  leading.  In  this  case,  all  that  needs  correction  is  a
mere  act  of  distraction — a  failure  to  look  carefully  at  an  object  fully  in
sight.

From  Mrs.  E.  K.  ELLIOTT,  wife  of  the  Rev.  E.  K.  Elliott.

About  twenty  years  ago  I  received  some  letters  by  post,  one  of  which  con-
tained ^15  in  bank  notes.  After  reading  the  letters  I  went  into  the  kitchen
with  them  in  my  hands.  I  was  alone  at  the  time,  no  one  being  near  me,  except
the  cook,  and  she  was  in  the  scullery.  Having  done  with  the  letters,  I  made  a
motion  to  throw  them  into  the  fire,  when  I  distinctly  felt  my  hand  arrested  in
the  act.  It  was  as  though  another  hand  were  gently  laid  upon  my  own,  press-
ing it  back.  Much  surprised,  I  looked  at  my  hand,  and  then  saw  that  it  con-
tained not  the  letters  I  had  intended  to  destroy,  but  the  bank  notes,  and  that
the  letters  were  in  the  other  hand.  I  was  so  surprised  that  I  called  out,  "  Who
is  here  ? "  I  called  the  cook  and  told  her,  and  also  told  my  husband  on  the  first
opportunity.  I  never  had  any  similar  experience  before  or  since.

Statement  by  Rev.  E.  K.  ELLIOTT.

I  remember  my  wife  describing  the  above  adventure  to  me  at  the  time,  and
also  that  she  was  nearly  fainting  from  the  excitement  caused  by  it.

E.  K.  ELLIOTT.

819  A.     In    the    following    case    the    hypothesis   of    a    subliminal
hyperaesthetic  discernment  of  the  bifid  fern  by  ordinary  eyesight  is  pos-
sibly applicable.     The   account    is  a  translation   of  that   given   in   the
Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques  (May-June,  1895),  by  M.  Adrien  Gueb-
hard,  Professeur  agrege"  a  la  Faculte"  de  Medecine.

On  the  3oth  May  1893,  I  was  on  a  geological  excursion  in  the  environs  of
Nice.  After  a  very  uneasy  night,  passed  in  the  village  of  Contes,  I  set  out  in  a
rather  bad  humour  in  the  direction  of  Escarene  by  an  old  road,  where  my  dis-
gust was  heightened  by  seeing  on  my  right  a  long  mound  of  absolutely  no
interest,  either  palaeontological  or  stratigraphical.  In  vain  I  tried  to  console
myself  by  seeking  in  the  crevices  of  the  moist,  dripping  stone,  or  under  the
tufts  of  green  maidenhair,  some  rare  snail-shell  for  a  collection  belonging  to  my
friends.  I  had  already  resigned  myself  to  the  uninteresting  walk  of  the  ordinary
tourist,  when  suddenly  a  flash  of  recollection  arrested  my  wandering  attention
— a  memory  dating  from  my  old  passion  of  long  ago  for  botany,  revived  for  a
short  time  in  1889  by  the  publication  of  a  work  on  the  abnormal  partitions  of
ferns,  but  certainly  long  since  abandoned.  Promptly,  and  with  all  the  intensity
of  an  old  longing  never  satisfied,  I  conceived  a  great  ambition  for  an  object
which,  having  been  vainly  sought,  had  almost  passed  into  a  myth,  namely,  the
Asplenium  Trichomanes,  or  Common  Maidenhair  Spleenwort  abnormally
bifurcated,  which  I  had  often  seen  mentioned  in  a  book,  but  which  I  had  never
once,  during  thirty  years,  been  able  to  discover,  in  spite  of  the  great  abundance
of  the  normal  species.


412  APPENDICES  [819  A

Hardly  was  this  mental  picture  evoked,  before  my  eyes,  as  if  drawn  by  the
real  image,  were  arrested  by  one  amongst  all  the  green  tufts  which  surrounded
me,  and  amongst  all  the  fronds  which  composed  it, — by  one  alone,  which,  two
yards  off,  had  the  exact  appearance  of  a  bifurcation.

Purely  appearance,  I  said  to  myself,  drawing  near.  Simply  the  juxtaposi-
tion of  two  neighbouring  fronds,  which  I  have  so  often  mistaken  for  it.

Sceptical  even  while  gathering  it,  I  could  not  believe  my  eyes.  But  the
evidence  was  undeniable,  and  when,  much  astonished  but  highly  delighted,  I
had  plucked  the  fern,  I  said  to  myself  half-aloud,  as  though  uttering  a  chal-
lenge, "Well,  I  only  want  now  to  find  the  Get—"  I  had  not  finished  my
sentence  when  my  gaze,  leaving  the  high  wall  on  the  right  where  it  was  still
mechanically  searching,  fell  below  the  footpath  on  the  left,  at  the  foot  of  the
buttress,  on  a  poor  sickly  plant  of  Ceterach  Officinarum  (Common  Scale-Fern
or  Scaly  Spleenwort)  crowded  into  the  midst  of  the  Asplenium  (Spleenworts)
as  if  dejected  at  finding  itself  in  this  damp  shady  corner  instead  of  a  crevice
in  a  dry  and  sunny  wall,  which  is  the  usual  abode  of  this  species.

And  this  plant,  which  ordinarily  I  should  never  have  dreamed  of  seeking  in
such  a  spot,  this  fern  of  quite  simple  venation,  edges  very  slightly  divided,  and
under  surfaces  all  scaly,  in  fact  with  an  appearance  so  opposed  to  the  idea  of
partition  that  (never  having  come  across  a  specimen  either  in  my  youthful  re-
searches, in  the  splendid  collections  of  the  Museum,  or  in  any  herbal  or  rare
book)  I  had  concluded  it  to  be  non-existent — an  impossible  anomaly — it  was,  I
say,  a  frond  of  this  fern  that  appeared  before  me  to-day  at  my  bidding,  as  in
Perrault's  stories,  as  clearly  bipartite  as  the  Asplenium  close  by  had  been.

Being  at  once  led  on,  and  covetously  pushing  my  reasoning  straight  to  the
principal  conclusion  of  my  old  observations  on  the  somewhat  epidemic  and  at
the  same  time  local  character  of  these  freaks  of  nature,  I  argued :  "  If  I  have
found  one,  and  even  two  bifurcated  fronds,  certainly  the  third  is  not  far  to
seek."  And  in  less  time  than  it  had  taken  to  announce  this  decision,  without
any  hesitation,  amongst  all  the  attractive  groups  of  fern,  I  distinguished  im-
mediately one  frond  of  maidenhair  showing  two  clearly-marked  points.

I  should  never  have  made  up  my  mind  to  put  this  incident  in  writing,  at  the
risk  of  occasioning  the  reader's  sceptical  smile,  if  the  recurrence  of  the  same
adventure  twice  in  the  course  of  this  same  year  had  not  confirmed  the  reality
and  demonstrated  the  importance  of  the  psychological  problem.

On  the  8th  August  1893,  at  Lausanne  (Switzerland)  I  had  just  accompanied
some  friends  returning  to  the  country,  whose  gay  conversation  was  anything
rather  than  botanical,  and  the  last  good-byes  were  hardly  said,  when  all  at
once,  as  I  walked  along  the  path  we  had  taken  a  minute  or  two  earlier,  there
shot  into  my  head,  without  rhyme  or  reason,  the  idea  of  a  divided  maidenhair,
and  immediately  I  put  my  hand  on  a  frond,  then  further  on  on  a  second,  and
again  on  another,  always  making  my  choice  at  once  without  groping  in  the
long  green  mantle  of  the  great  wall.  Afterwards  I  in  vain  retraced  my  steps
to  explore  conscientiously,  with  attention,  and  at  length,  the  fifty  yards  of
pathway ;  there  was  nothing  more,  or  I  could  see  no  more.

Ten  days  later  I  was  visiting  near  Chambdry  with  a  gay  and  numerous
party  the  celebrated  country  house  Charmettes,  still  alive  with  memories  of
Jean  Jacques  Rousseau.  As  I  crossed  the  threshold,  the  thanks  of  the  care-
taker still  in  my  ears,  and  before  my  eyes  the  pictures  of  the  Confessions,  I
instinctively  felt  my  gaze  drawn  towards  the  little  wall  of  the  terrace,  where,


819A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  413

at  the  first  glance  amongst  several  stunted  tufts,  which  were  afterwards  to
furnish  me  with  several  similar  specimens,  I  discovered  an  extremely  curious
plant  of  maidenhair,  such  as  I  did  not  yet  possess,  with  fronds  not  merely
bifurcated,  but  really  ramified.

Was  it  this  time  a  reminiscence  of  "  Lettres  sur  la  botanique  "  which  had
given  the  suggestion  ?  Was  it  not,  as  well  as  the  time  before,  simply  an  echo
at  a  relatively  shorter  distance  of  the  exciting  experience  in  the  month  of
May?  I  do  not  think  so,  for  with  regard  to  the  latter  nothing  of  the  sort
could  be  argued,  and  it  seems,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  was  precisely  the
absence  of  all  appreciable  cause,  the  apparently  complete  spontaneity  of  the
first  vision,  to  which  was  due  the  intensity  of  the  second — a  real  second  sight
which  leads  infallibly  straight  to  the  mark.  That  mark  is  evidently  pre-
existent,  of  a  real  kind,  and  perhaps — one  might  defend  this  view ! — is
itself  by  its  simple  presence,  and  by  a  sort  of  self-discharge  at  a  distance,
the  unsuspected  and  unperceived  cause  of  the  sudden  internal  revival  of  a
similar  image,  stored-up  long  ago ; — the  spontaneous  exteriorisation  of  which,
and  the  placing  of  it  in  coincidence  with  the  corresponding  object,  would
constitute  precisely  the  fact  of  the  discovery — that  is  to  say,  simply  the  proof  of
the  existence — of  that  object.  Whatever  may  be  the  cause,  it  seems  certain
that  only  the  abruptness,  the  suddenness  of  the  cerebral  awakening  is  capable
of  giving  momentarily  to  the  sensorial  faculties  that  acuteness  in  some  sort
prophetic,  which  automatically  attracts  the  material  object  of  the  mental
evocation,  not  out  of  nothing,  as  a  superstitious  mind  might  believe,  but  simply
out  of  the  relative  obscurity  in  which  it  would  have  remained  under  other
circumstances.

No  normal  tension  of  the  mind,  no  effort  of  will,  no  abilities  exercised  at
their  best  could  attain  to  the  results  of  these  rapid  moments  of  temporary
hyper-stimulation.  Never,  except  on  the  three  occasions  I  have  recorded,
have  I  been  able  to  find  the  abnormal  Asplenium,  still  less  the  abnormal
Ceterach,  although  every  year,  sooner  or  later,  thousands  of  specimens  have
passed  before  my  eyes,  amongst  which  I  have  often  tried  on  solitary  walks
in  the  most  varied  localities,  with  all  the  concentration  of  attention  of  which
I  am  capable,  and  the  fullest  use  of  a  faculty  of  discovery  developed  by  old
naturalistic  habit,  to  discover  the  rare  object,  the  eternal  ambition  of  the
collector.  I  often  found  other  things,  but  never  that.  .  .  .

ADRIEN  GUEBHARD.

[In  answer  to  the  following  question  by  the  Editor  of  the  Annales,}  As  to
the  fact  of  finding  three  [abnormal  ferns]  in  a  small  space,  is  it  possible
that  this  monstrosity  may  be  determined  by  certain  local  causes  in  such  a
manner  that  in  a  very  limited  area  many  may  occur,  whilst  for  several  hundreds
of  yards  not  one  may  be  met  with  ?  [Professor  Guebhard  replied  :]

I  can  reply  at  once  "Yes,"  for  such  was  exactly  the  conclusion  I  came
to  on  my  first  study  of  this  subject,  confirmed  by  my  last  find  at  Contes-
les-Pins.

These  abnormal  growths  are  almost  always  in  little  groups,  forming  well-
defined  islands,  as  it  were,  in  the  midst  of  normal  plants,  proving  the  external,
local,  and  non-individual  character  of  the  original  causal  lesion,  which  might
be  due,  as  I  think,  to  some  micro-organism,  either  vegetable  or  animal,  a
parasite  fungoid  or  gnawing  insect.  .  .  .


414  APPENDICES  [821  A

821  A.  In  the  following  case,  as  in  that  of  Mr.  C.  W.  Moses,  quoted
in  the  text,  some  subliminal  sense  of  smell  may  be  conjectured.  It  is
taken  from  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  421.

23  ST.  ANDREW'S  DRIVE,  POLLOKSHIELDS,  GLASGOW,
March  3U/,  1893.

Fifteen  or  sixteen  years  have  elapsed  since  I  had  the  following  clairvoyant
experience,  but  at  the  time  I  was  much  struck  by  it,  and  described  it  minutely
to  several  of  my  friends,  so  that  I  feel  sure  I  can  remember  the  facts  accurately.
The  circumstances  were  most  prosaic,  and  I  a  matter-of-fact  individual,  with
little  interest  and  less  faith  in  psychical  phenomena.  I  was  about  eighteen
years  of  age,  at  home  for  my  winter  holiday,  but  taking  no  interest  in  household
matters,  and  I  question  whether  on  that  particular  evening  I  knew  that  it  had
been  the  washing-day.

I  had  gone  upstairs  to  look  for  a  missing  knitting  needle,  and  was  returning
to  the  parlour  wondering  whether  I  had  dropped  it  there,  when  suddenly  I  was
arrested  by  a  strange  feeling,  and  saw  before  me  a  vision  of  flames,  and  felt
irresistibly  impelled  to  go  through  a  door  at  the  end  of  the  passage  and  down
some  steps  into  the  kitchen.  There  all  was  quiet,  and  I  came  partially  out  of
the  trance-like  state,  and  found  myself  thinking,  "Why  am  I  here?  I'll  go
upstairs."  But  again  I  saw  the  fire,  and  felt  I  must  go  into  the  adjoining
laundry.  On  opening  the  door,  I  was  in  no  way  surprised  to  see  just  such  a
scene  as  had  during  the  preceding  moments  been  distinctly  before  my  mental
vision.  A  jointed  gas  bracket  had  just  fallen  on  to  a  dry  heap  of  sheets  and
towels,  which  were  blazing  almost  to  the  ceiling.  With  a  little  difficulty  I
extinguished  the  flames,  and  went  to  tell  the  rest  of  the  household  what  had
occurred.  I  remember  I  had  a  strange  feeling  in  my  head,  as  if  I  had  just
awakened  out  of  an  unnatural  state.

No  other  person  was  near  at  the  time,  the  washerwoman  having  gone  home,
and  the  servants  being  upstairs.  Nor  could  I  even  unconsciously  have  smelled
burning,  as  two  doors  were  closed  between,  and  the  gas-pipe  had  evidently
fallen  only  a  few  moments  before  I  entered,  or  the  flames  would  have  spread
further.  The  laundry  was  situated  just  under  a  wooden  staircase  in  the  middle
of  a  very  dry  house,  so  if  the  fire  had  been  undiscovered  for  even  a  few  minutes
the  consequences  must  have  been  disastrous  to  the  house.

Several  members  of  the  family  remember  the  occurrence,  and  I  have  still  an
old  servant  of  the  family  who  distinctly  remembers  it.  I  have  never  had  any
recurrence  of  such  a  phenomenon,  and  was  at  the  time  much  surprised  that  I
should  have  been  the  subject  of  an  experience  so  strange  and  so  real.

M.  H.  GRAY.

The  gentleman  who  sends  this  case  writes  that  he  has  received  orally
the  confirmatory  testimony  of  Jessie,  the  old  servant,  and  encloses  the  cor-
roborative statement  of  Mrs.  Elizabeth  White,  stepmother  of  the  percipient

Mrs.  Elizabeth  White  does  not  remember  that  she  was  told  at  the  time
of  the  fire  part  of  the  vision.  She  writes  : —

My  daughter,  at  home  from  school,  not  naturally  domesticated,  seldom  went
near  the  kitchen,  which  was  shut  off  from  the  hall  by  a  swing-door.  On  the
night  above  mentioned  she  came  into  the  parlour  looking  so  pale  and  agitated—


825A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  415

being  naturally  nervous — that  I  at  once  asked  what  was  the  matter,  and  when
she  could  speak  she  said,  "  Mamma,  it  is  a  wonder  the  house  was  not  on  fire,"
and  then  told  of  having  the  strong  impression  that  she  must  go  down  to  the
laundry,  that  there  was  fire.  She  had  to  go  through  two  closed  doors  to  get
there,  and  was  not  aware  that  no  one  was  in  the  laundry  at  the  time.  Her
promptitude  in  stamping  out  the  fire  of  the  burning  sheets  no  doubt  saved  the
house,  and  accounted  for  her  pallid  look  on  returning  to  the  parlour.  This
occurred  about  fifteen  years  ago.  ELIZABETH  WHITE.

NORWOOD,  THIRM.

825  A.     From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  285.

CATHEDRAL  YARD,  WINCHESTER,  January  3U/,  1884.

I  respectfully  beg  to  offer  you  a  short  statement  of  my  experience  on  a
subject  which  I  do  not  understand.  Let  me  premise  that  I  am  not  a  scholar,
as  I  left  school  when  twelve  years  of  age  in  1827,  and  I  therefore  hope  you  will
forgive  all  sins  against  composition  and  grammar.  I  am  a  working  foreman  of
masons  at  Winchester  Cathedral,  and  have  been  for  the  last  nine  years  a
resident  in  this  city.  I  am  a  native  of  Edinburgh.

It  is  now  more  than  thirty  years  ago  that  I  was  living  in  London,  very  near
where  the  Great  Western  Railway  now  stands,  but  which  was  not  then  built.
I  was  working  in  the  Regent's  Park  for  Messrs.  Mowlem,  Burt,  &  Freeman,
who  at  that  time  had  the  Government  contract  for  three  years  for  the  masons*
work  of  the  capital,  and  who  yet  carry  on  a  mighty  business  at  Millbank,
Westminster.  I  think  it  was  Gloucester  Gate,  if  I  mistake  not.  At  all  events,
it  was  that  gate  of  Regent's  Park  to  the  eastward  of  the  Zoological  Gardens,  at
the  north-east  corner  of  the  park.  The  distance  from  my  home  was  too  great
for  me  to  get  home  to  meals,  so  I  carried  my  food  with  me,  and  therefore  had
no  call  to  leave  the  work  all  day.  On  a  certain  day,  however,  I  suddenly  felt
an  intense  desire  to  go  home,  but  as  I  had  no  business  there  I  tried  to  suppress
it,— but  it  was  not  possible  to  do  so.  Every  minute  the  desire  to  go  home
increased.  It  was  ten  in  the  morning,  and  I  could  not  think  of  anything  to
call  me  away  from  the  work  at  such  a  time.  I  got  fidgety  and  uneasy,  and  felt
as  if  I  must  go,  even  at  the  risk  of  being  ridiculed  by  my  wife,  as  I  could  give
no  reason  why  I  should  leave  my  work  and  lose  6d.  an  hour  for  nonsense.
However,  I  could  not  stay,  and  I  set  off  for  home  under  an  impulse  which  I
could  not  resist.

When  I  reached  my  own  door  and  knocked,  the  door  was  opened  by
my  wife's  sister,  a  married  woman,  who  lived  a  few  streets  off.  She  looked
surprised,  and  said,  "Why,  Skirving,  how  did  you  know?"  "  Know  what?"
I  said.  "  Why,  about  Mary  Ann."  I  said,  "  I  don't  know  anything  about
Mary  Ann"  (my  wife).  "Then  what  brought  you  home  at  present?"  I
said,  "  I  can  hardly  tell  you.  I  seemed  to  want  to  come  home.  But  what
is  wrong  ? "  I  asked.  She  told  me  that  my  wife  had  been  run  over  by  a  cab
and  been  most  seriously  injured  about  an  hour  ago,  and  she  had  called  for
me  ever  since,  but  was  now  in  fits,  and  had  several  in  succession.  I  went
upstairs,  and  though  very  ill  she  recognised  me,  and  stretched  forth  her
arms  and  took  me  round  the  neck  and  pulled  my  head  down  into  her  bosom.
The  fits  passed  away  directly,  and  my  presence  seemed  to  tranquillise  her,
so  that  she  got  into  sleep,  and  did  well.  Her  sister  told  me  that  she  had


4i6  APPENDICES  [830  A

uttered  the  most  piteous  cries  for  me  to  come  to  her,  although  there  was  not
the  least  likelihood  of  my  coming.  This  short  narrative  has  only  one  merit;
it  is  strictly  true.  ALEXANDER  SKIRVING.

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  the  time  of  the  accident  corre-
sponded with  the  time  when  he  felt  a  desire  to  go  home,  Mr.  Skirving
says : —

I  asked  my  wife's  sister  what  time  the  accident  occurred,  and  she  said
"  An  hour  and  a  half  ago  " — that  is,  from  the  time  I  came  home.  Now,  that
was  exactly  coincident  with  the  time  I  wanted  to  leave  work.  It  took  me  an
hour  to  walk  home ;  and  I  was  quite  half-an-hour  struggling  in  my  mind  to
overcome  the  wish  to  leave  work  before  I  did  so.

[He  adds :]  You  ask  me  if  I  ever  had  a  similar  impression  on  any  other
occasion.  I  never  had.  It  was  quite  a  single  and  unique  experience.

Mr.  Skirving's  wife  is  dead.  His  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  Vye,  is  in  New
Zealand.  Her  husband,  writing  from  Otago  on  July  ist,  1885,  says  that
she  cannot  now  give  particulars  of  the  occurrence,  though  she  remembers
the  accident  very  well.

830  A.  From  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  226-31.  In  this
case,  anagrams  were  written  automatically  by  Mr.  A.,  who  describes  his
experience  as  follows  : —

CLELIA,  OR  UNCONSCIOUS  CEREBRATION.

The  experiment  was  made  Easter  1883,  upon  one  day,  and,  after  an  interval
of  a  week,  continued  upon  three  consecutive  days;  upon  four  days  in  all.
Upon  the  first  day  I  became  seriously  interested ;  on  the  second  puzzled ;  on
the  third  I  seemed  to  be  entering  upon  entirely  novel  experiences,  half  awful
and  half  romantic;  upon  the  fourth  the  sublime  ended  very  painfully  in  the
ridiculous.

FIRST  DAY.

Q.  I.  Upon  what  conditions  may  I  learn  from  the  unseen?

My  hand  immediately  moved,  though  not  to  a  very  satisfying  issue.  But,
as  my  expectation  of  the  answer  had  been  that  the  condition  was  a  strict
adherence  to  the  absolute  rule  of  right,  holiness  in  short,  I  took  this  answer  to
be  at  any  rate  consistent  with  my  expectation,  and  continued :

Q.  2.  What  is  it  that  now  moves  my  pen  ?  A.  2.  Religion.  Q.  3.  What
moves  my  pen  to  write  that  answer?  A.  3.  Conscience.  Q.  4.  What  is
religion?  A.  4.  Worship.

Here  arose  a  difficulty.  Although  I  did  not  expect  either  of  these  three
answers,  yet  when  the  first  few  letters  had  been  written  I  expected  the  remain-
der of  the  word.  This  might  vitiate  the  result.  ...  As  if  to  meet  the  diffi-
culty, ...  my  next  question  received  a  singular  reply.

Q.  5.  Worship  of  what?  A.  5.  wbwbwbwbwb .  Q.  6.  What  is  the

meaning  of  wb?  A.  6.  Win,  buy.  Q.  7.  What?  A.  7.  Know(ledge).

Here  I  knew  the  letters  which  were  to  follow,  and  the  pen  made  a  sudden
jerk,  as  if  it  were  useless  to  continue.

Q.  8.  How  ?

Here  I  was  referred  to  the  first  answer.  .  .  .


830  A]  TO     CHAPTER    VIII  417

SECOND  DAY.

Q.  i.    What  is  man?  (i.e.  What  is  the  nature  of  his  being?)     A.  I.  Flise.

My  pen  was  at  first  very  violently  agitated,  which  had  not  been  the  case
upon  the  first  day.  It  was  quite  a  minute  before  it  wrote  as  above.  Upon  the
analogy  of  iJub,  I  proceeded.

Q.  2.  What  does  F  stand  for  ?  A.  2.  Fesi.  Q.  3. 1  ?  A.  3.  le.  Q.  4.  i  ?  A.  4.
i  v  y.  Q.  5.  s?  A.  5.  sir.  Q.  6.  e?  A.  6.  eye.  Fesi  le  ivy  sir  eye.

Q.  7.  Is  this  an  anagram  ?  A.  7.  Yes.  Q.  8.  How  many  words  in  the
answer?  A.  8.  Four.

I  tried  for  a  few  minutes  to  solve  it  without  success.  Not  caring  to  spend
much  time  in  trying  to  solve  what  might  have  no  solution,  I  gave  it  up.

THIRD  DAY.

Q.  i.  (rep.)  What  is  man  ?     A.  i.  Tefi  Hasl  Esble  Lies.

This  answer  was  written  right  off.

Q.  2.  Is  this  an  anagram?  A.  2.  Yes.  Q.  3.  How  many  words  in  the
answer  ?  A.  3.  V  (i.e.,  five).  Q.  4.  What  is  the  first  word?  A.  4.  See.  Q.  5.

What  is  the  second  word?     A.  5.  Eeeeee .      Q.  6.  See?      Must  I  interpret

it  myself  ?     A.  6.  Try.

Presently  I  got  out,  "  Life  is  the  less  able."  Next  I  tried  the  anagram  given
upon  the  previous  day,  and  at  last  obtained,  "Every  life  is  yes."  But  my  pen
signified  that  it  preferred  the  following  order  of  words,  "  Every  life  yes  is."  .  .  .

I  do  not  know  whether  any  other  interpretations  can  be  given  to  the  letters.
But  these  fulfil  the  requirements  as  to  the  number  of  words ;  and  the  action  of
the  pen,  assisting  in  the  process  of  interpretation,  pointing  to  the  letters,
accepting  these  and  rejecting  those  combinations,  left  no  doubt  in  my  mind
that  I  had  hit  the  meaning.

But  now  I  was  so  astonished  at  the  apparently  independent  will  and  in-
tellect manifested  in  forming  the  above  anagrams  that,  for  the  nonce,  I  became
a  complete  convert  to  Spiritualism  ;  and  it  was  not  without  something  of  awe,
that  I  put :—

Q.  7.  Who  art  thou  ?  A.  7.  delta  !  !  Q.  8.  Thou  art  a  woman  ?  A.  8.  Yes.
Q.  9.  Hast  thou  ever  lived  upon  the  earth  ?  A.  9.  No.  Q.  10.  Wilt  thou?
A.  10.  Yes.  Q.  ii.  When?  A.  n.  Six  years.  Q.  12.  Wherefore  dost  thou
speak  with  me  ?  A.  12.  E  if  Clelia  e  1.

It  has  been  already  said  that  when  I  experimented  I  had  a  certain  fever  of
speculative  pessimism  upon  me.  It  was,  therefore,  with  increasing  excitement
that  I  perceived  as  an  interpretation,  "  I  Clelia  feel."  But  upon  my  asking
whether  this  was  right,  "  Clelia  "  wrote  again  thus  :  E  if  Clelia  e  1.  20.

Q.  13.  Is  20  your  age  ?  A.  13.  oo  .  (She  was  eternal.)  Q.  14.  Then  20
what  ?  A.  14.  Words.  .  .  .

FOURTH  DAY.

I  began  my  questioning  in  the  same  exalted  mood,  but,  to  my  surprise,  did
not  get  the  same  answer.

Q.  i.  Wherefore  dost  thou  speak  with  me  ?  A.  i.  [Wavy  line.  Repetition
and  emphasis  :  Wherefore  dost  thou  speak  with  me  ?}

However,  I  thought  this  "  a  solemn  and  piercing  rejoinder,"  and  proceeded
to  consider  my  motives,  and  purify  them  from  all  earthly  and  unspiritual  alloy.
Then—

Q.  2.  Wherefore  dost  thou  answer  me  ?     A.  2.  [Wavy  line.     Wherefore  dost

VOL.    II.  2   D


418  APPENDICES  [832  A

thou  answer  mef\  Q.  3.  Do  I  answer  myself?  A.  3.  Yes.  Q.  4.  Is  Clelia
here  ?  A.  4.  No.  Q.  5.  Who  is  it,  then,  now  here  ?  A.  5.  Nobody.  Q.  6.
Does  Clelia  exist?  A.  6.  No.  Q.  7.  With  whom  did  I  speak  yesterday?
A.  7.  No  one.  Q.  8.  Why  didst  thou  lie  ?  A.  8.  [Wavy  line.  Why  didst  thou
lie?]  Q.  9.  Do  souls  exist  in  another  world?  A.  9.  m  b.  Q.  10.  What  does
m  b  mean?  A.  10.  May  be.  Q.  n.  What  was  that  last  answer  of  yesterday
again?  A.  u.  Eif  Clelia  o  el,  i.e.  I  feel  no  Clelia;  or,  the  original  may
have  been  "I  Clelia  flee."  And  the  20  meant  no,  negativing  my  inter-
pretation.

My  pen  now  became  altogether  wild,  sometimes  affirming  and  sometimes
denying  the  existence  of  Clelia.  .  .  .  Almost  the  last  anagram  I  received  was :
Wvfs  yoitet — testify,  vow.  .  .  .

Note. — I  simply  took  a  pen  into  my  hand.  Since,  I  have  tried  with  the
planchette,  but  without  any  success.

I  have  never  known  any  one  named  Clelia.

I  have  not  been  in  the  habit  of  writing  anagrams,  though  I  have  done  so  in
boyhood.

To  the  anagrams  cited  above  two  others  should  be  added,  which  Mr.
A.  obtained  at  about  the  same  time.  These  were  ieb  iov  ogf  wle  (I  go,
vow  belief),  and  neb  16  vbliyev  86  e  earf  ee  (Believe  by  fear  even  !  1866).
This  last  was  an  answer  to  the  question,  "How  shall  I  believe?"  and
seems  quite  to  negative  the  hypothesis  that  the  anagrams  were  mere
chance  combinations  of  letters,  which  happened  to  be  susceptible  of
arrangement  in  sentences.  It  should  be  mentioned,  however,  that  there
was  an  i  too  much  in  one  of  the  anagrams  previously  cited.

832  A.     From  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  216-24.

This  is  a  case  typical  at  least  in  its  main  features,  and  specially  suit-
able for  record  on  account  of  the  care  with  which  the  phenomena  were
noted  down  as  they  occurred.  The  case  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  F.  C.  S.
Schiller,  now  Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford,  and  I  have  myself
been  present  at  one  of  the  experiments  where  Mr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller  and
his  brother,  Mr.  F.  N.  Schiller,  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  obtained
some  of  the  old  French  writing.  Some  experiments  in  telepathy  and
clairvoyance  were  also  tried,  but  with  no  great  success,  and  the  description
of  these  is  omitted  here.

In  the  following  account  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  in  speaking  of  the
"spirits"  of  planchette  under  their  soi-disant  names,  I  intend  to  endorse  the
Spiritualist  explanation,  any  more  than  I  consider  the  reproductions  of  the
"mediums'"  latent  knowledge  to  be  conclusive  in  favour  of  any  form  of  "un-
conscious-self "  theory.

The  experiments  in  question  were  conducted  during  a  great  part  of  the  Long
Vacation,  with  my  brother,  whom  I  will  call  F.,  and  my  sister  L.,  as  "mediums,"
writing  conjointly  at  first,  but  afterwards  separately.  Of  course,  there  could
thus  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  good  faith  of  the  "  mediums,"  even  if  the  course
of  the  experiments  had  not  afforded  convincing  proof  that  the  phenomena  were
independent  of  their  conscious  mind.  There  appeared  at  different  times  no  less
than  nine  "spirits,"  of  whom  four  wrote  exclusively  with  F.  and  one  mainly;


832A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  419

another  freely  with  either  or  both  but  chiefly  with  L.,  and  three  exclusively
with  L.  or  with  F.  and  L.  conjointly.  They  all  wrote  with  a  more  or  less  distinc-
tive style  of  their  own,  and,  as  far  as  I  could  judge,  there  was  not  any  marked
difference  of  style  when  the  same  spirit  wrote  with  different  mediums.  Nor,
on  the  other  hand,  was  there  sufficient  evidence  to  justify  the  assertion  that  the
style  was  so- unmistakably  similar  that  it  must  have  proceeded  from  the  same
intelligence.  But  although  the  evidence  was  not  conclusive  in  establishing  the
identity  of  the  various  "  spirit "  personages,  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  their
complete  independence  of  the  mediums'  conscious  will.  Both  F.  and  L.  were
at  first  entirely  ignorant  of  what  planchette  was  writing,  and  F.  remained  so  to
the  end,  nor  did  the  occupations  of  his  conscious  self  appear  in  the  least  to
affect  the  progress  of  the  writing.  I  have  seen  planchette  write  in  the  same
slow  and  deliberate  way  both  while  he  was  telling  an  amusing  anecdote  in.
an  animated  way  and  while  he  was  absorbed  in  an  interesting  novel ;  and  fre-
quently whole  series  of  questions  would  be  asked  and  answered  without  his
knowing  what  had  been  written  or  thinking  that  anything  else  than  unmeaning
scrawls  had  been  produced.

In  L.'s  case  it  is  true  that  after  some  time  she  came  to  know  what  letters
were  being  formed  and  was  able  to  interpret  the  movements  of  her  hand.  This,
of  course,  made  it  difficult  to  avoid,  at  times,  a  certain  half-conscious  influence
on  the  writing,  and  makes  it  necessary  to  allow  for  the  personal  equation.  But
it  is  clear  that  this  influence  must  tend  to  harmonise  the  answers  of  planchette
with  the  opinions  and  will  of  the  medium,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  I  observed
frequent  cases,  especially  with  L.,  of  a  conflict  between  her  will  and  opinions
and  those  of  planchette.  .  .  .

The  spirit  of  a  "  careless  rhymer,"  after  writing  verses  in  English,  French,
and  German,  professed  its  ability  to  do  so  in  the  classical  languages.  And
as  F.  said  he  had  never  read  the  Iliad,  we  asked  the  rhymer  for  a  quotation.
This  he  was  at  first  unable  to  do,  but,  some  hours  after,  he,  unasked,  produced
the  following  :  "  Eratimoi  kekaloseiai  "  and  "  Kouridion  potheoumenos  posin."
These  extraordinary  tags  were  found  to  be  derived  from  the  fifth  book  of  the
Iliad  (421,  4!4)>  and  to  represent  rj  pd  ri  poi  Ke^oXcoo-eut  and  KovpiSiov  TroOeova-a
TTCKTIV.  F.  then  remembered  that  he  had  read  this  very  book,  and  this  alone,  a
long  time  ago.  This  was  certainly  the  incident  pointing  most  directly  at  uncon-
scious cerebration,  and  may,  perhaps,  help  to  explain  the  occurrence  of  an
entirely  unknown  language,  namely  Hindustani.  A  "  spirit  "  gave  his  name  as
"  Lokenadrath,"  and  wrote  in  an  extraordinary  Oriental  style,  rather  resembling
some  of  Marion  Crawford's  rhapsodies.  On  introducing  the  words  "  Allah  il
Allah,"  he  was  asked  whether  he  was  a  Mohammedan.  "  Hindi  apkahai."  I
have  since  been  informed  1  that  ["  apkahai "  means]  "  I  am  yours,"  "  At  your
service,"  and  that  "  Lokenadrath  "  should  be  "  Lokendranath,"  and  means  ""lord
of  princes  "  ;  and  one  or  two  other  fragments  of  Hindustani  were  similarly
inaccurate.2  Now,  as  F.  left  India  as  a  baby  of  eight  months,  and  has  never
since,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  heard  any  Hindustani  spoken,  this  is  surely  a
most  curious  case  of  unconscious  memory,  if  such  it  was.  .  .  .

1  On  the  authority  of  (i)  an  Anglo-Indian  lady  ;  (2)  aBalliol  Brahmin  of  Bombay.
[The  whole  phrase  means  "  A  Hindu  is  at  your  service."     The  Oriental  rhapsodies  were
found  to  be  mainly  centoes  of  Mr,  Isaacs,  worked  together  so  as  to  make  sense.]

2  I  have  now  found  out  (December  1886)  that  Lokenadrath's  description  of  his
nationality  is  not  as  totally  unintelligible  as  I  had  hitherto  thought  it.     He  called  him-
self a  "  Jude  poerano,"  and  I  have  been  told  that  "  poerano  "  is  Romany  for  gipsy.


420  APPENDICES  [832  A

Of  the  nine  "  spirits,"  six  wrote  only  in  English,  and  several  of  them  failed
ignominiously  with  all  other  languages.  The  Hindustani  of  "  Lokenadrath  "  I
have  already  mentioned.  "  Irktomar,"  the  French  Positivist,  gave  us  specimens
of  English,  French,  and  Latin.  Lastly,  the  poet  "  Closcar  "  rhymed  in  English,
French  and  German,  Latin  and  Greek,  and  even  sometimes  wrote  the  last  of
these  with  Greek  letters.  But  with  this  exception,  planchette  never  wrote  any
German,  though  both  the  mediums  are  perfectly  familiar  with  it,  and  in  their
childhood  probably  knew  it  far  better  than  English.  If,  then,  these  phenomena
are  a  dream-like  recrudescence  of  long-forgotten  thoughts,  this  absence  of  Ger-
man seems  to  require  some  explanation.1  As  regards  the  mode  of  writing,  we
were  unable  to  distinguish  any  differences  of  handwriting  between  the  various
"  spirits,"  except  that  one  of  F.'s  wrote  from  right  to  left,  mirror-writing,  whether
or  no  the  left  hand  was  used.  .  .  .

(Signed)        F.  C.  S.  SCHILLER.

BALLIOL  COLLEGE,  OXFORD,  26^  October,  1886.

APPENDIX.

Since  writing  the  preceding  paper  the  experiments  have  been  continued  with
F.,  and  I  will  give  a  short  sketch  of  the  results  subsequently  obtained.  The
first  thing  to  be  noted  is  that  F.'s  power  of  writing  seems  to  have  diminished
sensibly,  so  that  whereas  he  would  formerly  write  on  three  out  of  every  four
occasions  he  can  now  only  do  so  about  once  out  of  every  three.  .  .  .
An  interesting  experiment  was  tried  of  writing  with  two  planchettes,  F.
having  one  hand  on  each.  I  suggested  this  in  order  to  elucidate  the  con-
nection between  left-hand  writing  and  "  mirror-writing,"  and  fully  expected  that
the  two  hands  would  write  the  same  communications.  To  my  astonishment,
however,  the  communications,  though  written  simultaneously,  were  different
and  proceeded  from  different  "  spirits."  I  regard  this  as  conclusive  proof  that
the  phenomena  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  medium's  consciousness,  for,  as
every  one  can  easily  experience  for  himself,  it  is  quite  impossible,  at  least  with-
out long  practice,  to  write  two  different  words  at  the  same  time.

Whenever  F.  wrote  with  two  planchettes,  the  left  hand  wrote  mirror-writing,
which  was  often  very  hard  to  decipher,  but  we  did  not  observe  anything  like  a
fixed  rule  in  this  respect  on  other  occasions.  For  though  planchette  generally
wrote  in  the  ordinary  way  even  when  the  left  hand  was  used,  it  sometimes  pro-
duced mirror-writing  with  the  right  hand  also.  We  have  also  had  some  in-
structive experiments  in  what  I  may  call  conjoint  writing.  I  must  begin  by
saying  that  ordinarily  I  am  quite  unable  to  make  planchette  move  at  all.  But
one  night  I  put  my  hand  also  on,  after  F.  had  failed,  as  on  several  preceding
days,  to  make  it  write.  Planchette  soon  began  to  move  and  to  write  intelligibly.
I  repeatedly  took  my  hand  off  and  the  writing  stopped  at  once.  Similarly,
whenever  F.  took  his  hand  off,  the  writing  also  ceased,  except  that  on  one  occa-
sion, when  he  did  so  without  my  knowledge,  it  appears  to  have  written  two  or
three  letters  before  stopping.  I  am  inclined,  therefore,  to  regard  the  pheno-
menon of  conjoint  writing,  whatever  may  be  its  explanation,  as  genuine,  i.e.
that  the  second  operator  really  contributes  to  the  result.

Passing  from  the  method  to  the  matter  of  the  communications,  I  should  note
that  "  Heliod  "  has  shown  a  knowledge  of  German  and  alluded  to  Goethe's

1  Since  this  was  written  "  Heliod  "  has  shown  a  knowledge  of  German  and  Latin.


832  A]


TO    CHAPTER    VIII


421


Eivig  Weibliche,  but  that  the  bulk  of  the  communications  were  in  French  and
produced  by  "  Irktomar."

In  addition  to  some  dialectical  variations  which  appear  to  be  Provencal
(e.g.  Irktomar  n'a  pas  lou  terns,  Pour  vous  faire  des  coumplimens),  he  produced
an  extraordinary  jargon  which  he  called  "Romaunce  "  and  ascribed  to  the  time
of  "  Roland  "  and  of  "  Charlemagne."

Afterwards  it  was  found  to  be  old  Norman  French,  and  mostly  quoted  from
the  Chanson  de  Roland  of  the  twelfth  century,  as  will  appear  from  the  following
comparison  : —


"CHANSON   DE    ROLAND."

1.  Carles  li  reis,  nostre  emperere
magnes.

Set   anz  tuz  pleins    ad   estet  en
Espaigne.     (C.  de  R.  1-2.)

2.  Ne  reverrunt  lor  meres  ne  lor
femmes.

Ne  eels  de  France  ki  as  porz  les
atendent.     (C.  de  R.  1402-3.)  *

3.  Jo  vus  ai  mult  servit.     (C.  de
R.  3492.)

4.  Passet  li  jurz   si   turnet  a  la
vespre'e.     (C.  de  R.  3560.)


PLANCHETTE.

(isttime.)  Car[l]es  li  reis  magnes
empere  [re]  set  anz  ut  plein  estet  en
Espaigne.

(2nd  time.)  Carles  li  reis  magnes
empere  [re]  set  anz  lutans  estet  en
Espaigne.

2.  Ne  reverrunt  ne  peres  no.  parenz
ne  Charlemagne,  ki  as  porz  les  atent.


3.  Jo  vous  ai  mult  bien  servit.

4.  Sfenfuit  li  jourz  de  bleneut  la

vespre'e.


F.  does  not  know  old  French  at  all,  and  cannot  remember  to  have  ever  read
or  heard  any,  but,  being  strongly  inclined  towards  the  unconscious  self  theory,
suggests  that  the  passages  produced  may  have  been  quoted  in  some  magazine
article,  and  thus  met  his  eye.2  In  any  case,  however,  these  quotations  throw
an  interesting  light  on  the  mode  of  thinking  of  the  intelligence  that  dictated
them.  It  will  be  seen  that  they  are  evidently  quoted  from  memory,  and  by  no
means  accurate.  And  in  No.  i  the  first  version  was  nearer  the  original  than
the  second ;  but,  as  quoted,  the  words  "  ut  plein  "  made  no  sense,  and  hence
"  lutans,"  a  word  which  does  not,  I  believe,  occur  in  the  Roland,  was  substi-
tuted for  them  to  complete  the  sense.  That  is  to  say,  the  second  version  is  no
mere  reproduction  of  an  impression  in  the  memory,  but  has  been  subjected  to
a  process  of  emendation  which  by  us  would  be  held  to  imply  the  action  of
conscious  thought.  Yet  during  this  time  F.'s  conscious  mind  was  entirely  void
of  any  knowledge  of  the  dialect,  and  a  fortiori  could  not  possibly  have  corrected
what  appeared  to  him  quite  meaningless.  .  .  .

Lastly,  planchette  volunteered  the  information  that  "  Carles  fu  carles  il
caux "  (Charles  was  Charles  the  Bald),  which  is  certainly  wrong,  and  as  cer-
tainly could  not  be  derived  from  the  Roland  or  any  similar  poem,  while  it  is
nevertheless  linguistically  correct.  It  must,  therefore,  I  think,  be  admitted
that  the  intelligence  which  produced  it  must  have  possessed  a  considerable

1  Two  lines  have  since  been  found  which  are  almost  identical  with  the  planchette
writing,  viz. : — "  Ne  reverrunt  lor  peres  ne  lor  parenz,  Ne  Charle  Magne  ki  as  porz  les
atent."     (C.  de  R.  1420-21.)

2  Neither  had  Mr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller  read  any  old  French.


422  APPENDICES  [832  B

amount  of  what  we  should  call  conscious  knowledge  of  old  French,  and  such  as
F.  certainly  does  not  possess.

To  sum  up  then  I  will  only  say  that  the  matter  of  the  various  communica-
tions (i.e.  excluding  the  card  and  alphabet  experiments,  &c.)  does  not  seem  to
me  to  afford  absolute  proof  that  the  knowledge  displayed  could  not  possibly
have  been  latent  in  the  writer's  mind,  while  at  the  same  time  this  is  extremely
improbable  in  a  large  number  of  cases.  Moreover,  both  the  matter  and  the
manner  of  the  communications  display  powers  beyond  any  at  present  recog-
nised as  normal.  (Signed)  F.  C.  S.  SCHILLER.
January  22nd ',  1887.

832  B.  Other  cases  of  imaginary  personalities  are  to  be  found  in
the  accounts  of  possession  which  have  come  down  to  us  from  the
"  Ages  of  Faith."  I  take  as  an  example  the  autobiography  of  Soeur
Jeanne  des  Anges.1  Soeur  Jeanne  was  the  Superior  of  the  Ursulines
of  Loudun,  about  1630-1665,  and  was  one  of  the  most  ardent
admirers,  afterwards  one  of  the  fiercest  enemies,  of  the  unfortunate
Urbain  Grandier,  who  was  burnt  alive  in  1634,  on  the  charge  of  having
bewitched  the  Ursuline  nuns.  Her  manuscript  autobiography  has  fallen
into  the  hands  of  editors  of  a  type  which  she  can  hardly  have  fore-
seen, Drs.  Gabriel  Legue  and  Gilles  de  la  Tourette.  These  physicians
have  carefully  analysed  the  symptoms  which  she  narrates,  and  have  shown
that  her  affliction  may  be  classed  as  a  well-developed  case  of  hystero-
epilepsy,  of  the  kind  now  so  often  described  by  the  Salpetriere  school.

Our  present  interest  lies  in  the  personalities  which  she  gives  to  the
demons  whom  she  supposes  to  possess  her, — who  are  in  reality  mere
objectifications  of  different  series  of  hysterical  attacks.

Just  as  the  automatic  writer  has  a  group  of  soi-disant  guides  or  "  con-
trols," who  take  it  in  turns  to  direct  his  hand,  and  each  of  whom  main-
tains a  specific  character  of  his  own, — even  so  does  Soeur  Jeanne  describe
Asmodeus,  Leviathan,  Behemoth,  Isacaaron,  Balaam,  Gresil,  and  Aman,
whose  diverse  presence  she  apparently  recognised  mainly  by  the  special
train  of  undesirable  emotion  which  each  inspired,  but  partly  also  by  their
words  and  writings.  A  facsimile  of  a  letter  of  Asmodeus  is  given  by  the
learned  editors,  but  the  writing  does  not  perceptibly  differ  from  Soeur
Jeanne's  own  script.

And  Dr.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette  informs  me  that  there  are  letters,  also  in
Soeur  Jeanne's  own  handwriting,  which  profess  to  come  from  the  other
demons  too — such  letters  being  habitually  written  by  the  Sister  during  the
process  of  exorcism,  which  usually  brought  on  a  hystero-epileptic  attack.
The  substance  of  the  letters  reflected,  no  doubt,  the  foulness  and  malig-
nity of  the  Sister's  own  mind ;  but,  nevertheless,  the  modern  hysteriolo-
gists  who  have  discussed  the  whole  affair  do  not  suppose  that  the  Sister
consciously  simulated  the  writing  or  speech  of  devils  through  herself.  Her

1  BibliothZque  Diabolique (Collection  Bourneville).  Paris  :  Aux  Bureaux  du  Progrts
Midical,  1886.


843A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  423

diabolic  script  and  utterance  were  probably  (though  not  certainly)  purely
automatic.1

It  must  be  remembered  that  Soeur  Jeanne  was  perfectly  sane  during
these  years  of  possession,  sane  at  least  in  the  sense  that  she  governed  her
community,  plotted  savagely  against  her  enemies,  and  made  religious
capital  out  of  her  real  or  fictitious  stigmata ;  but  that,  nevertheless,  there
is  no  doubt  whatever  that  she  believed  in  these  possessing  demons,  who,
as  I  say,  were  in  reality  the  incarnations  of  hystero-epileptic  attacks.

Now,  I  certainly  do  not  mean  to  trace  any  moral  analogy  between
these  distressing  products  of  Soeur  Jeanne's  imagination  and  the  "  guides  "
of  the  planchette-writer — which,  as  I  have  said,  so  far  as  I  have  seen,  are
almost  always  harmless,  generally  even  sermonising  entities.  So  far  as  my
experience  goes  I  do  not  see  that  planchette-writing  has  any  connec-
tion with  disease  of  mind  or  body,  or  any  tendency  to  evil  of  any  kind,
except  in  a  few  cases  of  great  credulity  on  the  writer's  part,  a  credulity
which — it  is  to  be  hoped — is  now  becoming  somewhat  less  common.
Rather  is  Sceur  Jeanne's  case  parallel  in  another  way;  as  showing  the
tendency  of  the  individuality  to  split  itself  up  into  various  co-ordinate  and
alternating  trains  of  personality,  each  of  which  may  seem  for  a  time  to  be
dominant  and  obsessing,  while  yet  the  habitual  sense  of  the  ordinary  self
may  persist  through  all  these  invasions.

843  A.  Some  early  experiments  in  thought-transference  through  table-
tilting  were  published  by  Professor  Richet  in  the  Revue  Philosophique
for  December  1884.  A  critical  discussion  of  these  by  Gurney  appeared
in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  239-64,  and  a  briefer  report  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  pp.  72-81.  I  quote  from  the  latter
a  description  of  the  method  used  : —

The  place  of  a  planchette  was  taken  by  a  table,  and  M.  Richet  prefaces  his
account  by  a  succinct  statement  of  the  orthodox  view  as  to  "  table-turning."
Rejecting  altogether  the  three  theories  which  attribute  the  phenomena  to
wholesale  fraud,  to  spirits,  and  to  an  unknown  force,  he  regards  the  gyrations
and  oscillations  of  stance-tables  as  due  wholly  to  the  unconscious  muscular
contractions  of  the  sitters.  It  thus  occurred  to  him  to  employ  a  table  as  an
indicator  of  the  movements  that  might  be  produced  by  "mental  suggestion."
The  plan  of  the  experiments  was  as  follows.  Three  persons  (C,  D,  and  E),
took  their  seats  in  a  semi-circle,  at  a  little  table  on  which  their  hands  rested.
One  of  these  three  was  always  a  "  medium  " — a  term  used  by  M.  Richet  to
denote  a  person  liable  to  exhibit  intelligent  movements  in  which  consciousness
and  will  apparently  take  no  part.  Attached  to  the  table  was  a  simple  electrical
apparatus,  the  effect  of  which  was  to  ring  a  bell  whenever  the  current  was
broken  by  the  tilting  of  the  table.  Behind  the  backs  of  the  sitters  at  the  table
was  another  table,  on  which  was  a  large  alphabet,  completely  screened  from
the  view  of  C,  D,  and  E,  even  had  they  turned  round  and  endeavoured  to  see
it.  In  front  of  this  alphabet  sat  A,  whose  duty  was  to  follow  the  letters  slowly
and  steadily  with  a  pen,  returning  at  once  to  the  beginning  as  soon  as  he

1  See  Dr.  Legue's  Urbain  Grandier  et  les  Possedecs  de  Loudun.     Paris  :  Baschet.


424  APPENDICES  [843


arrived  at  the  end.  At  A's  side  sat  B,  with  a  note-book  ;  his  duty  was  to  wri
down  the  letter  at  which  A's  pen  happened  to  be  pointing  whenever  the  bell
rang.  This  happened  whenever  one  of  the  sitters  at  the  table  made  the  simple
movement  necessary  to  tilt  it.  Under  these  conditions,  A  and  B  are  apparently
mere  automata.  C,  D,  and  E  are  little  more,  being  unconscious  of  tilting  the
table,  which  appears  to  them  to  tilt  itself;  but  even  if  they  tilted  it  consciously,
and  with  a  conscious  desire  to  dictate  words,  they  have  no  means  of  ascertain-
ing at  what  letter  A's  pen  is  pointing  at  any  particular  moment;  and  they
might  tilt  for  ever  without  producing  more  than  an  endless  series  of  incoherent
letters.  Things  being  arranged  thus,  a  sixth  operator,  F,  stationed  himself
apart  both  from  the  tilting  table  and  from  the  alphabet,  and  concentrated  his
thought  on  some  word  of  his  own  choosing,  which  he  had  not  communicated
to  the  others.  The  three  sitters  at  the  first  table  engaged  in  conversation,
sang,  or  told  stories;  but  at  intervals  the  table  tilted,  the  bell  rang,  and  B
wrote  down  the  letter  which  A's  pen  was  opposite  to  at  that  moment.  Now,
to  the  astonishment  of  all  concerned,  these  letters,  when  arranged  in  a  series,
turned  out  to  produce  a  more  or  less  close  approximation  to  the  word  of  which
F  was  thinking.

The  general  result — of  which  full  details  are  given  in  the  original
articles  referred  to — was  that  the  amount  of  coincidence  between  the
letters  of  the  words  chosen  by  F  and  those  tilted  out  by  the  table  was
considerably  greater  than  would  most  probably  have  been  produced  by
chance.  Gurney  continues  : —

[These  experiments]  seem  to  exhibit  telepathic  production  of  movements
by  what  is  at  most  an  idea,  and  not  a  volition,  on  the  agent's  part.  This,
indeed,  is  a  hypothesis  which  seems  justified  even  by  M.  Ri chefs  less  excep-
tional results.  For  we  must  remember  that  in  a  sense  A  is  throughout  more
immediately  the  agent  than  F;  it  is  what  A's  mind  contributes,  not  what  F's
mind  contributes,  that  produces  the  tilts  at  the  right  moments.1  But  this  is
of  course  through  no  will  of  A's;  he  is  ignorant  of  the  required  word,  and  has
absolutely  no  opportunity  of  bringing  his  volition  into  play.  His  "  agency  "  is
of  a  wholly  passive  sort;  and  his  mind,  as  it  follows  the  course  of  his  pen,  is  a
mere  conduit-pipe,  whereby  knowledge  of  a  certain  kind  obtains  access  to  the
"unconscious  intelligence  "  which  evokes  the  tilts.  If,  then,  the  knowledge
manifests  itself  as  impulse,  can  we  avoid  the  conclusion  that  in  this  particular
mode  of  access — in  "mental  suggestion"  or  telepathy  as  such — a  certain
impulsive  quality  is  involved  ?  .  .  .

But  of  course  the  relation  between  F  and  the  "medium"  "plays  also  a
necessary  part  in  the  result;  the  impulse  to  tilt  when  a  particular  letter  is
reached  only  takes  effect  when  it  falls  (so  to  speak)  on  ground  prepared  by

1  When  A,  in  pointing,  began  at  the  beginning  of  the  alphabet,  the  sense  of  time
might  conceivably  have  led  to  an  unconscious  judgment  as  to  the  point  arrived  at.  This
idea  had  occurred  to  M.  Richet.  It  seems,  however,  an  unnecessary  multiplication  of
hypotheses ;  for  we  learn  from  him  that  in  some  trials  A  began  at  uncertain  places,  and
that  under  these  conditions  coherent  words  were  obtained.  The  fact  that  so  often  the
approximate  letter  was  given,  instead  of  the  exact  one,  might  seem  at  first  sight  to  favour
the  hypothesis  of  unconscious  reckoning  ;  but  it  will  be  observed  that  exactly  the  same
approximations  took  place  in  our  own  experiment  (Phantasms,  vol.  i.  pp.  77-8),  where
the  alphabet  was  in  the  "  medium's  "  sight.


:

:»


843B]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  425

"mental  suggestion"  from  F — on  a  mind  in  which  the  word  imagined  by
him  has  obtained  an  unconscious  lodgment.  The  unconscious  part  of  the
percipient's  mind  would  thus  be  the  scene  of  confluence  of  two  separate  tele-
pathic streams,  which  proceed  to  combine  there  in  an  intelligent  way — one
proceeding  from  F's  mind,  which  produces  unconscious  knowledge  of  the  word,
and  the  other  proceeding  from  A's  mind,  which  produces  an  unconscious  image
of  the  successive  letters.  Another  possible  supposition  would  be  that  F's
thought  affects,  not  the  "  medium,"  but  A ;  or  conversely,  that  A's  thought
affects,  not  the  "  medium,"  but  F ; — that  A  obtains  unconscious  knowledge
of  the  word,  or  that  F  obtains  unconscious  knowledge  of  the  letter,  and
so  is  enabled  to  communicate  an  impulse  to  the  "  medium "  at  the  right
moment.  And  we  should  then  have  to  suppose  a  secret  understanding  be-
tween two  parts  of  A's  or  F's  mind,  the  part  which  takes  account  of  the  letters
of  the  alphabet,  and  the  part  which  takes  account  of  the  letters  of  the  word —
the  former  being  conscious  and  the  latter  unconscious,  or  vice  versa,  according
as  A  or  F  is  the  party  affected.

843  B.  A  somewhat  similar  but  less  complex  set  of  experiments
by  Mr.  G.  M.  Smith  was  given  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  318—20,

as  follows  : —

CUSTOM  HOUSE,  AMBLE,  NORTHUMBERLAND,  October  itfh,  1892.

I  have  for  many  years  been  familiar  with  the  usual  modus  operandi  and
results  in  table-tilting,  but  I  have  no  sympathy  with  so-called  Spiritualists  as
such.  Recently,  when  reading  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  I  was  struck  with
the  experiment  in  table-tilting  recorded  there,  vol.  i.  pp.  77-Si,1  and  I  made
arrangements  with  a  few  friends  to  meet  in  my  house  to  experiment  in  table-
tilting  (a  thing  which  none  of  them  had  ever  seen)  with  the  view  of  adding
some  of  the  novel  features  of  the  case  referred  to  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living.

On  September  Qth  last  Mrs.  Smith  (my  wife),  three  young  men,  and  myself
sat  down  with  the  palms  of  our  hands  on  a  small  deal  table  in  my  house.  In
a  few  minutes  the  table  commenced  to  tilt.  What  follows  is  copied  from  a
note  written  immediately  after  the  experiment  and  read  over  to  all  present
at  the  sitting.  I  asked  the  questions,  and  in  doing  so,  merely  for  conveni-
ence, used  the  language  and  phraseology  peculiar  among  Spiritualists  on  such
occasions.

Q.  Will  the  influence  which  is  controlling  this  table  please  tilt  it  once
when  "  No  "  is  meant  and  twice  when  "Yes"  is  meant?  A.  Yes  (two  tilts  or
raps).  Q.  Is  it  a  spirit  that  is  controlling  this  table?  A.  Yes.  Q.  Is  it
the  spirit  of  a  friend  of  any  one  at  the  table  ?  A.  Yes.

After  a  few  more  such  questions  and  answers — Q.  Will  you  please  rap
(tiU)  the  table  when  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  are  pointed  to  which  spell  out
your  name  ?  A.  Yes.

I  then  asked  Mrs.  Smith  to  withdraw  from  the  table  and  sit  in  a  corner  of  the
room  about  six  feet  from  the  table,  and  to  take  a  small  book  with  the  alphabet
in  it,  and  commencing  to  point  at  "A"  to  move  slowly  towards  the  end  and
back  to  "A"  again,  and  so  on,  observing  at  what  letters  the  table  tilted.
Although  she  was  visible  to  all  at  the  table,  yet  she  was  so  placed  that  no  one
could  form  any  idea  of  what  letters  were  being  pointed  to.  These  preparations,
which  only  took  about  a  minute,  being  finished,  we  then  continued.

1  The  reference  is  to  the  experiments  by  Professor  Richet,  just  quoted.


426  APPENDICES  [849

Almost  at  once  the  table  commenced  to  tilt  at  irregular  short  intervals,  and
when  it  had  tilted  seven  or  eight  times,  I,  being  anxious  to  know  whether  any-
thing coherent  was  being  spelled  out,  asked  Mrs.  Smith  what  were  the  results,
and  she  answered  that  the  table  had  tilted  at  the  letters  H-o-w-e-y  J-a.  The
name  of  a  young  man  a  few  years  deceased,  and  known  by  name  at  any  rate
to  all  at  the  table,  was  at  once  recognised,  his  name  being  James  Howey.  I
then  asked:  Q.  Is  it  the  spirit  of  James  Howey?  A.  Yes.  Q.  Have  you
met  your  mother  since  she  passed  out  ?  A.  Yes.  Q.  Is  she  with  you  now  ?
A.  Yes.  Q.  Does  she  wish  to  communicate?  A.  Yes.  Q.  With  any  one
at  the  table  ?  A.  No.  Q.  With  any  of  her  family  ?  A.  Yes.  Q.  With
Miss  Howey  ?  A.  Yes.  Q.  Will  she  rap  (tilt)  the  table  when  the  letters  of
the  alphabet  are  pointed  to  which  spell  out  her  communication  ?  A.  Yes.
The  table  commenced  to  tilt  again  as  before,  but  it  was  not  interrupted,  and
when  it  had  stopped  I  asked  what  had  been  spelled  out,  and  Mrs.  Smith
replied :  "  Good  and  faithful  "  had  been  spelled.  Q.  Do  you  mean  that  Miss
Howey  is  good  and  faithful?  A.  No.  Q.  Do  you  mean  it  as  an  injunction
to  her  to  be  good  and  faithful  ?  A.  Yes.  Q.  Do  you  wish  to  communicate
further  ?  A.  Yes.  Proceeding  as  before,  the  table  at  once  commenced  tilting,
and  when  it  had  ceased  Mrs.  Smith  said  it  had  spelled  out :  "  Mind  father,  and
be  sure  of  that."  The  experiment  here  ended,  and  the  striking  aptness  of  the
latter  communications  was  much  spoken  of  by  the  sitters.

I  should  not  have  thought  this  worth  writing  out,  but  for  the  fact  that  Mrs.
Smith,  while  pointing  out  the  letters,  sat  away  from  the  table  and  in  such  a
position  that  no  one  at  the  table  could  form  the  faintest  idea  of  what  letters
were  being  pointed  to.  These  circumstances  remove  the  case  from  the  ordinary
run  of  table-tilting  experiments.

Of  course  I  was  aware  of  the  imperfection  of  the  arrangements,  but  they
could  not  be  improved  at  the  time,  and  I  at  once  arranged  for  a  further  and
more  testing  experiment  for  the  evening  of  September  I3th.  For  this  occasion
I  secured  the  assistance  of  two  more  young  men,  one  of  whom  I  intended
should  write  down  the  letters  rapped  or  tilted  out,  and  the  other  to  witness  that
such  was  done  correctly.  I  also  arranged  for  the  sitters  at  the  table  to  be  in  the
room,  and  those  with  the  alphabet  just  outside  the  door  (which  was  almost  shut)
of  such  room.  But  I  regret  to  say  that,  though  the  table  tilted  quite  briskly,  and
though  we  made  several  changes  of  persons  from  the  table  to  the  alphabet,
and  tried  for  about  an  hour,  yet  there  could  not  be  found  the  least  trace  of
coherence  or  intelligibility  in  the  series  of  letters  taken  down  as  rapped  out,
although  we  tried  them  by  inversion,  anagram matically,  and  by  substituting
neighbouring  letters,  as  is  done  in  the  case  referred  to  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living.  I  have  not  further  experimented  in  this  way.

GEORGE  MAIN  SMITH.

849  A.     I  quote  below  part  of  Mr.  Newnham's  account  of  his  experi-
ments in  thought-transference  through   automatic  writing,  the  whole   of
which  is  given  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  8—23.
EXTRACTS  FROM  MR.  NEWNHAM'S  DIARY.

It  was  in  January  1871  that  I  was  first  led  to  think  of  making  an  attempt
to  investigate  the  alleged  phenomena  of  planchette-writing.  Having  procured
an  instrument,  I  consulted  carefully  with  my  wife,  as  to  forming  a  code  of
conditions  which  we  would  agree  to  bind  ourselves  rigidly  to  observe,  in  case
she  was.  found  capable  of  writing.


849A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  427

I  copy  from  my  note-book  the  following  preliminary  statement  and  con-
ditions agreed  upon,  which  were  put  down  in  writing  before  any  experiment  had
been  made : —

"  Being  desirous  of  investigating  accurately  the  phenomena  of  planchette,
myself  and  my  wife  have  agreed  to  carry  out  a  series  of  systematic  experiments
in  order  to  ascertain  the  conditions  under  which  the  instrument  is  able  to  work.
To  this  end  the  following  rules  are  strictly  observed  : —

1.  The  question  to  be  asked  is  written  down  before  the  planchette  is  set

in  motion.     This  question,  as  a  rule,  is  never  known  to  the  operator.

2.  Whenever  an  evasive  or  other  answer  is  returned,  necessitating  one  or

more  new  questions  to  be  put  before  a  clear  answer  can  be  obtained,
the  operator  is  not  to  be  made  aware  of  any  of  these  questions,  or
even  of  the  general  subject  to  which  they  allude,  until  the  final  answer
has  been  obtained.

3.  In  all  cases  where  the  operator  has  asked  the  question,  or  is  aware  of  its

terms  or  general  tenor,  the  question  will  be  distinguished  by  pre-
fixing an  asterisk,  and  leaving  a  space  between  it  and  the  marginal
line.  [None  of  these  questions  are  quoted  here.]

4.  Where  no  operator  is  mentioned,  my  wife  is  always  meant.

5.  Where  no  questioner  is  mentioned,  myself  is  always  meant."
Although  not  provided  for  in  writing  (as  our  mutual  bona  fides  was,  of

course,  taken  for  granted),  I  may  add  that  my  wife  always  sat  at  a  small  low
table,  in  a  low  chair,  leaning  backwards.  I  sat  about  eight  feet  distant,  at  a
rather  high  table,  and  with  my  back  towards  her  while  writing  down  the
questions.  It  was  absolutely  impossible  that  any  gesture,  or  play  of  features,
on  my  part,  could  have  been  visible  or  intelligible  to  her.  As  a  rule,  she  kept
her  eyes  shut;  but  never  became  in  the  slightest  degree  hypnotic,  or  even
naturally  drowsy.

Under  these  conditions  we  carried  on  experiments  for  about  eight  months,
and  I  have  309  questions  and  answers  recorded  in  my  note-book,  spread  over
this  time.1  But  the  experiments  were  found  very  exhaustive  of  nerve-power,
and  as  my  wife's  health  was  delicate,  and  the  fact  of  thought-transmission  had
been  abundantly  proved,  we  thought  it  best  to  abandon  the  pursuit.

I  now  proceed  to  give  a  sample  of  some  of  these  questions  and  answers.
The  numbers  prefixed  are  those  in  my  note-book.

I  may  mention  that  the  planchette  began  to  move  instantly  with  my  wife.
The  answer  was  often  half  written  before  I  had  completed  the  question.

On  first  finding  that  it  would  write  easily,  I  asked  three  simple  questions
which  were  known  to  the  operator ;  then  three  others,  unknown  to  her,  relating
to  my  own  private  concerns.  All  six  having  been  instantly  answered  in  a
manner  to  show  complete  intelligence,  I  proceeded  to  ask —

7.    Write  down  the  lowest  temperature  here  this  winter.     A.    8.

Now,  this  reply  at  once  arrested  my  interest.  The  actual  lowest  tempera-
ture had  been  7.6°  so  that  8  was  the  nearest  whole  degree  ;  but  my  wife  said  at
once  that,  if  she  had  been  asked  the  question,  she  would  have  written  7,  and
not  8 ;  as  she  had  forgotten  the  decimal,  but  remembered  my  having  said  that
the  temperature  had  been  down  to  7  something.

I  simply  quote  this,  as  a  good  instance,  at  the  very  outset,  of  perfect  trans-

1  The  remainder  of  the  385  questions  and  answers  in  this  book  belong  to  a  different
series,  where  the  question  was  known  to  the  operator.


428  APPENDICES  [8-19  A

mission  of  thought,  coupled  with  a  perfectly  independent  reply ;  the  answer  being
correct  in  itself,  but  different  from  the  impression  on  the  conscious  intelligence
of  both  parties.

Naturally  our  first  desire  was  to  see  if  we  could  obtain  any  information
concerning  the  nature  of  the  intelligence  which  was  operating  through  the
planchette,  and  of  the  method  by  which  it  produced  the  written  results.  We
repeated  questions  on  this  subject  again  and  again ;  and  I  will  copy  down  the
principal  questions  and  answers  in  the  connection.

January  zqth.  13.  Is  it  the  operator's  brain,  or  some  external  force,  that
moves  the  planchette  ?  Answer  "  brain  "  or  **  force."  A.  Will.

14.  Is  it  the  will  of  a  living  person,  or  of  an  immaterial  spirit,  distinct  from
that  person  ?     Answer  "  person  "  or  "  spirit."     A.    Wife.

15.  Give  first  the  wife's  Christian  name;  then  my  favourite  name  for  her.
(This  was  accurately  done.)

27.  WThat  is  your  own  name  ?     A.    Only  you.

28.  We  are  not  quite  sure  of  the  meaning  of  the  answer.     Explain.     A.
Wife.

Failing  to  get  more  than  this,  at  the  outset,  we  returned  to  the  same  thought
after  question  114;  when,  having  been  closely  pressed  on  another  subject,  we
received  the  curt  reply—"  Told  all  I  know."

February  \%th,  117.  Who  are  you  that  writes,  and  has  told  all  you  know  ?
A.  Wife.

1 1 8.  But  does  no  one  tell  wife  what  to  write  ?     If  so,  who?    A.   Spirit.

119.  Whose  spirit?     A.   Wife's  brain.

1 20.  But  how  does  wife's  brain  know  [Masonic]  secrets  ?     A.    Wife's  spirit
unconsciously  guides.

121.  But  how  does  wife's  spirit  know  things  it  has  never  been  told  ?    A.    No
external  influence.

122.  But  by  what  internal  influence  does  it  know  [Masonic]  secrets  ?    A.
You  cannot  know.

March  \$th.  132.  Who,  then,  makes  the  impressions  upon  her?  A.  Many
strange  things.

133.  What  sort  of  strange  things  ?     A.    Things  beyond  your  knowledge.

134.  Do,  then,  things  beyond  our  knowledge  make  impressions  upon  wife?
A.    Influences  which  no  man  understands  or  knows.

136.  Are  these  influences  which  we  cannot  understand  external  to  wife  ?   A.
External — invisible.

137.  Does  a  spirit,  or  do  spirits,  exercise  those  influences  ?    A.   No,  never
(written  very  large  and  emphatically).

138.  Then  from  whom,  or  from  whence,  do  the  external  influences  come  ?
A.    Yes ;  you  will  never  know.

139.  What  do  you  mean  by  writing  "  yes  "  in  the  last  answer  ?    A.  That  I
really  meant  never.

March  iqth.  142.  By  what  means  are  [Masonic]  secrets  conveyed  to  wife's
brain  ?  A.  What  you  call  mesmeric  influence.

144.  What  do  you  mean  by  "  what  you  call  "  ?    What  do  you  call  it?     A.
Electro-biology.

145.  By  whom,  or  by  what,  is  the  electro-biologic  force  set  in  motion?     A.
I  told  you  you  could  not  know  more  than  you  did.

146.  Can  wife  answer  a  question  the  reply  to  which  I  do  not  know  ?   A.  Why
do  you  try  to  make  me  say  what  I  won't  ?


849  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  429

147.  Simply  because  I  desire  knowledge.     Why  will  not  you  tell  ?    A.  Wife
could  tell  if  some  one  else,  with  a  very  strong  will,  in  the  room  knew.
March -2.6th.     179.  Can  you  foresee  the  future  ?     A.  No,
April  loth.     190.  Why  are  you  not  always  ....  influenced  by  what   I
think  ?     A.  Wife  knows  sometimes  what  you  think.

191.  How  does  wife  know  it?     A.  When  her  brain  is  excited  and  has  not
been  much  tried  before.

192.  But  by  what   means  are  my  thoughts  conveyed  to  her  brain?     A.
Electro-biology.

193.  What  is  electro-biology  ?     A.  No  one  knows.

194.  But  do  not  you  know?     A.  No.     Wife  does  not  know.

195.  What  makes  you  always  call  her  "wife"?     A.  You  always  think  of  wife.

196.  But  I  never  <r#//her  "  wife."     Why  do  you  ?     A.  I  am  nothing  with-
out wife.

200.  That  is  no  answer.  Why  do  you  call  her  so?  A.  Because  she  is  all
a  wife.

My  object  in  quoting  this  large  number  of  questions  and  replies  has  not  been
merely  to  show  the  instantaneous  and  unfailing  transmission  of  thought  from
questioner  to  operator  ;  but,  more  especially,  to  call  attention  to  a  remarkable
characteristic  of  the  answers  given.  These  answers,  consistent  and  invariable
in  their  tenor  from  first  to  last,  did  not  correspond  with  the  opinions  or  expecta-
tions of  either  myself  or  my  wife.  .  .  .  For  such  answers  as  those  numbered  14,
27,  137,  144,  192,  and  194,  we  were  both  of  us  totally  unprepared ;  and  I  may
add  that,  so  far  as  we  were  prepossessed  by  any  opinions  whatever,  these  replies
were  distinctly  opposed  to  such  opinions.  In  a  word,  it  is  simply  impossible  that
these  replies  should  have  been  either  suggested  or  composed  by  the  conscious
intelligence  of  either  of  us.

One  isolated  but  very  interesting  experiment  deserves  to  be  recorded  here.
I  had  a  young  man  reading  with  me  as  a  private  pupil  at  this  time.  On  Feb-
ruary I2th  he  returned  from  his  vacation  ;  and,  on  being  told  of  our  experiments,
expressed  his  incredulity  very  strongly.  I  offered  any  proof  that  he  liked  to
insist  upon,  only  stipulating  that  I  should  see  the  question  asked.  Accordingly,
Mrs.  Newnham  took  her  accustomed  chair  in  my  study,  while  we  went  out  into
the  hall,  and  shut  the  door  behind  us.  He  then  wrote  down  on  a  piece  of  paper :
87.  What  is  the  Christian  name  of  my  eldest  sister?

We  at  once  returned  to  the  study,  and  found  the  answer  already  waiting  for
us:  A.  Mina.

(This  name  was  the  family  abbreviation  of  Wilhelmina:  and  I  should  add
that  it  was  unknown  to  myself.)  .  .  .

We  soon  found  that  my  wife  was  perfectly  unable  to  follow  the  motions  of
the  planchette.  Often  she  only  touched  it  with  a  single  finger;  but  even  with
all  her  fingers  resting  on  the  board  she  never  had  the  slightest  idea  of  what  words
were  being  traced  out.  This  is  important  to  remember,  in  view  of  the  fact  that
five  or  six  questions  were  often  asked  consecutively  without  her  being  told  of
the  subject  that  was  being  pursued.  (Rule  2.)

It  struck  me  that  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to  take  advantage  of  this  pecu-
liarity on  her  part,  to  ask  questions  upon  subjects  that  it  was  impossible  for
her  to  know  anything  about.  ...  I  had  taken  a  deep  interest  in  Masonic
archaeology,  and  I  now  questioned  planchette  on  some  subjects  connected
therewith.


430  APPENDICES  [849  A

February  itfh.  92.  What  is  the  English  of  the  Great  Word  of  the  R.A.  ?
(After  an  interruption,  of  which  I  shall  speak  hereafter,  one  great  word  of  the
Degree,  but  not  the  one  I  meant,  was  written,  very  slowly  and  clearly.)

97.  Is  the  word  truly  genuine,  or  is  it  a  made-up  one  ?    A.  Tried  to  tell :
can't.

98.  By  whom  was  the  word  first  used  ?     A.  Too  hard  work  for  wife.
February  i8M.     112.  What  is  the  translation  of  the  Great  Triple  Word?

A.  (The  first  syllable  of  the  word  in  question  was  written  correctly,  and  then
it  proceeded.)  The  end  unknown.  Three  languages.  Greece.  Egypt.  Syriac.

113.  What  part  of  the  word  is  Greek?    A.  Meaning  unknown.

1 14.  When  was  the  word  first  invented  ?     A.  Told  all  I  know.

115.  Who  are  you  that  know?     (Answer  scrawled  and  illegible.)

116.  Please  repeat  same  answer  legibly?     A.  Manifestation  triune  person.

(Here  follow  questions  117-22,  as  above.)

March  i$th.  125,  126.  What  are  the  three  languages  of  which  the  Great
R.A.  Word  is  composed  ?  A.  Answered  all  I  could  before.

127.  You  said  one  part  of  the  word  was  Greek.     Which  is  it?    A.  Greek,  I
think.

128.  Which  syllable  do  you  think  is  Greek  ?     A.  The  last.

129.  What  is  the  English  translation  of  it  ?     A.  Can't  explain  it.

130.  If  the  last  syllable  be  Greek,  which  is  Egyptian,  as  you  said?    A.  I
cannot  tell  you  more  than  you  know.

131.  But  why,  then,  do  you  say  that  that  syllable  is  Greek  which  7  think
Egyptian  ?    A.  Wife  can't  always  receive  impressions.

(Here  follow  132-39,  as  above.)

March  2.6th.  166.  Of  what  language  is  the  first  syllable  of  the  Great  Triple
R.A.  Word  ?  A.  Don't  know.

167.  Yes,  you  do.     What  are  the  three  languages  of  which  the  word  is  com-
posed?   A.  Greek,  Egypt,  Syriac  first  syllable  (correctly  given),  rest  unknown.

168.  Write  the  syllable  which  is  Syriac.    A.  (First  syllable  correctly  written.)

169.  Write  the  syllable  which  is  Egyptian.     A.  Second.

170.  Can  you  not  write  the  syllable  itself?    A.  Third  Greek.

174.  Write  down  the  word  itself.  A.  (First  three  and  last  two  letters  were
written  correctly,  but  four  incorrect  letters,  partly  borrowed  from  another  word
of  the  same  degree,  came  in  the  middle.)

1 76.  Why  do  you  write  a  word  of  which  I  know  nothing  ?    A.  Wife  tried
hard  to  tell  the  word,  but  could  not  quite  catch  it.

177.  Catch  it  from  whom  ?     A.  Not  quite  sure.

178.  Not  quite  sure  of  what  ?    A.  I  know  nothing.    Wife  doesn't  quite  know.
182.  Write  out  the  prayer  used  at  the  advancement  of  a  Mark  Master  Mason.

A.  Almighty  Ruler  of  the  Universe  and  Architect  of  all  worlds,  we  beseech
Thee  to  accept  this,  our  brother,  whom  we  have  this  day  received  into  our  most
honourable  Company  of  Mark  Master  Masons.  Grant  him  to  be  a  worthy
member  of  our  brotherhood  ;  and  may  he  be  in  his  own  person  a  perfect  mirror
of  all  Masonic  virtues.  Grant  that  all  our  doings  may  be  to  Thy  honour  and
glory,  and  to  the  welfare  of  all  mankind.

This  prayer  was  written  off  instantaneously  and  very  rapidly.  It  is  a  very
remarkable  production  indeed.  For  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  not  members
of  the  craft,  I  may  say  that  no  prayer  in  the  slightest  degree  resembling  it  is
made  use  of  in  the  Ritual  of  any  Masonic  degree ;  and  yet  it  contains  more


:


850A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  431

than  one  strictly  accurate  technicality  connected  with  the  degree  of  Mark
Mason.  My  wife  has  never  seen  any  Masonic  prayers,  whether  in  "  Carlile,"
or  any  other  real  or  spurious  Ritual  of  the  Masonic  Order.

Here,  then,  assuredly,  was  a  formula  composed  by  some  intelligence  totally
distinct  from  the  conscious  intelligence  of  either  of  the  persons  engaged  in  the
experiment.

I  proceeded  to  inquire  as  follows  : —

183.  I  do  not  know  this  prayer.    Where  is  it  to  be  found  ?    A.  Old  American
Ritual.

184.  Where  can  I  get  one  ?     A.  Most  likely  none  in  England.

185.  Can  you  not  write  the  prayer  that  I  make  use  of  in  my  own  Lodge?
A.  No,  I  don't  know  it.

In  these  last  answers  we  see  a  new  moral  element  introduced.  There  is
evasion,  or  subterfuge,  of  a  more  or  less  ingenious  kind ;  and  totally  foreign
to  the  whole  character  and  natural  disposition  of  the  operator.  A  similar
attempt  at  deliberate  invention,  rather  than  plead  guilty  to  total  ignorance*
is  contained  in  the  following  answers: —

May  Jth.  255.  In  what  Masonic  degree  was  the  Triple  Word  first  used  ?
A.  Wife  does  not  know.

256.  Cannot  you  tell  her  ?     A.  How  can  wife  know  what  no  one  else  does  ?

257.  Does  no  one,  then,  know  the  answer  to  this  ?     A.  No  one  knows  now.

258.  What  do  you  mean  by  "now"?     Did  any  one  once  know?    A.  The
last  one  who  knew  died  at  least  twenty  years  ago.

259.  What  was  his  name?     A.  In  America  ;  don't  know  name.

And  again,  May  2ist.  280.  Can  you  write  the  Triple  R.A.  Word  to-night?
A.  Abracadabra.

281.  Wrong  word.     Try  again.     A.  Wife  can't  write  secret  words.

282.  Then  why  did  you  profess  to  write  it  the  other  day  ?     A.  I  only  wrote
what  wife  knew.

283.  But  if  she  knows  it  why  do  you  not  write  it  to-night  ?    A.  You  told  her.

284.  What  did  I  tell  her?     A.  One  day  when  your  influence  over  her  was
very  strong.

(N.B.  The  answer  to  284  is  a  case  of  "arrested"  reply;  i.e.  it  is  a  con-
tinuation of  the  reply  to  283,  without  reference  to  question  284  at  all.)

285.  Then  why  does  she  not  write  it  now  ?     A.  Wife  can't  understand.

286.  Is  it  my  question,  or  the  answer  to  it,  that  she  can't  understand?
A.  Don't  know.

287.  What  is  the  matter  with  you  to-night  ?    A.  You  are  tired  and  so  is  wife.
I  will  conclude  with  a  very  pretty  instance  of  a  mistake  instantly  corrected.

t  was  on  the  same  evening,  May  loth ;  I  had  to  preach  on  the  following  Whit-
Monday,  on  the  occasion  of  laying  a  foundation  stone  with  Masonic  ceremonial,
sc  I  asked  : —

275.  Give  me  a  text  for  Whit-Monday's  sermon.     A.  If  I  go  not  away,  the
Comforter  will  not  come  to  you.

The  selection  of  a  subject  suitable  for  Whitsuntide  is  plainly  the  first  idea
caught  by  the  intelligence  ;  so  I  proceeded  :—

276.  That  will  not  do  for  my  subject.     I  want  a  text  for  the  Monday's  ser-
mon.    A.  Let  brotherly  love  continue.

850  A.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  (1893),  pp.  61-64.

I  had  often  urged  that  attempts  should  be  made  to  imitate  Mr.  and


432  APPENDICES  [850  A

Mrs.  Newnham's  series  of  experiments  in  the  transference  of  an  unseen
question  through  an  automatist's  subliminal  self  to  his  pencil ;  and  I  was  at
length  fortunate  enough  to  find  a  friend — Mr.  R.  H.  Buttemer,  of  Em-
manuel College,  Cambridge,  a  graduate  in  honours  in  Natural  Science-
willing  to  make  a  serious  endeavour  of  this  kind.  Some  perseverance  was
required ;  but  a  friend  of  Mr.  Buttemer's,  Mr.  H.  T.  Green,  having  first
been  several  times  lightly  hypnotised  by  Mr.  Buttemer,  showed  during
some  months  unmistakable  power  as  a  percipient.  I  was  cognisant  of  the
experiments  throughout ;  although  on  the  only  occasion  on  which  I  was
myself  present  Mr.  Green's  mind  was  distracted  by  a  theological  examina-
tion which  he  was  to  pass  next  day,  and  his  pencil  would  write  little  but
names  of  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah.  The  conditions  were  throughout  good ;
the  question  being  written  down  out  of  Mr.  Green's  sight,  and  indications
carefully  avoided.  In  the  last  sitting  Mr.  Green  had  his  back  to  all  the
other  persons  present — which  is,  of  course,  the  right  plan  ; — and  that  sitting
was,  as  will  be  seen,  the  best  of  all.  But  considering  the  nature  of  the
questions  asked,  there  was,  I  think,  little  opportunity  for  unconscious
indications,  even  when  some  of  the  persons  who  knew  the  question  were
within  sight  of  Mr.  Green.  There  was  never  any  contact.  The  selection
of  questions  and  answers  given  below  is  a  nearly  average  sample ; — those
which  are  omitted  being  mainly  questions  on  private  affairs,  where  the
answers  were  necessarily  less  definite  than  numbers  or  letters,  and  where
their  degree  of  correctness  would  need  cumbrous  explanation.  The  best
answer  is  certainly  the  spelling  out  of  John  Bou — from  the  unseen  card.

The  answers  here  classed  as  "  irrelevant  "  were  sometimes  a  reproduc-
tion of  thoughts  likely  to  be  in  the  operator's  mind  (persons  like  Jeroboam
and  Omri  frequently  turning  up)  ;  and  sometimes,  I  think,  represented  im-
perfect efforts  of  the  subliminal  self  to  get  at  the  unseen  question.  In  this
and  other  points  these  experiments  resemble  the  much  more  completely
successful  Newnham  series.  There  was  no  apparent  reason  for  the  cessation
of  Mr.  Green's  power.  He  was  a  healthy  man,  but  had  one  or  two  trifling
ailments  during  the  experiments,  which  seemed  to  check  the  faculty  for
the  time.  Mr.  Green,  Mr.  W.,  and  Mr.  S.  are  known  to  me ;  and  all,  I
think,  have  pursued  the  inquiry  in  a  scientific  spirit.  The  frivolous  and
roundabout  style  of  the  replies  is  very  characteristic  of  automatic  messages
in  their  earlier  stages.  I  now  give  Mr.  Buttemer's  account.

AUTOMATIC  WRITING  EXPERIMENTS  WITH  PLANCHETTE.

The  following  series  of  experiments  were  conducted  at  Cambridge,  the
operator  being  Mr.  Green,  of  Emmanuel  College.  The  agents  (present  during
all  the  experiments  described)  were  Mr.  W.  and  Mr.  Buttemer.  The  series  of
experiments  commenced  on  November  I2th,  1892  :  prior  to  this  Mr.  Green  had
made  one  or  two  more  or  less  successful  attempts  at  automatic  writing,  but  the
obvious  difficulty  of  avoiding  the  chance  of  conscious  interference  where  the
questions  put  were  asked  aloud  had  prevented  the  following  up  of  these  till  the
suggestion  was  made  that  the  questions  should  be  written  down  and  concealed


850A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  433

from  the  operator.  Under  these  conditions  a  trial  was  made  on  the  above
date,  time  2  P.M.,  the  questions  being  known  only  to  the  two  agents.  No  one
else  was  present.

Q.  What  is  number  on  machine  ?  (an  automatic  dice-box,  none  of  the  three
having  seen  the  numbers  on  it).  A.  Give  another.

Q.  Who  is  ill  on  this  staircase  ?  A.  Ke  pike  pike.  (A  man  of  that  name,
Pike,  was  ill,  as  all  were  aware  ;  but  Mr.  Green  had  not  seen  the  question.)
All  then  (Mr.  Green  included)  looked  at  the  dice-box,  and  saw  the  number —
seven — on  it.

Q.  Why  would  you  not  answer  first  question  ?     A.  Seven.

Another  question  was  then  correctly  answered.

Q.  What  is  the  matter  with  H.  T.  Green  ?  Answer  referred  to  previous
question.

Question  was  put  again,  still  without  Mr.  Green  seeing  it.  A.  A  bad  cold.
(Correct.)

Q.  Why  cannot  (Mr.  W.)  write  with  planchette  ?  A.  W ,  you  mean.

There  is  nothing  in  good  health.  Liver  is  not  in  good  condition.

Q.  Whose  liver  is  not  right  ?     A.  i.  (Irrelevant.)     ii.  Nobody  particularly.

Q.  (By  Mr.  Buttemer.)  Where  am  I  going  this  afternoon  ?  After  waiting
some  time  the  answer  was  written  rapidly.  A.  Away,  away,  away.

Mr.  Green  knew  where  I  was  going,  but  did  not  write  a  more  definite
answer  automatically.

Eight  questions  were  put  in  all,  of  which  four  were  answered  immediately
and  correctly,  and  two  after  a  sentence  referring  to  the  previous  question  had
been  written.  The  first  and  third  were  not  answered,  the  answer  to  the  first
being  unknown  to  the  agents,  while  at  the  third  Mr.  Green's  subliminal  con-
sciousness appeared  to  seize  the  opportunity  of  showing  its  just-acquired  know-
ledge of  the  first.  [When  two  answers  are  given,  the  operator  was  simply  told
to  write  again,  after  the  first  irrelevant  answer,  without  being  shown  the
question  ;  except  where  otherwise  stated.]

At  the  next  sitting,  on  the  I4th  November,  Messrs.  W.,  S.,  and  Buttemer
were  present,  while  Mr.  Green  operated  planchette,  as  before.  Six  questions
[the  answers  to  which  were  known  to  the  agents]  were  put  in  the  same  way,
two  being  answered  directly  and  unmistakably,  while  one  was  answered  after
some  irrelevant  writing,  two  incorrectly,  and  the  last  was  not  answered,  the
operator  appearing  tired.

November  ?.Qth.     Agents  and  percipient  as  before.     4  P.M.

The  questions  were  put  in  the  same  way.

Q.  Who  is  J.  O.  F.  M.  ?  (The  initials  being  given  in  the  question,  we
wished  the  name  to  be  written.)  A.  i.  Man.  Dean.  (Rather  illegible.)  ii.
Murray.  (Right.  Dean  of  Emmanuel.)

Q.  Who  is  G.  R.  S.  ?  (Only  S.  knew  who  was  meant.)  A.  Not  S .

(Here  S.  told  the  other  agents  the  name— Smith.)  Mr.  Green  wrote  "  Sleep,"
and  became  drowsy.  He  was  spoken  to,  to  rouse  him,  and  the  question  was
written.

Q.  Why  did  you  become  drowsy  and  write  fi  Sleep  "  ?  A.  H.  T.  Green
(pause)  cannot  help  himself.

Q.  Why?     A.  He  is  tired,  he  is  tired,  he  is  tired.     (Written  very  fast.)

January  31  j/,  1893.  4  P.M.  Agents  as  before,  with  the  addition  of  Mrs.  H.
and  Miss  B.

VOL.    IT.  2   E


434  APPENDICES  [851 A

Q.  How  many  cups  of  tea  did  Miss  B.  have  ?  A.  i.  Cannot  be  ascertained,
ii.  It  was  in  all  two — 2  2  2.  (Correct.)

(When  a  second  answer  was  waited  for,  care  was  taken  that  the  writer
should  glean  no  idea  of  the  question  in  the  interval.)

Q.  What  engraving  is  on  the  wall  over  the  piano?  (It  was  one  of  the
Queen  soon  after  her  marriage.)  A.  i.  You  may  perceive  it  was  so.  (Ap-
parently referring  to  previous  question.)  ii.  It  is  a  girl,  the  daughter  of  a  man.

Q.  Who  was  playing  the  piano  when  the  ladies  came  in  ?  A.  i.  The  clock
hath  stricken  five.  (The  clock  struck  just  as  Mr.  Green  began  to  write.)  ii.
Mr.  S.  (This  was  correct.)

Q.  What  was  it  ?  A.  i.  The  one  that  was  asked  first,  ii.  Something,  iii.
Explain  yourself  more  clearly.

Q.  What  was  S.  playing  when  we  came  in  ?  A.  i.  The  original  one  of  all.
ii.  All  I  can  say  is  "  La  Cigale."  (Correct.)

Two  more  questions  were  answered  correctly,  and  then  the  writer  began
writing  on  a  subject  in  his  mind  at  the  time,  and  four  more  questions  that  were
put  received  no  direct  answers.

February  \%th.  8  P.M.  Mrs.  H.,  Miss  B.,  Mr.  and  Miss  M.  present,  in
addition  to  Mr.  Green,  and  Messrs.  S.,  W.,  and  Buttemer.

Mr.  Green,  as  usual,  operated  planchette,  and  on  this  occasion  sat  with  his
back  to  all  the  other  persons  present.

Q.  (from  Mr.  M.)  What  was  I  doing  this  afternoon?  A.  i.  the  sun

(all  else  illegible),  ii.  Enjoying  the  fresh  air  of  heaven.

Q.  What  was  Mr.  Rogers  doing  in  Cambridge?  A.  i.  (Irrelevant,  or  pos-
sibly connected  vaguely  with  the  question.)  ii.  Ask  another,  but  Mr.  Rogers
came  up  on  important  business  connected  with  the  Lodge.  (Correct.)

Q.  Where  has  Mrs.  M.  gone  ?  A.  i.  (Irrelevant.)  ii.  Far,  far  away,  but
more  next  time.  iii.  Her  mother  has  gone  to — oh,  what  a  happy  place  is
London  !  iv.  All  change  here  for  Bletchley.  (Mrs.  M.  had  possibly  passed
this  station  on  her  journey.)

Q.  Who  has  won  the  Association  Match  to-day?  A.  i.  (Illegible.)  ii.  Oh,
ye  simple  ones,  how  long  will  ye  love  simplicity?  Why,  Oxford,  of  course.
[This  fact  was  known  to  some  persons  in  the  room,  but  not  to  Mr.  Green.]

One  of  the  company  then  suggested  the  attempt  to  get  the  name  on  a  visiting
card  transmitted,  and  the  question  was  written,  "  Write  name  on  card."  Mr.
Green  did  not  know  that  this  experiment  was  about  to  be  tried,  and  the  card
was  picked  from  a  pile  at  random.  The  name  was  John  B.  Bourne.  A  sen-
tence was  written  by  Mr.  Green,  which  proved  to  be,  "  Think  of  one  letter  at  a
time  and  then  see  what  will  happen."  We  did  so.  A.  i.  J  for  Jerusalem,  0
for  Omri,  H  for  Honey,  and  N  for  Nothing,  ii.  B  for  Benjamin,  O  for  Olive,
U  for  Unicorn.  (The  remaining  letters  were  given  incorrectly.)

Q.  How  many  of  the  Society's  books  are  here  ?  (There  were  two  volumes
of  Proceedings  on  the  table.)  A.  i.  (Irrelevant.)  ii.  The  answer  is  100-98.

Q.  What  is  2  X  3  ?  Two  irrelevant  answers  were  given,  possibly  owing  to  a
slight  disturbance  in  the  room.  The  third  answer  was—"  When  that  noise  has
ceased  and  S.  has  finished  knocking  the  lamp  over  I  say  6."

A  trial  shortly  after  this,  February  iQth,  gave  no  results,  and  the  power  of
automatic  writing  appears  to  have  entirely  left  Mr.  Green  for  the  present.

851  A.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  44~48-

The  following  account,    dated   Thoraes    House,  Wakefield,  January


851  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  435

30th,  1893,  is  signed  by  Lady  Mabel  Howard;  her  husband,  Mr.  Henry
Howard,  of  Greystoke  Castle,  Westmoreland,  attesting  the  facts  which  lie
within  his  cognisance.  Some  corroborations,  and  some  comments  of  my
own,  are  added  in  brackets.

i.  I  began  to  write  automatically  every  now  and  then  when  a  young  girl,
as  some  relations  of  mine  were  in  the  habit  of  doing  so.  I  do  not,  however,
remember  any  of  the  messages  until  I  was  eighteen,  when  one  day  a  girl  friend
asked  me  as  a  joke,  "  Who  wished  to  marry  her  ?  "  My  pencil  wrote  two
initials  which  had  no  meaning  for  me.  The  girl  was  very  angry,  as  though  the
writing  implied  that  she  was  fated  to  marry  this  man.  She  told  me  nothing;
but  some  years  afterwards  a  man  with  these  initials  told  me  that  he  had  wished
to  marry  this  lady  at  just  that  time.  [The  transference  of  an  idea  latent  in  the
agent's  mind — to  the  exclusion  of  the  idea  which  he  wishes  to  have  transferred
— is,  of  course,  a  frequent  phenomenon  in  these  experiments.]

2.  Some  time  after  my  marriage  (1885)  there  was  a  burglary  at  Netherby
Hall,  in  Cumberland,  a  few  valuable  jewels  being  stolen.  The  robbers  were
caught  three  or  four  days  later,  but  the  jewels  were  not  found.  Next  Sunday
[apparently  November  ist,  1885,  see  below],  I  was  asked  by  some  friends  to
write  where  the  jewels  were.  I  wrote,  "  In  the  river,  under  the  bridge  at
Tebay."  This  was  very  unlikely,  and  had  never  been  suggested,  so  far  as  I
know,  by  any  one.  Every  one  laughed  at  this  ;  but  the  jewels  were  found  there.
[The  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  J.  Cropper,  of  Tolson  Hall,  Kendal,  corroborates  as  follows,
in  February  1893:  "We  were  staying  at  Greystoke  just  after  the  capture  of
the  Netherby  burglars,  and  some  questions  about  the  burglary  were  answered
by  Lady  Mabel's  pencil.  I  am  absolutely  certain  that  in  answer  to  the  question
'  Where  are  the  jewels  ?  '  the  pencil  wrote  '  In  the  river.'  I  think  that  in  answer
to  a  further  question  it  added  '  Under  the  bridge,'  but  I  am  not  so  certain  of
this.  I  am  perfectly  certain  that  it  went  on  to  say  that  the  fourth  man,  who
never  was  caught,  was  then  'in  Carlisle,'  and  that  it  also  gave  his  name.  (The
fourth  man  was  some  time  after  suspected  to  have  been  a  local  man. — M.  H.)
My  husband,  who  was  also  present,  is  quite  sure  about  the  words  '  under  the
bridge.' — EDITH  E.  CROPPER."]

[From  the  Carlisle  Express  and  Examiner,  October  3ist,  1885,  it  appears
that  two  of  the  burglars  were  captured  at  Tebay  Station.  The  guard  saw  them
conceal  themselves  in  a  truck,  and  telegraphed  in  advance  for  assistance.  The
third  man  escaped,  but  seems  to  have  crept  back  to  the  train,  for  he  was  sub-
sequently caught  at  Lancaster,  as  he  was  quickly  making  for  a  London  train.
It  was  not  in  the  least  known  where  the  jewels  were  (a  fourth  man  having  got
away),  and  the  finding  of  the  first  jewel  near  Tebay  Station,  close  to  the  water
side  (reported  in  same  paper  November  7th),  was  accidental.  This  discovery,
of  course,  caused  search  to  be  made  in  the  river,  where  the  jewels  were  found
"near  the  railway  bridge,"  more  than  a  month  later.  (Same  paper,  December
I9th.)  There  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt  that  the  writing  was  on  November  ist.
Lady  Mabel  Howard,  writing  from  Lyulph's  Tower,  Penrith,  May  5th,  1893,
is  quite  certain  of  this  :  "  It  was  immediately  after  the  men  were  caught,  and
before  any  jewel  at  all  was  found.  This  all  will  assert — the  Bullers,  Croppers,
my  brother  and  husband — for  all  five  of  us  were  local  people,  and  looking  out
for  every  fresh  detail  about  it,  and  only  the  capture  had  taken  place  when  the
pencil  wrote."]


436  APPENDICES  [851  A

3.  On  the  same  night  I  wrote   that  my  sister  would   be  engaged  to   be
married   in   September   1887.     At  the   end  of   September  1887  she  became
engaged  to  a  gentleman  of  whom  there  had  been  no  idea  at  the  time.     [It  is,  of
course,  conceivable  that  the  prediction,  known  to  this  lady,  may  have  influenced
the  date  of  the  event.]

4.  At  nearly  the  same  date  some  connections  of  mine  who  had  let  a  house,
the  lease  of  which  was  expiring,  were  expecting  to  hear  whether  any  damage
had  been  done,  but  did  not  speak  of  any  particular  possibility.     I  wrote  that
nothing  was  injured  except  a  particular  table  in  a  particular  spot.     Next  day
they  heard  that  this  particular  table,  and  this  alone,  had  been  injured.

[Miss  Buller  corroborates  and  expands  this  statement  as  follows: —

36  GREEN  STREET,  PARK  LANE,  W.,  April  26th,  1893.

The  following  incident  happened  when  I  was  staying  at  Greystoke  more
than  a  dozen  years  ago  [discrepancy  as  to  date],  but  I  have  often  told  the
story  since,  and  to  the  best  of  my  recollection  the  facts  were  these : —

On  being  asked  what  damage  our  tenants  had  done,  Lady  Mabel  Howard's
pencil  replied:  "They  have  broken  the  table  and  a  chair,"  and  added,
"the  table  has  been  mended."  On  reaching  our  house  and  asking  the  same
question  of  our  housemaid,  she  replied  that  a  table  in  the  drawing-room  (the
only  one  of  its  kind)  had  been  broken,  but  had  been  mended,  and  one  of  the
kitchen  chairs  had  been  broken.  Nothing  else  in  the  way  of  furniture  had
been  injured.  HENRIETTA  J.  BULLER.]

5.  Shortly  afterwards  I  went  for  some  winter  months  to  St.  Moritz.     For
some  reason  or  other  the  answers  were  particularly  good  there.     One  day  a
lady  living  in  quite  a  different  part  of  the  huge  hotel,  and  on  the  fourth  floor,
while  we  were  on  the  first  floor,  missed  a  valuable  object  which   she  had
bought  as  a  prize  for  tobogganing.     I  knew  nothing  of  the  circumstances,  but
my  hand  wrote  that  the  object  had  been  taken  by  a  light-haired  young  waiter
called  Richard.     I  knew  of  no  such  waiter,  as  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  our
part  of  the  hotel.     But  on  mentioning  this  answer  to  the  lady  in  question  she
said   that  there  was  in  fact  a  young  light-haired  waiter  called   Richard  who
waited  on  her  floor;  and  that  she  had  suspected  him.     My  hand  had  written
where  the  object  was  hidden;  but  the  lady  would  not  have  search  made.

6.  A  Mr.  Huth,  who  was  staying  at  our  hotel,  was  leaving  the  next  day  for
Paris,  and  had  arranged  to  dine  the  day  after  with  a  friend,  a  young  doctor
attached  to  the  Embassy  in  Paris,  from  whom  he  had  just  received  an  invita-
tion.    He  asked  me  to  predict  something  about  his  journey.     My  hand  wrote
words  to  this  effect:  "You  will  have  an  accident  on  your  journey;  and  you
will  not  see  your  friend,  and  you  cannot  see  him."     He  derided  this,  as  the
arrangement  with  the  friend  had  just  been  made.     As  he  went  to  Chur  next
day  by  sleigh  his  sleigh  was  overturned,  and  his  journey  was  thus  delayed  for
a  day.     When  he  got  to  Paris  he  found  that  his  friend  was  dead.

[Mr.  Huth  independently  corroborates  and  adds  to  this  account  as
follows : —

OAKFIELD  LODGE,  HUDDERSFIELD,  April  \6th,  1893.

In  March  1889  I  was  staying  at  St.  Moritz  (Engadine),  where  I  met  with
a  very  serious  accident  tobogganing.  Although  still  crippled,  I  decided  to
return  home,  and  on  the  morning  of  my  departure  the  weather  was  brilliantly
fine.  I  asked  Lady  Mabel  Howard's  pencil,  more  in  joke  than  anything  else,


851  A]  TO     CHAPTER    VIII  437

what  sort  of  a  journey  I  should  have.  The  pencil  promptly  replied  that  I
should  have  an  awful  journey  and  meet  with  an  accident.  I  then  asked
whether  I  should  meet  and  dine  with  any  friend  in  Paris.  I  asked  this
question  because  I  had  arranged  to  dine  with  a  friend  of  mine,  a  Dr.  Davies,
who  was  living  there,  to  talk  over  some  theatricals  he  was  to  get  up  at  the
British  Embassy.  The  pencil  at  once  replied  that  I  should  neither  meet  nor
dine  with  any  one  I  knew.  Knowing  of  my  arrangement  and  incredulous  as
to  this  reply,  I  repeated  my  question,  with  the  same  result.  I  then  asked
what  day  I  should  get  back  to  England,  having  decided  in  my  own  mind  to
return  on  the  Friday.  The  pencil  at  once  answered  "  On  Thursday."

On  the  summit  of  the  Julier  Pass  the  weather  suddenly  changed  from
bright  sunshine  to  a  perfect  hurricane  of  wind,  snow,  and  sleet,  which  com-
pletely blinded  us,  and  the  snow  was  so  thick  we  could  not  see  ten  yards  in
front  of  us.  Our  driver  missed  the  track,  the  sleigh  upset,  and  we  were  all
thrown  out  on  to  the  snow,  and  it  was  three  hours  before  we  were  in  compara-
tive safety.  On  my  arrival  in  Paris  I  found  no  word  from  my  friend  Dr.
Davies,  and  on  inquiry  at  his  rooms  I  learnt  that  he  had  died  from  typhoid
fever  ten  days  previously.  I  neither  dined  with  nor  met  any  one  I  knew  whilst
in  Paris,  and  I  returned  to  England  a  day  sooner  than  I  had  intended  in  con-
sequence of  my  friend's  death,  and  it  was  only  upon  my  arrival  in  London  that
I  remembered  it  was  Thursday,  the  day  foretold  by  the  pencil.

HARRY  HUTH.]

7.  In  1888  another  girl  friend  of  mine  asked  when  she  was  to  be  engaged
to  be  married.     My  hand  wrote :  "  In  March  1890."     She  became  engaged  in
that  month  to  a  man  of  whom  there  had  been  no  idea  at  the  time.     [The  lady
in  question,  Mrs.  Lawson,  writing  from  Greystoke  Castle,  February  1893,  con-
firms and  enlarges  this  statement  as  follows :  "  I  was  at  Greystoke  in  February
1888,  and  Lady  Mabel  Howard  was  writing  with  her  pencil,  which  said  that  I
should  be  engaged  to  be  married  in  March  1890,  and  it  also  said  that  I  should
not  be  married  until  the  following  year.     I  was  engaged  to  be  married  on
March  27th,  1890,  and  it  was  all  settled  that  I  should  be  married  within  six
weeks ;  but  most  unforeseen  circumstances  arose,  and  my  marriage  did  not
take  place  until  April  1891. — CAMILLA  LAWSON."]

8.  I   have  never  tried  experiments  in  thought-transference,  such  as  those
recorded  in  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings.     But  I  have   no  doubt  that  words   and
ideas  do  pass  without  speech  from  my  husband's  mind  into  mine.     I  have
specially  remarked  this  a  propos  of  bye-elections,  when  I  feel  certain  that  I
have  never  consciously  known  the  names  of  the  candidates.     Many  times  my
hand  has  written  those  names  (when  known  to  him)  truly,  and  sometimes  it  has
predicted  results  of  elections  with  an  accuracy  which  seemed  to  both  of  us  not
to  be  the  result  of  chance.     In  one  case,  where  a  gentleman  named  Nanney
was  standing,  of  whom  I  was  quite  sure  that  I  had  never  heard,  my  hand  kept
writing  "  Goat,  Goat."     In  this  case  my  husband  was  not  present,  but  some  one
else  who  was  present  knew  the  name.

MABEL  HOWARD.
"  Correct,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned. — HENRY  HOWARD."

[These  last  instances  must,  according  to  our  canons  of  evidence,  be  reckoned
merely  as  revivals  of  subliminal  memory.  Names  which  have  been  printed  in
newspapers  which  have  been  lying  about  must  be  taken  as  having  possibly


433  APPENDICES  [851

fallen  within  the  field  of  at  least  unconscious  vision.  The  emergence  of  an
unconsciously  observed  name  Nanney  in  the  grotesque  form  Goat  would  thus
be  parallel  to  the  emergence  of  the  unconsciously  observed  word  Bouillon  in
the  grotesque  form  Verbascum  Thapsus,  mentioned  in  Proceedings,  vol.  viii.
P-  455-]

Writing  later,  from  P Park,  April  iSth,  1893,  Lady  Mabel  adds :—

9.  The  H.  girls  asked  what  entertainment  they  should  go  to  directly  on
arriving  in  London.  The  pencil  answered,  "  Lady  C."  This  puzzled  us  all,  as  no
one  knew  of  an  entertainment  to  be  given  next  week.  At  last,  as  it  continued
writing  "  Lady  C.,"  we  gave  it  up,  thinking  it  must  mean  dining  at  home,  Lady
C.  meaning  [their  mother].  That  very  evening,  eight  hours  after,  a  letter
arrived  from  [Lady  W.  G.]  saying  Lady  Carrington  wished  to  know  if  the  H.'s
could  dance  the  minuet  at  her  house  on  the  27th.  They  will  arrive  in  London
on  the  25th.  [From  a  later  letter  it  appears  that  the  Ladies  H.  knew  that  this
engagement  impended,  but  believed  that  it  would  be  much  later  in  the  season,
"and  were  much  surprised  themselves  at  receiving  the  letter."]

ro.  I  have  myself  [F.  W.H.M.]  succeeded  in  getting  two  correct  answers  to
questions  absolutely  beyond  Lady  Mabel's  knowledge.  From  Thornes  House
I  was  asked  to  luncheon  at  the  house  of  a  gentleman  whom  I  knew  only  by
correspondence,  and  of  whose  home  and  entourage  the  rest  of  the  party  knew
absolutely  nothing.  On  my  return  I  asked,  "  How  many  people  sat  down  to
luncheon  ?  "  The  answer  was  "  Six,"  which  was  right.  "  What  was  the  name
of  the  gentleman,  not  my  host,  with  whom  I  sat  and  talked  after  luncheon  ? "
The  pencil  wrote  MO,  and  then  began  to  scrawl.  The  name  was  Moultrie.
It  was  impossible  that  Lady  Mabel  should  have  had  any  kind  of  notion  that
a  gentleman  of  that  name  would  have  been  present  in  a  group  of  which  she
knew  nothing  whatever.  But  here  the  impulse  to  write  seemed  spent,  and
a  few  further  questions  were  answered  by  erroneous  words  or  mere  scrawls.

II.  The  following  statement,  dated  Downes,  Crediton,  Devonshire,  April
8th,  1893,  is  signed  by  Sir  Redvers  Buller,  K.C.B.,  and  by  Miss  Dorothy
Howard  (daughter  of  Lady  Audrey  Buller)  : —

"  Lady  Mabel  Howard  was  stopping  with  us  this  week.  She  was  writing  with
her  pencil  just  after  arriving.  Some  one  asked :  •  Where  is  Don  ? '  The  pencil
immediately  answered,  *  He  is  dead.'  Lady  Mabel  then  asked  who  Don  was,
and  was  told  that  he  was  a  dog.  No  one  in  the  room  knew  that  he  was  dead  ;
but  on  inquiry  the  next  day,  it  was  found  that  it  was  so.  One  of  the  party  then
asked  how  many  fish  would  be  caught  in  the  river  the  next  day.  The  pencil
at  once  wrote  three,  which  was  the  number  obtained  the  next  day.

"  A  little  girl  in  the  house,  who  attends  a  school  in  London,  asked  who
was  her  greatest  friend  at  this  school.  The  pencil  answered  Mary,  which
was  again  a  fact  absolutely  unknown  to  Lady  Mabel.

"  DOROTHY  E.  HOWARD.
"REDVERS  BULLER."

The  following  is  another  case  which  I  quote  from  the  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  395.  Lady  Vane  writes  : —

HUTTON-IN-THE-FOREST,  April  8tA,  1894.

About  a  month  ago  I  lost  a  book,  a  manuscript  one,  relating  to  this  house.
I  thought  I  had  left  it  in  my  writing-table  in  my  sitting-room,  and  intended
to  add  a  note  about  some  alterations  just  completed — but  next  day  the  book


851A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  439

had  vanished.  I  looked  through  every  drawer  and  cupboard  in  my  room  and
then  asked  Sir  Henry  to  do  the  same,  which  he  did  twice.  I  also  made  the
head  housemaid  turn  everything  out  of  them  and  helped  her  to  do  so — so  that
four  thorough  searches  were  made  ;  but  in  vain.  We  also  looked  in  the  gallery
and  library  (the  only  other  rooms  to  which  the  book  had  been  taken)  and  could
not  find  it.  On  March  28th  I  asked  Lady  Mabel  Howard  to  write  about  it.
She  wrote,  "It  is  in  the  locked  cupboard  in  the  bookcase — hidden  behind
the  books."

I  said,  "  Then  it  must  be  in  the  library,  because  the  bookcases  are  locked,"
and  Lady  Mabel  wrote,  "Not  in  the  library."  I  said,  "Then  it  must  be  in
the  ante-room  in  the  cupboard,"  and  asked  if  /  should  find  it.  Lady  Mabel
wrote,  "No,  send  Sir  Henry."  I  asked,  "Will  he  find  it? "and  she  wrote,
"  Of  course."

Still  thinking  it  could  only  be  the  ante-room  or  the  library — on  account  of
the  locked  cupboard  and  bookcase,  I  asked,  "  Which  end  of  the  room  ?  "

Lady  Mabel  wrote,  "The  tapestry  end."  I  asked,  "Is  it  on  the  window
side  of  the  room  or  on  the  other  ?  "  and  she  wrote,  "  The  other."  A  friend
staying  in  the  house  looked  in  the  bookcases  in  the  library  at  the  tapestry  end,
and  in  the  cupboard  in  the  ante-room  (I  had  met  with  an  accident  and  could
not  go  myself)  and  could  not  find  the  book,  so  we  gave  it  up.

On  April  5th  Sir  Henry  was  in  my  sitting-room  and  suddenly  said,  "  I  have
an  idea !  Lady  Mabel  meant  this  room.  There  is  the  bookcase  and  the  locked
cupboard  in  it — and  the  wall  outside  the  door  is  covered  with  tapestry."  I
said,  "You  have  looked  in  that  cupboard  twice,  and  so  have  I  and  the  house-
maid, and  the  book  is  not  there — but  look  again  if  you  like."  Sir  Henry  un-
locked the  door  of  the  cupboard  and  took  out  all  the  books  (there  were  not
more  than  half-a-dozen)  and  put  them  on  the  floor.  The  last  he  put  back  into
the  cupboard  was  a  scrap-book  for  newspaper  cuttings,  and  as  it  was  rather
dark  at  6.30  P.M.  he  could  not  see  the  name  on  the  back  and  therefore  opened
it  to  see  what  it  was,  and  the  lost  manuscript  book  fell  out.

Having  searched  this  very  small  cupboard  four  times  previously,  either  of  us
would  have  been  ready  to  swear  that  this  book  was  not  in  it.

(Signed)  MARGARET  VANE.

HENRY  VANE.

Writing  to  me  about  this  case  on  April  loth,  from  Greystoke  Castle,
Penrith,  Lady  Mabel  Howard  says  : —

The  day  I  got  your  letter  I  got  a  special  letter  sent  over  from  Hutton  to  say
my  pencil  had  found  a  valuable  book  that  Lady  Vane  had  lost.  We  therefore
walked  over  there  on  Sunday  and  I  asked  her  to  write  it  out.  It  is  so  very
curious,  quite  the  best  thing  I  think  the  pencil  ever  has  done — as  it  said,  "  in
the  cupboard  in  the  bookcase,"  and  they  couldn't  think  where  it  meant— a
cupboard  in  a  bookcase— and  this  little  cupboard  is  a  cupboard  in  the  middle
let  into  glass  bookcases  on  either  side.  I  had  no  idea  of  the  cupboards  or
tapestries  there,  and  the  pencil  wrote  all  this  in  the  sandwich  paper  at  luncheon
on  the  Point-to-Point  racecourse.

So  curious,  too,  the  pencil  said,  "Send  Sir  Henry,"  twice.  It  was  the
merest  chance  finding  it,  as  it  fell  out  of  this  scrap-book,  and  was  hidden
behind  the  other  books.


440  APPENDICES  [852  A

In  another  letter,  dated  April  i4th,  Lady  Mabel  Howard  writes  :—

I  saw  Lady  Vane  on  February  24th,  when  the  book  had  not  been  lost.  I
did  not  see  her  again  till  Easter  Monday.  The  moment  I  got  upstairs  she
exclaimed,  "I  want  you  to  find  a  book  for  me  that  is  lost."  No  pencil  nor
paper  was  forthcoming,  so  she  said,  "  Never  mind,  write  when  you  get
home,"  but  I  forgot,  and  it  was  two  days  after  at  the  Point- to-Point  race
that  she  asked  me  again,  and  we  wrote  it  in  the  paper  the  sandwiches  had
been  in.

I  was  abroad  all  this  March  and  it  was  then  that  there  were  repairs  being
done  in  the  house,  and  Lady  Vane  took  the  book  down  from  where  she  kept
it  (I  don't  know  where)  and  having  entered  the  repairs  into  it,  put  it  down,
and  from  that  moment  it  was  never  seen  again.  I  must  have  been  at  Florence
when  the  book  was  lost.  MABEL  HOWARD.

Are  we  to  describe  this  as  a  knowledge  of  past,  of  present,  or  of
future  ?  Or  may  we  say  that  a  telaesthetic  perception  of  this  kind  is  not
strictly  conditioned  by  time,  but  includes  some  retrogressive  knowledge
as  to  how  things  reached  their  present  condition,  and  also  some  pre-
gressive  inference  as  to  their  coming  development?  The  element  of
forecast  in  the  present  case, — the  indication  that  it  would  be  Sir
Henry  Vane  who  would  find  the  book, — is  in  itself  very  slight;  but  it
cannot  be  ignored  when  we  compare  other  messages  of  Lady  Mabel
Howard's.  See,  for  instance,  the  messages  to  Mr.  Huth,  where  the
element  of  precognition  was  strongly  marked.  In  this  present  case,  the
whereabouts  of  the  book  can  hardly  have  been  supraliminally  known  to
any  human  being ;  since  the  workman  or  servant  whose  hands  may  have
slipped  it  into  the  larger  book  was  probably  unaware  of  what  it  was,
or  even  of  his  own  unthinking  action  itself.  If,  however,  it  were  Sir
Henry  or  Lady  Vane  who  unthinkingly  placed  the  small  book  in  the
larger  one — and  this  does  not  seem  quite  impossible — Lady  Mabel's
knowledge  might  have  been  drawn  telepathically  from  their  subliminal
memory.

852  A.     From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  15-16.

The  following  incident  seems  to  have  been  carefully  watched  and
recorded,  and  was  published,  with  names  of  guarantors,  immediately
after  the  event.  It  is  extracted  from  a  pamphlet,  entitled  Spiritualisms  :
Faits  Curieux,  par  Paul  Auguez  (Dentu,  Paris,  1858)  : —

On  December  loth,  1857,  we  addressed  the  following  letter  to  M.  Morin,
vice-president  of  the  Societd  du  Mesme'risme,  asking  him  to  keep  the  letter
sealed  until  the  complete  fulfilment  of  the  sad  event  of  which  we  related  the
prediction.  The  said  prediction  was  as  clearly  expressed  as  it  was  wonderful
in  the  extraordinary  method  of  production.  We  retained  a  copy  of  this  letter
word  for  word.  The  original,  stamped  with  the  postmark,  has  been  returned
to  us,  after  the  verification  of  its  date  and  contents,  under  the  following  cir-
cumstances : —


852  A]  TO     CHAPTER    VIII  441

PARIS,  December  loth,  1857.

"  SIR> — About  a  year  ago,  after  a  fruitless  experiment  in  hydromancy,1  a
young  lady,  who  was  with  us  making  these  experiments,  suddenly  saw  a  very
strange  scene  reflected  on  the  polished  surface  of  a  glass  into  which  she  had
been  looking  a  few  minutes  before.  .  .  .

"  She  saw,  she  said,  a  room  containing  two  beds.  In  one  of  these  she  saw
quite  distinctly  a  sick  person,  whose  distorted  features  betokened  the  approach
of  death.

"  Around  this  bed  were  standing  several  people,  amongst  whom  she  could
distinguish  a  young  woman  and  two  children,  all  three  dressed  in  black.

"  Being  much  astonished  at  this  vision,  and  not  knowing  with  what  to
connect  it,  we  asked  the  experimenter  if  these  persons  were  known  to  her.
She  replied  at  once  that  the  dying  man  seemed  to  her  to  be  a  friend  of  ours,
M.  X.,  an  employe*  in  a  government  office,  and  that  the  three  persons  dressed
in  black  must  be  his  wife  and  his  two  sons.

"  Although  this  appeared  very  strange,  we  did  not  attach  much  importance
to  the  matter,  for  M.  X.  had  a  strong  constitution,  and  at  that  time  was  in
good  health.

"  However,  about  three  months  ago — that  is  to  say,  about  nine  months  after
the  vision  of  which  we  have  given  an  account — M.  X.  was  suddenly  attacked
by  acute  bronchitis  and  congestion  of  the  lungs ;  but  although  his  illness  was
pronounced  by  the  doctor  to  be  rather  serious,  it  did  not  cause  any  great
uneasiness.

"  Then  the  fatal  prediction  came  into  our  minds,  and  we  were  very  anxious
about  the  condition  of  our  friend,  which  became  more  and  more  distressing.

"  A  few  weeks  ago  the  disease  assumed  a  more  serious  character,  and  as
the  arrangement  of  the  apartments  in  which  he  was  living  made  it  impossible
to  nurse  him  efficiently,  he  determined  to  take  advantage  of  the  privilege
attached  to  his  position  as  government  official,  and  was  moved  to  Val-de-
Grace.

"  At  the  time  of  writing  this  letter,  the  invalid,  finding  himself  somewhat
better,  has  just  been  taken  to  the  house  of  a  relation,  where  he  hopes  to  stay
during  his  convalescence.

"  At  the  same  time,  the  disease  has  not  diminished  in  severity,  although  it
is  stationary.  This  is  how  matters  stand  to-day,  December  loth,  1857.

"  As  far  as  we  are  concerned,  however,  the  prediction  is  in  some  measure
fulfilled.  Indeed,  who  would  ever  have  thought  that  a  young  man,  in  full
strength,  would,  in  such  a  short  time,  be  in  such  a  state  as  he  is  to-day?  Who
would  have  supposed  that  any  one  who  lived  in  such  comfortable  circumstances
as  our  unfortunate  friend  would  be  obliged  by  the  force  of  circumstances  to
have  himself  taken  to  a  hospital  ?  Who  could  have  foreseen  that  his  family,
who  had  been  seen  dressed  in  black,  should  happen  just  at  that  time  to  be  in
mourning  for  a  relation  who  had  died  a  short  time  previously  ?

"  We  must  add  further  that  since  M.  X.  was  moved  to  the  house  of  his  re-
lation, after  attempts  to  obtain  communications  by  means  of  a  table,  for  several
evenings,  a  message,  giving  the  name  of  M.  X.,  appeared  spontaneously.
Among  other  things  said,  in  reply  to  questions  asked,  were  the  words :
1  Death  warning!  .  .  .'

1  Divination  by  means  of  pictures,  which  are  delineated  in  the  water  before  the  eyes
of  the  seer  [i.e.  a  species  of  crystal-gazing].


442  APPENDICES  [852  B

"  We  heard  later  on  that  at  the  time  when  these  manifestations  occurred,
M.  X.  was  lying  in  a  state  of  lethargic  stupor,  in  consequence  of  the  doses  of
opium  given  him  to  induce  sleep."

M.  X.  died  a  month  after  this  letter  was  sent.  It  was  read  by  us  in  the
presence  of  MM.  le  Baron  du  Potet,  Petit  d'Ormoy,  and  Morin,  who,  after
having  considered  all  the  circumstances,  and  having  verified  the  date  of  the
postmark,  December  nth,  certified  that  the  details  therein  contained  were
absolutely  accurate.

852  B.  The  following  are  extracts  from  a  translation  l  of  a  paper
on  "  Telepathic  Perceptions  by  Means  of  Automatic  Writing,"  by
M.  Bonatti,  which  appeared  in  the  Rivista  di  Studi  Psichici,  July  1895.

I  began  to  write  automatically  with  the  hand  of  a  medium  resting  on  mine,
but  soon  I  was  able  to  write  alone.  The  communications  were  at  first  of  a
spiritualistic  character,  and  the  writing  was  a  fair  imitation  of  that  of  the
defunct  who  appeared  to  be  present,  and  whom  I  had  known  in  life.  However,
I  was  acquainted  with  their  writing.  I  was  generally  advised  to  work  and
study  much ;  my  counsellor  was  interested  in  my  moral  life,  and  was  a  more
attentive  friend  than  any  I  have  found  in  flesh  and  blood.  Soon  after  I  was
obsessed  by  a  lying  and  frivolous,  but  not  wicked,  personality,  who  displayed  a
great  passion  for  art.  This  personality  was  only  useful  to  me  on  that  point,
giving  me  advice,  and,  by  means  of  automatic  drawing,  greatly  developing  my
memory  of  drawing  and  powers  of  conception.  I  did  not  write  for  several
months,  in  order  to  free  myself  of  this  obsession.  Meanwhile  I  enlarged  my
knowledge  of  psychical  matters ;  and  when  I  began  to  write  again  I  succeeded
in  convincing  the  communicating  personality  that  it  might  be  an  emanation
from  my  own  subconscious  self.  After  this  it  called  itself  my  Secondo.

I  examined  this  Secondo  to  see  if  it  possessed  any  supernormal  powers,  and
discovered  some.  It  continued  to  give  me  useful  advice,  and  strengthened  my
love  of  art.

When  I  write  automatically  I  do  not  know  what  the  communication  will  be;
sometimes  I  guess  after  a  few  words,  but  I  often  guess  wrongly,  and  write
something  altogether  unlike  my  guess.

I  enjoy  perfectly  good  health,  and  am  able  to  endure  constant  outdoor
exercise  without  fatigue.  As  far  as  I  know,  I  am  psychically  normal.  I  retain
all  my  normal  faculties  when  writing  automatically.

The  following  are  cases  of  telepathy  from  persons  sleeping  or  dreaming
at  a  greater  or  less  distance,  their  impressions  being  revealed  to  me  by
automatic  writing.  The  first  of  these  cases  was  a  great  surprise  to  me,  as  I  had
never  heard  of  similar  ones.  Up  to  February  i/th,  1893,  I  have  had  very  few
failures,  and  these  took  place  when  I  eagerly  desired  the  phenomenon ;  whilst
the  successes  happened  spontaneously.  Every  time  that  I  tried  to  receive  a
telepathic  communication,  it  was  false.  The  following  are  cases  of  the  com-
munication of  dreams,  and  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  dreams  are  sometimes
not  remembered  at  all,  and  often  remembered  only  in  part.

October  ^th,   1892,    11    P.M.— I   wrote    automatically,    "Go Ang —

Goodbye."     "  The  man  who  has  been  my  murderer  will  not  fare  well."
next  day   "  Go Ang "  told  me  that  during  the  past   night  she  had

1  The  greater  part  of  this  translation  appeared  in  full  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R-.
vol.  xi.  pp.  477-481.


852B]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  443

dreamt  of  me  and  of  a  man  who  had,  in  truth,  been  for  her  a  very  murderer.

In  her  dream  she  intended  to  revenge  herself  on  him.  Ang Go lived

about  three  kilometres  from  where  I  was  writing.

October  8M,  9.30  P.M. — I  wrote,  "  Hugo,  I  am  speaking  with  you."  And
then  a  dream  not  worth  reporting.  "  I  also  am  speaking— I  am  Guido.  I  am

speaking  with  my  grandmother."  And  then  another  dream.  "  Go Ang ,

I  am  speaking  to  G .  I  am  telling  him  that  I  wish  him  to  pay  me ;  but  I

don't  ask  for  money,  but  for  clothes."

Hugo  and  Guido  are  my  two  nephews,  who  live  in  a  village  five  kilometres
from  me.  The  first  is  ten  and  the  other  twelve  years  old.  When  asked  the
next  day,  with  the  greatest  care  not  to  suggest  anything  to  them,  of  what  they
had  dreamt  the  previous  night,  the  first  answered  that  he  had  dreamt  that
•people  were  trying  to  kill  me,  and  that  he  remembered  nothing  else  ;  the  other
told  me  that  he  had  dreamt  of  me,  but  remembered  nothing  more  of  his  dream.
Both  had  gone  to  bed  at  8.15.

Go Ang ,  when  questioned  with  great  caution,  told  me  that  on  the

night  of  the  8th  she  had  dreamt  of  G .  She  remembered  quite  well  that  he

was  talking  to  her  about  a  new  suit  of  his  which  was  barely  begun,  but  did  not
remember  if  she  had  been  paid  by  him.

On  the  same  evening  on  which  I  had  written  down  the  dreams  of  my  two
nephews,  I  made  automatically  a  very  childish  drawing,  and  in  a  moment  per-
ceived that  it  represented  them  and  their  brothers,  who  were  in  the  country.
But  I  observed  that  one  of  them  was  missing,  because  there  are  four  of  them,
and  in  my  drawing  there  were  only  three.  I  did  not  know  the  reason  of  this.
The  next  morning  I  had  an  explanation,  discovering  in  my  house,  where  he  had
passed  the  night,  that  very  nephew  who  was  missing  in  my  picture.  He  had
come  up  on  the  evening  of  the  8th,  a  few  hours  before  I  received  the  telepathic
message,  and  after  I  had  gone  from  my  house  to  my  studio,  where  I  am  accus-
tomed to  pass  the  evening.  His  arrival  had  not  been  pre-arranged,  and  I
could  not  have  seen  him  arrive,  even  unconsciously,  as  the  street  I  went
through  to  go  to  my  studio  was  in  a  totally  different  direction  from  the  street
he  traversed  to  get  to  my  house.

The  following  is  copied  from  my  journal : —

October  zist,  7.30  P.M. — I  write,  "  M.  O.  is  now  mentioning  your  name  to
Signa  R."  Two  hours  after  I  meet  M.  O.,  who  says  he  spoke  of  me  to  SigQ  R.
about  7.30,  a  propos  of  a  letter  which  he  had  received  that  evening,  and  which
contained  a  reference  to  me.  I  had  not  seen  him  all  the  day,  knew  nothing  of
the  letter,  nor  that  he  was  with  Signa  R.  when  I  was  writing.

February  26th,  i  P.M. — I  write,  "  I  am  poisoning  myself.  Think  of  me."
The  writing  begins  with  a  name  I  cannot  decipher,  but  which  I  guess.

March  igth. — To-day  a  friend  of  the  person  whose  name  I  guessed  told  me
spontaneously  that  that  person  had  attempted  to  poison  herself  several  days  ago.
On  the  26th,  when  I  had  the  communication,  she  was  at  Bologna,  and  made  the
attempt  later  at  Rovigo.  I  do  not  know  if  it  was  the  first  attempt,  nor,  if  it
was  so,  whether  she  had  decided  to  do  it  when  I  wrote.  I  had  no  reason  to
suppose  that  A.  G.  would  wish  to  take  her  own  life.  Unfortunately  I  have  had
no  more  communications  from  her  which  might  have  given  me  more  details.

March  ijth. — I  write,  "Run  to  the  Club.  Go."  I  have  not  been  to  the
Club  for  more  than  a  month,  and  intended  to  go  to  bed  at  once.  My  friend,
A.  L.,  who  rarely  goes  to  the  Club,  had  this  evening  assisted  at  a  conference


444  APPENDICES  [852  B

on  Guido  Bonatti.  Association  of  ideas  made  him  think  of  me,  and  he  went
to  the  Club  believing  he  would  find  me  there.  I  obeyed  the  telepathic  order,
and  thus  discovered  what  had  caused  it.

May  %th.  Morning. — A  communication  partly  illegible.  "  You  will  re-
ceive .  .  .  Ang Go to-day,  which  will  tell  you  about  M.,  because  she

has  been  talking  to  him."

Ang Go is  at  Venice.  Many  days  ago  I  had  charged  her  to  say

certain  things  to  M.  if  she  met  him.  He  lives  at  Venice.  On  this  evening

(the  8th)  I  received  a  card  from  Ang Go ,  relating  her  conversation

with  M.,  whom  she  had  met  by  chance.  After  the  "  You  will  receive  to-day  "  in
the  automatic  writing,  there  are  several  attempts  at  a  word.  Now  I  know  all
about  it,  I  can  see  that  the  word  is  meant  for  "postcard."

[The  postcard  was  kept  and  reads  : —

"VENICE,  May  -jth,  1893."
(Postmark,  VENICE,  May  8//&.)

u  I  found  M.  and  told  him  what  you  charged  me  to  say.  He  told  me  he
had  written  to  you  before  leaving,  and  that  he  would  write  again  and  send  you
his  portrait.— Yours,  ANGELINA."]

February  $th,  1894.  Venice.— (I  lived  at  Padua  while  receiving  the  previous
communications.)  The  automatic  writing  informs  me  that  my  mother  at
Padua  has  had  something  the  matter  with  her  hand.  [About  twenty  days  later
I  verified  this.  No  one  had  told  me  of  it.]

Unfortunately  I  have  not  kept  all  the  original  writings  before  January  1893,
I  have  preserved  only  those  which  were  verified.  This  is  due  to  my  then  inex-
perience, for  I  thought  it  useless  to  preserve  unverifiable  communications.  I
remember  that  till  January  1893  false  communications  were  rare,  and  the
unverifiable  ones  were  numerous.

From  the  beginning  of  1893  till  February  5th,  1894,  against  twenty-seven
communications  verified,  I  have  recorded  eight  false  ones,  eighteen  which  I
could  not  verify,  five  which  were  wholly  or  partly  correct,  but  where  I  am
not  certain  that  the  information  may  not  have  reached  me  in  some  normal
but  unnoticed  manner,  and  two  which  were  correct  but  not  exact.

I  reckon  that  from  October  1892  till  January  1893  there  may  have  been
five  false  announcements.  Thus  there  may  have  been  altogether  thirteen  false
communications.

I  conclude  from  my  personal  experiences  that  the  principal  cause  of  failure
is  the  intervention  of  the  normal  consciousness,  which  occurs  most  easily  when
the  writing  is  slow  and  illegible,  or  when  the  communication  is  desired.  I  do
not  remember  ever  having  received  a  truthful  message  when  I  wished  for  it.
The  true  telepathic  cases  were  always  spontaneous,  and  improved  by  the  exer-
cise of  the  faculty.  A  true  message  was  nearly  always  followed  by  other  true
ones;  then  came  a  false  one,  which  caused  discouragement,  and  initiated  an
annoying  series  of  falsehoods,  till  another  success  restored  confidence.

I  have  observed  that  confidence  is  the  best  condition  for  obtaining  psychical
phenomena.

[Signer  Bonatti  is  a  friend  of  Dr.  Ermacora,  who  has  been  sometimes  present
when  he  was  writing  automatically;  on  one  or  two  occasions  when  the  writing
was  of  telepathic  origin.  Signor  Bonatti  cannot  obtain  much  confirmation,
partly  on  account  of  the  lapse  of  time,  and  partly  because  the  supposed  agents
are  persons  whom  he  has  lost  sight  of.]


857A]  TO     CHAPTER    VIII  445

857  A.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  67-8.
Professor  H.  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  in  1889  : —

I  write  you  the  details  of  another  matter  told  me  by  a  friend,  Hon.  Z.,  of

C .     He  is  one   of  the  leading  members  of  the Bar,  has  represented

his  State  several  times  in  the  National  Congress,  and  has  a  very  clear,  dis-
criminating, and  vigorous  intellect.  He  does  not  believe  in  Spiritualism,  but
regards  its  phenomena  as  illusions  or  hallucinations.  In  his  youth,  in  1854,

he  had  taught  a  winter's  term  in  his  native  town  of  P ,  and  in  the  spring

returned  to  Q to   complete  his   fit  for  college  in  the  Academy   in   that

place.     One  evening  after  his  return  to  Q ,  a  party  of  young  people  to  the

number  of  eight  were  gathered  about  a  table  to  witness  the  trance-writing
of  one  of  their  number,  a  Miss  A.,  a  very  beautiful  girl  of  eighteen  years
of  age,  and  the  music  teacher  of  the  Academy.  She  wrote  the  name  of  Mr.

Z.'s  father, ,  who  had  died  in  1845,  and  whom  no  one  in  the  room

save  his  son  could  have  known.     I  may  add   that  none  of  the   party  save

my  friend  knew   anything  about  P or  its   inhabitants.     Mr.    Z.    declared

that  he  did  not  believe  his  father  had  anything  to  do  with  the  writing.  At
this  Miss  A.,  who  sat  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  table  from  Mr.  Z.,  arose,
came  about  to  his  side,  drew  her  pencil  several  times  rapidly  across  the  two
middle  fingers  of  his  left  hand,  returned  to  her  seat,  and  wrote  quickly,
"  Does  this  convince  you  ? "  Mr.  Z.  said  that  those  two  fingers  were  gone
from  his  father's  left  hand,  having  been  cut  off  in  his  boyhood.  Mr.  Z.  was
startled,  but  still  expressed  his  disbelief.  Miss  A.  then  wrote  H.  T.  Y.'s

name,    and   continued :    "  Killed   on  day   of  ,    sliding  down   M

Hill,   running  off    embankment,    broke    his    neck ;    Rev.    Mr.    W.   attended

funeral;    text:    book   ,    chap.    ,   verse   ."     Both   date    and   text

were  given   with  particularity.     Mr.    W.  was   a  Congregationalist  clergyman

of   P ,  and    Mr.    Y.'s   family   were    active  and  leading    members   of    his

church.     Mr.  Y.  had  been  one  of  Mr.  Z.'s  pupils  that  winter  in  P ,  and  with

the  other  boys  had  coursed  M Hill,  a  very  steep  hill  near  the  school-
house,  and  covered  with  glare  ice  from  summit  to  foot.  Near  the  foot  was
an  embankment  wharfed  up  to  sustain  the  road-bed,  and  that  was  a  very
dangerous  place  to  slide  by.  Mr.  Z.  had  repeatedly  warned  the  boys  of  the
danger,  but  had  not  deemed  it  best  to  forbid  their  sliding.  He  had  worried
over  the  matter  a  great  deal,  and  was  exceedingly  relieved  when  school  closed
without  any  accident  having  happened.  Mr.  Z.  looked  up  the  text  and
found  it  entirely  inappropriate  to  a  funeral  occasion.  H.  T.  Y.  is  living

to-day,  and  is  the  head  of  the  K School  of  Technology.     This  fact  made

Mr.  Z.  scout  the  whole  affair  as  unworthy  of  his  notice ;  but  to  me  it  seems
to  indicate  a  telepathic  explanation  of  both  occurrences.  I  asked  Mr.  Z.  if
either  his  father  or  Mr.  Y.  were  in  his  mind  at  the  time.  He  replied,  "  No,"
they  came  into  his  mind  with  a  shock  of  surprise  when  their  names  were
written.  We  must  so  suppose  the  telepathic  communication  to  be  without
consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  agent.

The  Hon.  Z.  of  this  case  writes  as  follows  : —

This  statement  by  Professor  H.  is  correct,  and  I  cannot  improve  it,  or  make
it  more  correct  by  re-writing.  Now  you  may  use  these  facts,  but  I  earnestly
desire  you  not  to  make  use  of  any  names  or  places.


446  APPENDICES  [858  A

858  A.     My  next  case  comes  from  Dr.  Ermacora,  of  Padua.     I  quote
it  from  Proceedings  S.P.R..  vol.  ix.  pp.  68-70.


«#£  lytti,  1892.

.  .  .  Signora  Maria  Manzini,  residing  here  in  Padua,  has  been  for  a  few
months  experimenting  with  automatic  writing,  and  is  habitually  controlled  by
a  personality  which  announces  itself  under  the  name  of  Elvira.

On  April  2ist,  1892,  Signora  Maria  Manzini  received  a  letter  from  Venice
informing  her  that  her  cousin,  Maria  Alzetta,  was  seriously  ill  with  phthisis.
It  was  long  since  Signora  Manzini  had  heard  news  of  this  cousin,  and  she
only  knew  that,  having  been  left  a  childless  widow,  she  had  remarried  and
had  two  children  by  her  second  husband.  On  the  evening  of  the  same  day
Signora  M.  was  writing  in  my  presence,  under  the  control  of  Elvira,  and  asked
questions  as  follows  :  —

Q.  Can  you  tell  me  if  my  cousin's  illness  is  really  serious  ?  After  a  pause
of  about  a  minute  and  a  half  the  answer  came.  A.  She  has  a  very  short  time
to  live,  and  she  leaves  three  lovely  children.

Q.  Did  you  first  know  this  when  I  received  news  of  the  illness  ?  A.  No,
I  have  known  it  for  many  days,  but  did  not  mention  it  for  fear  of  paining  Maria
[the  medium].

Q.  Why,  then,  were  you  so  slow  just  now  in  answering  my  question?  A.
I  went  to  see  how  she  was,  so  as  to  be  able  to  tell  you  precisely.

Next  day  Signora  M.  wrote  to  Venice  offering  to  go  and  see  the  invalid.
On  the  24th  she  received  an  answer  expressing  a  desire  for  her  arrival,  and
stating  that  the  invalid  was  at  the  hospital.  She  wrote  again  to  ask  on  what
days  it  was  allowed  to  visit  the  hospital  patients.  Before  an  answer  arrived
Signora  M.  wrote  in  my  presence  (April  28th)  under  Elvira's  control,  and  we
put  the  following  questions  :  —

Q.  How  is  the  invalid  at  Venice  ?  Do  you  know  why  the  answer  to  my
letter  has  not  arrived  ?  and  do  you  know  on  what  day  it  is  allowed  to  visit  the
hospital?  A.  The  invalid's  condition  is  the  same.  There  is  little  hope.  She
has  undergone  a  serious  operation  ;  there  is  danger.  To-morrow  morning
Maria  will  receive  a  letter.  Visitors  such  as  she  are  received  every  day  at
the  hospital.

Q.  Do  you  mean  because  Maria  is  a  relation  of  the  invalid's  ?  A.  No,  but
because  she  comes  from  a  distance.

Failing  to  see  what  connection  there  could  be  between  pulmonary  disease
and  a  surgical  operation,  we  asked  :  —

Q.  If  the  patient  is  in  a  consumption,  what  operation  can  she  have  under-
gone ?  A.  She  is  in  a  consumption  ;  but  the  operation  was  necessitated  by
the  birth  of  her  last  little  girl.

Next  morning  Signora  M.  received  a  postcard  from  Venice  containing
these  words  :  "  Amalia  inquired  at  the  hospital  and  was  told  that  you  and  your
mother  would  be  received  on  any  day,  as  strangers  from  another  city,  if  you
will  come  when  it  suits  you."

The  date  of  the  letter's  arrival  and  the  news  contained  in  it  thus  corre-
sponded with  the  prediction.  But  an  embarrassing  circumstance  remained.
When  the  postman  delivered  this  letter  he  said  that  he  had  in  fact  brought
it  to  the  house  on  the  previous  evening,  but  finding  no  one  at  home  he  had
taken  it  away  with  him  again  till  the  following  morning.  Thus  the  messages
from  Elvira  had  been  received  after  the  postman  had  endeavoured  to  deliver


859A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  447

the  letter.  Had,  then,  the  fact  that  the  letter  was  already  in  Padua  deter-
mined the  communication  which  announced  its  approaching  delivery  and  part
of  its  content  ?

On  April  3Oth  Signora  M.  went  to  Venice  and  found  that  her  cousin  had
really  had  a  third  child  a  few  months  previously,  and  after  its  birth  had  been
ill  in  a  way  which  had  ultimately  needed  a  surgical  operation.  Another  small
detail  previously  communicated  to  Signora  Manzini  by  Elvira  was  likewise
found  to  be  true.  Signora  Manzini  made  no  mention  whatever  of  her  own
experiments,  and  her  cousin  at  Venice  continued  entirely  ignorant  of  them.

On  that  same  evening,  April  3Oth,  on  Signora  Manzini's  return  from  Venice
to  Padua,  I  was  anxious  to  inquire  from  the  "  control "  as  to  the  effect  of  the
presence  in  Padua  of  the  letter  which  had  been  announced  on  the  evening  of
the  28th  for  the  following  morning.  Under  the  control  of  Elvira,  Signora  M.
wrote  the  following  answer:  "  I  did  not  know  that  the  letter  had  arrived;  but
I  was  sure  that  Maria  would  receive  it  next  morning,  because  those  who  wrote
it  had  intended  that  it  should  reach  her  in  the  morning.  They  had  intended
to  post  it  in  the  evening,  but  instead  of  that  they  posted  it  directly  it  was
written.  I  was,  in  fact,  mistaken  ;  for  it  was  a  mere  chance  that  it  was  actually
received  in  the  morning."

I  then  requested  Signora  M.  to  write  to  her  friends  at  Venice  in  the  fol-
lowing terms  :  "  I  would  beg  you  to  satisfy  a  feeling  of  curiosity  on  my  part
with  regard  to  a  presentiment  which  I  had  about  your  last  letter.  I  should
like  to  know  whether  it  was  posted  at  the  hour  which  you  originally  intended,
or  whether  you  changed  your  intention  and  posted  it  at  a  different  hour.  Will
you  please  tell  me  all  you  remember  about  this  ?  "

The  following  answer  was  received  on  May  2nd  : —

"  I  had  meant  to  post  my  last  letter  to  you  in  the  evening,  but,  fearing  to
forget  it,  I  posted  it  at  mid-day  v  when  I  had  occasion  to  go  out."

To  resume  the  facts.  Automatic  writing  informed  us  of  facts  entirely
unknown  to  our  ordinary  consciousness ;  namely,  the  fact  that  the  invalid  had
three  children,  and  the  fact  that  she  had  undergone  an  operation.  Thus  far
we  might  invoke  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  as  the  explanation.  Then  there
was  a  true  prediction  of  the  arrival  of  a  letter,  and  of  part  of  its  content.  But
although  the  letter  was  delivered  on  the  morning  specified,  it  had,  in  fact,
already  arrived  in  Padua  when  the  communication  was  made,  and  its  non-
delivery in  the  evening  was  due  to  accident.  Clairvoyance  would  not  explain
this  incident,  as  that  power  might  have  been  expected  to  reveal  the  presence  of
the  letter  in  Padua.  Neither  was  there  an  indication  of  so-called  psychometry —
an  influence  from  the  nearness  of  the  letter  itself.  But,  lastly,  an  automatic
message  explains  the  incident  in  the  simplest  manner,  and  that  explanation
turns  out  to  be  the  true  one.  DR.  G.  B.  ERMACORA.

859  A.  The  following  account  of  Miss  A.'s  experiences  is  quoted  from
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  (1893)  pp.  73-92.

Statement  of  Miss  A.  as  to  her  Automatic  Writing.

i .  Origin  of  the  Writing.— About  eight  years  ago  we  first  heard  that  people
could  sometimes  write  without  knowing  what  they  wrote  ;  and  that  it  was
supposed  that  departed  friends  could  communicate  in  this  way.  We  deter-
mined to  try  whether  any  of  us  could  write  thus.  We  tried  first  with  a


448  APPENDICES  [859  A

planchette,  and  when  my  mother's  hand  and  my  hand  were  upon  it  we  got
writing  easily.  We  did  not  at  first  get  any  message  professing  to  come  from
any  spirit  known  to  us.

2.  Mode  of  Writing. — We  soon  ceased  to  use  the  planchette,  and  I  was  able
to  write  alone.     I  can  now  generally,  but  not  always,  write  when  I  sit  quiet
with  a  pencil  in  my  hand.     The  writing  often  comes  extremely  fast ;  at  a  much
faster  rate  than  I  could  keep  up  by  voluntary  effort  for  so  long  a  time.     I  have
to  turn  over  the  pages  of  the  large  paper  which  I  generally  use,  and  to  guard
the  lines  of  writing  from  running  into  each  other,  but  except  for  this  there  is  no
need  for  me  to  look  at  the  paper,  as  I  can  talk  on  other  subjects  while  the
writing  is  going  on.     I  can  always  stop  the  writing  by  a  distinct  effort  of  will.
One  curious  thing  is  that  my  hand  is  never  in  the   least  tired  by  automatic
writing.

3.  Character  of  the  Script. — I  get  various  handwritings;  I  may  have  had  a
dozen  altogether.     I  may  divide  these  simply  into  two  classes.

A.  Large  and  scrawly  hands,  which  seem  to  aim  at  ease  of  writing,  rather
than  at  indivuality,  and  do  not  divide  their  words,  but  run  on  without  a  break.
Such  are  the  hands  of  the  so-called  "guides  "  and  of  other  "spirits  "  who  write
frequently.     (Whatever  the  sources  of  this  writing  may  be,  I  must  use  the  terms
which  the  writing  uses  in  order  to  avoid  constant  roundabout  phrases.)     These
large  running  handwritings  do  differ  somewhat  both  from  my  own  handwriting
and  from  each  other;  but  they  most  of  them  have  a  general  resemblance  to  a
large,  rapid  scrawl  of  my  own,  with  an  alteration  in  the  shape  of  some  letters  so
as  to  avoid  breaks  in  the  continuous  scrawl.     I  can  almost  always  tell  who  is
writing  ;  but  there  are  differences  in  energy,  in  little  details  of  management  of
the  paper,  &c.,  which  help  me  to  distinguish,  even  before  the  end  of  the  mes-
sage comes,  when  the  signature  shows  me  who  has  been  writing.     When  the
pronoun  "we"  is  used  there  is  no  signature,  as  that  represents  "the  guides."

B.  There  are  also  several  handwritings  which  keep  a  strongly  individual
character,  sometimes  plainly  of  an  assumed  kind  ;  I  mean  writing  in  a  way  in
which  no  one  would  have  written  in  life.     Thus  John  Longland  wrote  in  an  odd,
twisted,  serpentine  way  and  very  small.     We  unluckily  burnt  all  his  writings
except  one  scrap,  as  we  did  not  believe  that  he  was  a  real  person.     A  spirit
calling  himself  Detorno  makes  all  the  letters  square.

Then,  again,  when  the  guides  are  writing  in  reply  to  a  private  question  put
by  some  friend  of  mine  they  write  wrong  side  up,  so  that  the  friend  sitting
opposite  to  me  can  read  the  writing  and  I  cannot.  They  seem  to  write  this
way  just  as  easily  as  the  other.  Sometimes  there  is  mirror-writing.  Some-
times each  word  in  a  sentence  is  written  backwards,  and  sometimes  the  whole
sentence  is  written  backwards,  beginning  with  the  last  letter  of  the  last  word.
In  a  few  cases  only  have  we  thought  that  the  handwriting  resembled  what  the
supposed  spirit  wrote  in  life.  This  was  especially  so  in  the  case  of  a  communi-
cation claiming  to  come  from  my  grandfather,  whose  handwriting  I  had  never
seen.  My  mother  produced  an  old  signature  of  his,  and  certainly  it  was  like ;
but  there  was  not  enough  of  the  automatic  writing  to  make  us  quite  sure.
When  the  "  spirit "  or  "  control,"  or  whatever  it  is,  leaves  me  I  cannot  make  it
come  again,  and  writing  from  spirits  known  to  us  on  earth  is  rare  in  comparison
with  writing  from  the  guides,  or  from  quite  unknown  spirits  giving  fantastic
names.  Sometimes  they  give  what  they  say  were  their  real  earth-names  ;  and
then  we  can  sometimes  identify  them ;  although  there  is,  of  course,  this  dim-


859A]  TO     CHAPTER    VIII  449

culty,  that  if  they  are  obscure  we  cannot  find  them,  or  if  they  are  well  known,
people  who  give  me  credit  for  more  knowledge  of  history  than  I  possess  may
think  that  I  knew  all  about  them,  and  that  the  messages  come  from  my  own

mind.

[The  Countess  of  Radnor  adds  : —

I  think  Miss  A.  has  considerably  understated  the  number  of  distinctly  and
remarkably  different  types  of  handwriting  that  have  come  through  her  hand..
I  enclose  a  list  of  thirteen  names  of  "  guides,"  each  one  of  whom  has  a  charac-
teristic handwriting,  invariably  the  same,  however  great  the  length  of  time
that  elapses  between  the  communications.  In  addition  to  these  there  have
been  many  instances  where  personalities — the  so-called  dead,  or  occasionally
the  living — have  written  in  distinct  handwrittings.  H.  M.  RADNOR.]

4.  Drawings. — Sometimes  my  hand  is  moved  to  draw  instead  of  to  write.
The  impulse  in  such  cases  is  quite  equally  distinct.     I  never  know  what  I  am
going  to  draw  till  the  picture  is  half  finished.     My  hand  begins  at  odd,  un-
expected places;  for  instance,  with  shading  in  a  corner,  or  at  the  ear  of  a
profile;  and  approaches  the  principal  lines  in  a  way  which  no  artist  would
choose.     There  is  no  rubbing  out  or  alteration  of  what  is  once  done,  but  if
whatever  moves  my  hand  does  not  like  the  picture,  it  suddenly  scrawls  it  all
over  and  begins  again  on  another  piece  of  paper.     Sometimes  twenty  or  thirty
pieces  of  paper  have  been  spoilt  in  this  way,  even  when  the  picture  was  all
but  finished  ;  so  that  if  I  think  that  a  picture  is  pretty  I  sometimes  beg  some
one  to  take  it  away  from  under  my  hand  for  fear  it  should  be  scrawled  on.     I
have  no  natural  gift  for  drawing,  and  have  only  received  a  few  lessons  as  a
child.     I  could  not  even  copy  some  of  these  automatic  drawings.     I  have  never
of  myself  painted  in  oils,  but  sometimes  I  am  moved  to  paint  automatically  in
water-colour  or  oils.     I  put  out  a  number  of  oil  colours  in  a  row,  and  my  brush
goes  to  them  automatically  and  dabs  one  wet  colour  on  the  top  of  another,
making  a  picture  which  is  odd  enough,  but  much  less  muddled  than  might  be
supposed ;  in  fact,  artists  have  said  that  it  was  curious  that  a  distinct  picture
could  be  produced  in  that  way.     When  I  paint  thus  there  is  no  drawing  or
outline,  only  the  brush-work.     These  drawings  and  pictures  have  a  certain
boldness  and  strangeness  about  them,  but  they  are  certainly  not  like  the  work
of  a  regular  artist.

5.  Connection  of  Written  with  other  Messages. — The  writing  sometimes
explains   or   completes  other   phenomena,    as,   for  instance,  figures   seen,  or
sentences  begun  by  raps.     Sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  raps  will  come  when
I  wish  to  have  writing.     But  the  writing  will  hardly  ever  explain  or  in  any  way
allude  to  what  really  most  needs  explanation,  namely,  the  crystal-visions.     The
guides  who  write  seem  to  know  nothing  about  these  visions.

6.  Subject  of  the   Writing. — The  great   mass  of  the  writing  consists  of
teachings  as  to  religion  and  philosophy.     This  is  what  my  guides  seem  to  wish
to  give,  and  it  is  strange  that  it  should  be  so,  as  my  own  thoughts  have  not
been  much  directed  to  such  matters.

Another  large  part  of  the  writing  consists  in  a  kind  of  fantastic  description
of  the  way  in  which  a  world  was  made.  The  name  given  with  these  writings
is  Gelalius.  I  suppose  that  this  is  a  kind  of  romance.  It  is  very  different
from  anything  that  I  should  myself  ever  write  or  dream  of,  nor  am  I  at  all  fond
of  reading  romances  of  that  kind.  The  writing  professes  to  be  copied  from  a
book  open  at  that  particular  chapter,  and  sometimes  a  passage  will  be  con-

VOL.    II.  2    F


450  APPENDICES  [859  A

tinued  weeks  or  months  after  the  first  part  of  it  was  written,  as  if  the  book  had
chanced  to  be  open  again  at  that  same  place.

Some  of  the  messages,  however,  deal  with  earthly  matters.  Some  give
general  advice,  some  give  medical  advice,  and  some  show  a  knowledge  of
things  in  the  past  or  present  which  I  do  not  possess.  Some  of  these  messages
have  been  curiously  right;  some  have  been  partly  right,  but  confused  or  inter-
rupted; and  some  have  been  wrong  altogether.  The  sense  of  time  seems
confused,  so  that  it  is  hard  to  say  whether  the  incidents  are  meant  to  have
happened  long  ago,  or  lately,  or  to  be  still  in  the  future.  Many  of  the  messages
we  have  not  tested,  as  they  were  about  things  which  did  not  interest  us.  Often,
for  instance,  there  would  be  messages  about  events  in  the  newspapers  which  I
had  not  thought  or  cared  about.

As  to  what  I  have  called  "  general  advice,"  I  think  that  this  has  always
been  good  when  it  related  to  the  conduct  of  the  automatic  writing  itself.  I
should  be  told,  I  mean,  when  to  write  and  when  not  to  write,  and  what  people's
presence  was  desirable,  and  so  forth.  The  advice  is  often  quite  different  from
what  we  wish; — forbidding  us  to  ask  people  whom  we  had  desired  to  ask.
There  has  been  one  very  curious  case  where  we  were  repeatedly  told  [by  a  de-
ceased relative  of  his]  to  "  send  for  "  a  gentleman  whom  I  will  call  Mr.  C.  D.,  of
whom  we  knew  nothing,  except  that  we  had  seen  his  name  in  the  papers  in  quite
a  different  connection.  It  so  chanced  that  a  friend  of  ours  knew  Mr.  C.  D.
and  brought  him  to  see  us,  but  for  some  years  there  seemed  to  be  no  particular
result.  Lately,  however,  Mr.  C.  D.'s  presence  has  very  greatly  helped  the  phe-
nomena ;  and  the  advice  given  so  long  ago  has  turned  out  important  in  a  way
which  we  could  not  possibly  have  foreseen.

On  matters  not  connected  with  these  phenomena  I  should  always  carefully
read  what  the  writing  told  me,  but  I  should  not  go  by  it  unless  it  seemed
sensible.  It  does  not  always  advise  either  what  I  wish  or  what  I  think  wise;
but  generally  it  is  wiser  than  I.

7.  Medical  Advice  has   often  been  given   by   a   control   calling  himself
"  Semirus,"  and  this  has  been  often  successful ;  which  is  strange,  since  I  am
quite   ignorant   of    medicine,    and  often   do  not  know  the   names   either  of
diseases  or  of  drugs  mentioned.     Of  course  I   cannot  be  quite  sure  that  I
have  never  read  the  words,  but  certainly  when  I  have  written  them  I  have
often  not  known  what  they  meant.

At  other  times  the  facts  relating  to  the  illness  have  been  quite  outside
my  knowledge.  One  friend  has  given  an  instance  of  this  kind  [printed  later] ;
but  I  have  not  liked  to  ask  others,  as  what  Semirus  says  is  generally  meant
for  the  questioner  alone.

8.  Thought-transference.— -The  writing  occasionally,  but  not  often,  tells  me
of  thoughts  in  the  minds  of  persons  present.     One  day  a  lady  handed  me  a
letter,  in  a  handwriting  which  I  did  not  know.     I  held  the  letter  in  one  hand,
and  the  other  hand  wrote,  "  Bright  metal  and  brown  earth."     The  letter  was
from  a  gentleman  whom    I  had  never  seen,  and  who  committed  suicide  by
throwing  himself  on  the  rails  in  front  of  a  railway  engine.     I  think  that  this
message  came  from  thought-transference,  as  I  do  not  find  that  merely  holding
letters  in  my  hand  tells  me  anything  about  their  writers  unless  some  one  is
there  who  knows  the  content ;  and  even  then  I  so  seldom  succeed  that  I  do
not  care  to  try  experiments  of  this  kind.

[Lady  Brooke  (the  Ranee  of  Sarawak),  who  was  present  at  the  time,  has


859A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  451

given  me  a  written  confirmation  of  this  (quite  recent)  incident,  for  which  I
have  not  pressed  the  owner  of  the  letter,  on  account  of  the  painful  nature  of
the  circumstance.  F.  W.  H.  M.]

9.  Clairvoyance. — I  sometimes  get  messages  which  perhaps  may  be  called
clairvoyant,  telling  me,  for  instance,  where  lost  objects  are,  or  warning  me  of
some  danger  at  hand.     Thus  about  September  2oth,  1888  [this  incident  was
written  down  October  2ist,  1889],  my  sister  M.  and  I  had  just  finished  dressing
for  dinner  in  the  dressing-rooms  leading  from  a  large  bedroom.     The  maid
had  left  the  room.     M.  had  left  her  dressing-room,  and  was  standing  in  the
bedroom,  when  suddenly  she  called  to  me:  "Get  a  bit  of  paper;  there  are
some  raps."     I   came  in  and  took  an  envelope  and  pencil,  and  at  once  the
words  came,  by  raps  :     "  Look  to  the  candle  or  the  house  will  be  on  fire."     We
saw  that  it  was  not  the  candle  in  the  bedroom,  so  we  went  into  M.'s  dressing-
room,  and  found  that  her  candle  was  so  close  to  a  cardboard  pocket  depending
from  the  looking-glass  that  it  would  have  been  on  fire  in  a  moment.     It  was
already  smoking.     No  servant  would  have  come  in  for  some  time.     [Mrs.  A.
confirms  as  follows  :  "  I  heard  of  the  incident  in  my  daughter's  next  letter."]

Again,  I  was  descending  a  dark  corkscrew  staircase  at  Longford,  in  August
or  September  1889  [account  written  October  1889],  when  I  heard  a  tapping  on
the  stair.  It  was  persistent,  and  drew  my  attention.  I  looked  about  with  a
candle,  and  at  last  saw  a  gold  pencil-case  of  Lady  Radnor's,  with  which  I  was
accustomed  to  write  automatically,  lying  on  a  dark  little  landing  of  the  stair.  I
did  not  know  that  the  pencil  had  been  lost.

10.  But  the  most  puzzling  cases  are  those  where  the  message  professes  to
be  from  some  departed  person,  and  tells  some  true  things,  but  perhaps  mixes
up  some  mistakes  with  them.  .  .  .  But  sometimes  I  do  think  that  the  mes-
sage really  comes  from  the  person  who  professes  to  communicate.

Another  frequent  writer  is  a  strange  person  to  have  come  to  us,  as  I  knew
nothing  about  him,  and  should  not  have  thought  that  we  had  anything  in
common.  That  is  Lord  Chancellor  Hardwicke.  He — or  whatever  it  is  that
takes  that  name — has  become  a  sort  of  family  friend.  He  has  a  distinct
character  of  his  own,  which  is  not  quite  what  I  should  have  expected  in  a  Lord
Chancellor,  for  he  is  full  of  jokes  and  very  bluff  and  outspoken.  He  has  given
a  number  of  facts  about  himself,  names  of  friends,  and  laws  about  marriage
that  he  had  made.

One  reason  which  makes  me  think  that  the  messages  come  from  outside
myself  is  the  feeling  which  I  have  sometimes  of  rivalry  or  even  conflict
between  them.  When  I  am  writing  there  will  occasionally  be  sudden  changes,
as  if  some  new  personality  had  been  able  to  get  hold  of  the  pencil.  .  .  .

Again,  if  I  see  figures  and  then  have  writing  which  professes  to  come  from
those  figures,  it  seems  to  me  natural  to  suppose  that  it  does  so  come.

I  will  now  give  some  examples  of  motor  messages,  by  writing  and  raps,
given  through  Miss  A.  Here,  as  in  the  case  of  Miss  A.'s  crystal-visions
(see  vol.  i.  625  C),  I  am  obliged  to  confine  myself  mainly  to  cases  cor-
roborated by  the  few  friends  who  have  felt  in  the  messages  more  than  a
merely  personal  interest.  It  must,  of  course,  be  remembered,  in  justice
to  other  friends  (who  have  often  carried  off  messages  without  even  show-
ing them  to  the  writer),  that  much  of  what  has  been  thus  written  has  dealt
with  very  private  matters.


452  APPENDICES  [859  A

The  first  message  which  I  shall  quote  is  evidentially  interesting,  on
account  of  the  mere  chance  by  which  its  truth  was  verified.  It  should  be
premised  that  Miss  A.  has  never  been  to  Blankney,  and  is  not  acquainted
with  the  Chaplin  family.

I.  Lady  Radnor  writes  under  date  January  i5th,  1893  : —

The  following  case  has  always  struck  me  as  particularly  curious.

About  eight  years  ago,  when  Miss  A.'s  powers  had  only  quite  recently  shown
themselves,  her  automatic  writing  told  me  that  I  had  two  guides,  "  Estelle  "  and
"  Silvo  " — spirits  who  accompanied  me  and  took  an  interest  in  my  welfare.  I
did  not  think  of  this  at  first  as  a  thing  which  could  be  either  proved  or  dis-
proved. But  one  day,  when  a  question  was  mooted  as  to  whether  "  spirit
guides  "  had  ever  lived  on  earth,  I  asked  whether  mine  had  done  so,  and  was
told  that  Estelle  had.  I  asked  for  her  earth-name ;  and  as  we  were  then  getting
answers  by  raps  (through  Miss  A.'s  power)  it  was  rapped  out  "  Loved  voices
called  me  Anne."  I  asked  for  the  surname.  C — H — A  was  rapped  out.  As
my  maiden  name  was  Chaplin  I  at  once  jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  that  was
the  name  meant.  But  the  raps  said  decidedly  No,  and  rapped  out  Chambers.
I  had  no  associations  with  this  name.  I  asked  if  connected  with  my  family  ?
"  Yes."  Any  portrait?  "  Yes."  At  Blankney  ?  (my  brother's  place).  "  Yes."

Now  I  had  spent  much  of  my  childhood  at  Blankney,  and  I  had  been  par-
ticularly fond  of  one  picture  there,  representing  a  lady  whose  name  I  did  not
know.  It  used  to  hang  in  the  morning  room,  and  then  on  the  staircase,  and
represented  a  lady  in  a  red  velvet  gown  with  a  basket  of  cherries  in  her  hand.
As  a  child  I  used  to  sit  and  talk  to  this  picture,  and  make  a  friend  of  the  lady
with  the  cherries.

So  when  I  heard  that  the  picture  of  my  "  guide  "  was  at  Blankney,  I  hoped
it  might  be  this  lady,  and  asked,  "  Is  it  the  lady  with  the  cherries?  "  "  Yes,"
was  eagerly  rapped  out.  I  at  once  wrote  to  my  old  nurse  who  was  still  at
Blankney,  and  who  knew  a  good  deal  about  the  pictures,  and  asked  her  to  get
the  picture  examined  for  any  name  which  might  be  on  it.  She  got  the  picture
taken  down  and  carefully  examined,  but  there  was  no  clue.  She  told  me,  how-
ever, that  she  thought  she  had  heard  a  Mrs.  S. — a  connection  of  the  family,  who
knew  the  pictures  better  than  any  one — say  that  the  lady  with  the  cherries  was
a  Miss  Taylor.  This  disheartened  me  ;  but  I  wrote  to  a  friend  at  the  College
of  Heralds  to  ask  whether  the  name  Chambers  occurred  anywhere  in  the  Chaplin
pedigree.  He  wrote  back  that  there  was  no  such  name  in  the  pedigree.

The  same  day  that  I  got  his  letter  I  happened  to  meet  Mrs.  S.  (whom  I  had
not  seen  for  many  years)  in  a  shop  in  London.  I  knew  that  she  had  once  made
a  catalogue  (which  I  had  never  seen)  of  the  Blankney  pictures ;  so  I  felt  that
here  was  my  last  chance.  I  asked  her  if  she  knew  who  the  lady  with  the  cher-
ries was.  "  Oh,  that  is  Lady  Exeter,"  she  said,  "  whose  daughter,  Lady  Betty
Chaplin,  married  an  ancestor  of  yours."  "  Do  you  know  what  Lady  Exeter's
maiden  name  was  ?  "  "  It  was  Mellish."  I  now  lost  all  hope,  but  I  just  asked  :
"Has  the  name  Chambers  any  association  for  you?"  "  How  stupid  I  am!"
she  exclaimed,  "  Lady  Exeter  was  a  Miss  Chambers,  of  Mellish  !  "  My  friend
at  the  Heralds'  College  then  looked  in  the  Exeter  pedigree,  and,  sure  enough,
the  lady  with  the  cherries  was  Hannah  Chambers.  H.  M.  RADNOR.

I  was  cognisant  of  all  this,  and  attest  the  accuracy  of  the  account.

RADNOR.


859A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  453

In  a  later  letter  Lady  Radnor  adds  : —

Personally  I  had  always  believed  "  the  lady  with  the  cherries  "  to  be  some
one  (name  unknown)  who  had  married  a  Chaplin  ancestor.  There  was  no
Chaplin  pedigree,  and  it  was  I  who  suggested  to  my  brother  that  he  should  ask
"  York  Herald  "  (Mr.  Gatty)  to  draw  one  up ;  and  I  therefore  applied  to  Mr.
Gatty  as  being  the  only  person  who  would  know  the  names  of  the  families  con-
nected by  marriage  with  the  Chaplins.  I  knew  that  the  great-grandmother
was  "  Lady  Betty,"  nte  Cecil :  but  as  in  those  days  pedigrees  and  family  history
did  not  interest  me,  I  had  never— and  up  to  the  present  time  never  have — seen
the  Chaplin  pedigree.  In  any  case  the  name  Chambers  would  not  appear
in  it.

II.  The  next  case  is  typical  of  many  similar  trifling  incidents.

January  i$t/t,  1893.

I  have  several  times  had  reason  to  think  that  some  intelligence  writing
through  Miss  A.  was  aware  of  trifling  circumstances  happening  to  myself.  A
good  instance  occurred  the  other  day.  I  came  back  from  hunting  and  joined  in
a  se'ance,  where  my  so-called  "  guide  "  was  communicating.  I  asked,  "  Well,
have  you  been  with  me  in  my  run  to-day  ?  "

"  Yes,"  was  the  answer,  "  but  you  should  have  gone  up  the  hill  instead  of
down."  "Was  Nancy  right,  then?"  "Yes."  Now,  in  point  of  fact  we  had
changed  foxes  that  day  by  going  down  a  hill  instead  of  up,  one  hound  alone,
Nancy,  running  up  hill  on  what  was  doubtless  the  original  scent.

RADNOR.

January  \6th,  1893

III.  The  following  writing  was  given  at  Longford,  February  27th,  1890,
avowedly  by  "  Estelle  "  : —

"  You  ask  me  whom  I  see  in  this  habitation.  I  see  so  many  shades  and  several
spirits.  I  see  also  a  good  many  reflections.  Can  you  tell  me  if  there  was  a
child  died  upstairs  ?  Was  there  an  infant  who  died  rather  suddenly?  [Why?]
Because  I  continually  see  the  shadow  of  an  infant  upstairs,  near  to  the  room
where  you  dress.  [A  shadow  f}  Yes,  it  is  only  a  shadow.  [What  do  you
mean  ?]  A  shadow  is  when  any  one  thinks  so  continually  of  a  person  that  they
imprint  their  shadow  or  memory  on  the  surrounding  atmosphere.  In  fact  they
make  a  form  ;  and  I  myself  am  inclined  to  think  that  so-called  ghosts,  of  those
who  have  been  murdered,  or  who  have  died  suddenly,  are  more  often  shadows
than  earthbound  spirits ;  for  the  reason  that  they  are  ever  in  the  thoughts  of
the  murderer,  and  so  he  creates,  as  it  were,  their  shadow  or  image  ;  for  it  would
be  sad  if  the  poor  souls  suffered,  being  killed  through  no  fault  of  their  own, —
that  they  should  be  earthbound;  though,  remember,  they  very  often  are  earth-
bound  too."

With  reference  to  the  above  communication  I  may  say  that  an  infant  brother
of  mine  died  of  convulsions  in  a  nursery  which  then  occupied  the  part  of  the
house  where  the  figure  of  the  baby  was  said  to  have  appeared.  I  do  not  see
any  way  in  which  Miss  A.  could  have  known  either  of  the  death  of  my  infant
brother  or  of  the  fact  that  that  part  of  the  house  had  previously  been  a  nursery.

RADNOR.


454  APPENDICES  [859  A

VII.  The  following  statement  is  from  the  Ranee  of  Sarawak : —

January,  1893.

In  September  1892  my  maid,  who  was  not  known  to  Miss  A.,  complained
of  persistent  pain  in  the  neck  and  arm.  She  told  me  afterwards  that  she  had
been  afraid  of  paralysis.  I  asked  Miss  A.  to  let  "  Semirus  "  write  what  was  the
matter  with  her.  The  maid  came  into  the  room.  No  one  said  a  word  as  to  her
symptoms,  but  Miss  A.'s  hand  at  once  wrote  in  "  Semirus'  "  handwriting :  "  It
is  not  paralysis,  as  you  fear;  it  is  rheumatism;  your  bed  ought  to  be  moved
from  the  window,"  or  words  to  that  effect.  I  went  into  the  maid's  room,  which
it  so  happened  that  I  had  never  seen,  as  it  was  in  a  house  which  I  had  only
rented  for  a  short  time,  and  I  found  in  fact  that  the  bed  was  exposed  to  a  severe
draught.  It  was  placed  against  the  window.  I  had  it  moved,  and  the  rheu-
matic pain  disappeared.  MARGARET  BROOKE.

[See  another  case  connected  with  "  Semirus "  and  reported  by  Sir
Lawrence  Jones,  which  I  give  at  the  end  of  this  Appendix.]

VIII.  I  give  here  an  incident  of  which  I  was  myself  witness,  and  which
seems  to  me  typical  of  a  class  of  communications  of  which  I  have  already  said
something, — where  information  unknown   to  the  automatist  is    given,  on  the
soi-disant  authority  of  some  departed  spirit  ;  but  yet  this  information,  so  far
as  true,  is  known  to  some  person   present,  and  when   anything  which  goes
beyond  the  knowledge  of  persons  present  is  asked  for,  the  answer  goes  off  into
mere  guessing  and  vagueness.     Note  also  the  fact  that  these  messages  were
given  by  a  distinct  rapping  sound  in  the  table.     This   phenomenon  is  often
spoken  of  in  spiritist  journals  as  a  very  common  one.     For  myself  I  may  say
that  having  sat  at  tables  many  hundred  times,  in  readiness  to  welcome  raps  if
they  appeared,  I  have  frequently  heard  raps  in  the  presence  of  paid  mediums,
and  I  have  frequently  heard  creaks  of  the  table  in  the  presence  of  my  own
friends  ;  but  only  in  the  presence  of  some  four  or  five  non-professional  and
trustworthy  persons  have  I  heard  unmistakable  raps,  answering  questions,  and
producing  upon  my  mind  the  conviction  that  no  known  agency  was  concerned
in  producing  them.

On  this  occasion  the  messages  given  were  private  enough  to  need  an
alteration  in  the  initials  of  the  friends  present.  Besides  Miss  A.,  a  sister,
and  myself,  there  sat  at  the  table  Lady  B.  and  the  Hon.  C.  D.  A  Christian
name  was  clearly  rapped  out,  which  was  recognised  by  Mr.  C.  D.  as  that  of
his  mother,  not  consciously  known  to  any  of  the  rest  of  us.  Since,  however,
the  name  was  in  the  Peerage,  it  was  of  little  evidential  value.  A  message  then
came  as  to  Mr.  C.  D.'s  efforts  on  behalf  of  a  friend,  for  whom  he  was  then
trying  to  get  a  post.  "  What  kind  of  employment  shall  I  get  for  him  ? "
"  Island."  "  What  island  ?  "  "  Jersey."  "  Can  you  mention  any  one  who  will
help  in  this  ?  "  "  Lang  "  was  rapped  out,  and  then  came  many  confused  raps
and  the  message  ceased.

Now  Mr.  D.  was  in  reality  trying  privately  to  get  a  post  in  Jersey  for  his
friend, — about  whom  none  of  us  knew  anything.  How  easy,  therefore,  it
vould  be  to  report  this  sitting  as  follows:  "Mr.  D.'s  mother  announced  her-
self by  raps,  and  gave  advice  on  a  private  matter."

But  now  compare  the  classical  case,  if  I  may  so  term  it,  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Newnham  (849  A),  and  consider  how  these  replies  might  be  explained  on


859A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  455

the  theory  of  mere  thought-transference  between  living  persons.  In  Mr.
Newnham's  case  we  found  that  the  automatic  writing  got  at  the  questioner's
ideas  gradually  and  imperfectly,  and  filled  up  gaps  by  random  answers  made
to  look  as  interesting  as  possible.  So  here,  in  my  view,  some  intelligence
not  necessarily  other  than  some  part  of  Miss  A.'s  subliminal  self  readily
discerns  in  Mr.  D.'s  mind  an  idea  so  firmly  fixed  as  his  mother's  name,  and
takes  that  as  an  interesting  source  to  which  to  ascribe  the  replies.  It  next
gets  easily  at  the  idea  of  helping  the  friend ;  but  the  definite  name  Jersey  is
harder  to  come  at,  and  is  preceded  by  island,  a  reply  which  could  hardly
have  been  given  save  by  some  one  groping  for  the  clearer  notion.  Then
when  the  name  of  some  helpful  resident  in  Jersey  is  asked  for — Mr.  D.  him-
self now  not  knowing  any  such  name — an  attempt  is  made  to  rap  out  the
name  which  is  in  most  minds  the  first  which  the  idea  of  Jersey  would  call
up.  Senseless  as  this  guess  was  (for  Mr.  D.  certainly  did  not  expect  Mrs.
Langtry  to  find  posts  for  his  friends),  it  was  quite  analogous  to  the  random,
dreamlike  associations  and  plays  upon  words  which  are  characteristic  of  sub-
liminal messages  of  all  kinds.

The  next  question,  again,  received  an  answer  which  might  have  been
credited  to  clairvoyance.  Mr.  C.  D.  handed  Miss  A.  a  ring  (not  that  I  see
reason  to  suppose  that  the  ring  made  any  difference)  and  simply  said,  "  Tell
me  about  my  friend  now  at  a  hotel  in  Paris,  with  whom  this  ring  is  con-
nected." Immediately  raps  spelt  out  the  sentence,  "  Case  for  operation."
A  few  details  of  the  disease  were  then  given,  which  corresponded  with  what
Mr.  C.  D.  knew,  and  which,  where  they  went  beyond  his  knowledge,  admitted
of  no  proof.

I  can  hardly  myself  doubt  that  this  knowledge  also  came  from  Mr.  C.  D.'s
mind,  and  not  (as  is  usually  professed  in  such  cases)  from  actual  inspection  of
the  patient.

It  may,  of  course,  be  asked  why  experiments  like  this,  which,  even  if  they
prove  nothing  more  than  thought-transference,  do  at  least  seem  to  prove  that
so  definitely,  are  not  constantly  repeated.  The  answer  is  that  there  are
very  few  persons  with  whom  they  can  be  repeated;  and  that  Mr.  C.  D.'s
personality  was  in  this  case  probably  as  essential  as  Miss  A.'s.  Mr.  D.,
though  he  cannot  by  himself  obtain  raps,  has  marked  power  of  a  psychical
kind,  and  is  in  fact  the  gentleman  to  whom  Miss  A.  has  above  alluded  as
having  been  demanded  by  her  guides  before  she  or  her  family  knew  any-
thing of  him  beyond  official  mentions  of  his  name  in  the  papers.  I  can  myself
vouch  for  the  recurring  scrawls,  "  Bring  C.  D." — "  Bring  C.  D."  which  puzzled
the  A.  family  some  six  years  ago,  when  they  certainly  were  not  aware  of
Mr.  D.'s  gift  (then  very  slightly  developed),  and  when  it  had  not  consciously
occurred  to  myself  that  good  might  result  from  the  collocation  of  the  two
sources  of  power.

IX.  The  next  case  which  I  shall  give  is  a  curious  one,  as  involving  (i)  raps,
(2)  a  crystal-vision,  (3)  an  apparition  seen  by  two  persons,  viz.  Miss  A.  herself
and  Mr.  Harry  de  Windt  (brother  of  the  Ranee),  well  known  as  a  traveller  in
Russia.  Unfortunately  no  notes  were  taken,  but  I  heard  of  the  incident  a  few
weeks  afterwards  from  Lady  Brooke  (the  Ranee),  Mr.  C.  D.,  Mrs.  A.,  and
Miss  A.  (all  present  at  the  time),  and  a  letter  from  Mr.  de  Windt  confirms  two
of  the  main  points.

In  September  1892,  on  the  occasion  of  the  first  meeting  of  Mr.  de  Windt


456  APPENDICES  [859  A

and  Miss  A.,  the  latter  wrote  the  word  Doishowalinksky,  which  at  first
was  thought  to  be  a  sentence,  but  turned  out  to  be  a  name  well  known  to
Mr.  de  Windt.

On  the  same  day  a  face  appeared  near  Mr.  C.  D.  which  was  clearly  seen
by  Miss  A.  and  Mr.  de  Windt,  and  recognised  by  the  latter,  as  stated  in  a
letter  to  me,  dated  October  fth,  1892:  "  I  can  only  tell  you  that  I  distinctly
saw  the  face  of  an  exile  1  am  acquainted  with,  one  Dombrowski,  who  is
(or  was)  located  at  Tomsk,  in  Western  Siberia.  A  message  was  also  sent  me"
[from  a  Russian  source ;  but  Mr.  de  Windt  explains  the  inexpedience  of  print-
ing further  particulars  of  this].

Miss  A.,  on  being  afterwards  shown  a  photograph  of  Dombrowski  (not,
however,  mixed  with  other  photographs,  as  it  should  have  been),  recognised  it,
but  said  that  the  face  as  seen  by  her  looked  older  and  more  worn ;  in  which
Mr.  de  Windt  concurred.  It  is  not  known  whether  Dombrowski  is  dead
or  alive.

On  the  same  day  Miss  A.,  looking  in  the  crystal,  saw  a  small  man  with
bright  red  hair  and  red  face,  a  big  stick,  a  long  petticoat,  and  a  fur  cap,  walk-
ing in  front  of  a  little  hut.  Mr.  de  Windt  recognised  this  figure  as  resembling
a  hill-man  set  to  watch  an  isolated  prisoner.  These  stunted  hill-men  dye  their
hair  with  red  clay.

A  few  days  later  (September  I5th,  1892)  a  message  was  given  by  raps  to
Lady  Brooke  (the  Ranee)  :  "  Tell  your  brother  (Mr.  de  Windt)  that  Shiskine
is  the  man  to  help  him."  Neither  Miss  A.  nor  Mr.  de  Windt  had  ever  con-
sciously heard  of  Shiskine,  but  in  the  St.  James's  Gazette  of  September  24th
they  observed  that  M.  Shiskine  had  received  a  certain  high  appointment,  which
explained  the  message.  His  appointment  had  also  been  mentioned  in  the
Times  of  August  3ist.  It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  subliminal  memory  may
externalise  itself  by  raps,  as  by  other  means.

X.  Among  the  habitual  "controls,"  "  Lord  Chancellor  Hardwicke  "  is  almost
the  only  one  of  sufficient  historical  mark  to  admit  of  our  testing  the  truth  of
his  statements.  He  gave  a  list  of  the  surnames  of  sixteen  of  his  friends.  .  .  .
Most  of  the  names  (though  not  all)  appear  in  Harris's  "  Life  of  Lord  Hardwicke  "  ;
but  in  several  cases  there  are  reasons,  not  apparent  in  the  Life,  which  make  it
probable  that  there  was  more  intimacy  than  the  incidental  mention  in  the  Life
would  imply.  The  case  resembles  the  biographies  of  musicians  written  auto-
matically by  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  (see  947).  The  tone  of  boisterous  humour
which  runs  through  these  messages  is  unlike  Miss  A.,  but  it  must  be  re-
membered that  in  the  "  objectivation  of  types  "  so  often  obtained  by  hypnotic
suggestion,  a  part  quite  alien  to  the  hypnotised  subject's  character  is  often
surprisingly  well  maintained.

In  a  more  recent  case  connected  with  the  control  known  as  "  Semirus,"
through  whom  medical  advice  has  often  been  conveyed  to  Miss  A.,  a
boy's  career  was  saved  by  the  advice  thus  given.  The  documents  re-
lating to  this  case  were  shown  to  me  by  Sir  Lawrence  Jones,  who  was
personally  acquainted  with  all  the  circumstances.

The  boy  was  at  school,  preparing  for  a  profession  which  involved  a
severe  medical  examination.  In  May,  1900,  about  a  year  before  the
examination,  a  serious  physical  defect  was  discovered,  and  a  well-known
medical  authority  advised  that  the  defect  could  not  be  sufficiently


862A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  457

remedied  to  enable  the  boy  to  pass.  Arrangements  had  actually  been
made  for  changing  his  career  when  it  was  suggested  that  his  parents,  who
were  then  abroad,  should  consult  "  Semirus."  They  wrote  to  Miss  A.,
with  whom  they  were  slightly  acquainted,  but  who  had  never  seen  the
boy,  and  begged  her  to  ask  "  Semirus  "  to  go  to  the  school — distant
about  thirty  miles  from  where  she  was  living — look  at  the  affected  limb,
and  give  an  opinion  on  the  case.  "  Semirus  "  insisted  that  "  some  really
good  surgeon  could  set  it  right."  A  specialist  was  then  consulted,  and  a
delicate  operation  was  successfully  performed.  The  boy  has  since  passed
his  examination  without  any  difficulty.

862  A.  The  following  is  another  case  of  planchette-writing  communi-
cated by  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  the  operators  being  himself  and
Mrs.  R.  The  account  is  quoted  from  faz  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  319
(November,  1890).

Extract  from  Mrs.  R^s  Journal.

October  loth,  [1890,]  Friday,  at ,  Mr.  Wedgwood  and  I  sitting.     The

board  moved  after  a  short  pause  and  one  preliminary  circling.

"David — David — David — dead  143  years."

The  butler  at  this  moment  announced  lunch,  and  Mr.  Wedgwood  said  to  the
spirit,  "  Will  you  go  on  for  us  afterwards,  as  we  must  break  off  now  ?  "

"  I  will  try."

During  lunch  Mr.  Wedgwood  was  reckoning  up  the  date  indicated  as  1 747,
and  conjecturing  that  the  control  was  perhaps  David  Hume,  who  he  thought
had  died  about  then.  On  our  beginning  again  to  sit,  the  following  was
volunteered  : —

"  I  am  not  Hume.  I  have  come  with  [Mrs.  V.,  Mrs.  R.'s  sister].  I  was
attracted  to  her  during  her  life  in  America.  My  work  was  in  that  land,  and
my  earthly  toil  was  cut  short  early,  as  hers  has  been.  I  died  at  thirty  years
old.  I  toiled  five  years,  carrying  forward  the  lamp  of  God's  truth  as  I  knew  it."

Mr.  Wedgwood  remarked  that  he  must  have  been  a  missionary.

"  Yes,  in  Susquehannah  and  other  places."

"  Can  you  give  any  name  besides  David  ?  "

"David  Bra— David  Bra— David  Brain— David  Braine— David  Brain."

Mr.  W. :  "  Do  you  mean  that  your  name  is  Braine  ?  "

"  Very  nearly  right."

Mr.  W. :  "  Try  again."

"  David  Braine.  Not  quite  all  the  name ;  right  so  far  as  it  goes  ...  I  was
born  in  1717."

:  Mr.  W.  :  "  Were  you  a  native  of  America  ?  "

"  (Illegible)  My  native  land.  The  Indians  knew  many  things.  They  heard
me,  and  my  work  prospered.  In  some  things  they  were  wise."

Mr.  W. :  "  Are  you  an  American  ?  "

"America  I  hold  to  be  my  country  as  we  consider  things.  I  worked
at "  (sentence  ends  with  a  line  of  D.'s).

Here  Mr.  Wedgwood  felt  tired,  and  Miss  Hughes  proposed  that  she  and  I
should  go  for  a  walk  while  he  rested.  When  we  came  in  Mr.  Wedgwood  said
he  thought  it  had  come  into  his  head  who  our  control  was.  He  had  some
recollection  that  in  the  eighteenth  century  a  man  named  David  Brainard  was


45$  APPENDICES  [864  A

missionary  to  the  North  American  Indians.  We  sat  again,  and  the  following
was  written : —

"  I  am  glad  you  know  me.  I  had  not  power  to  complete  name  or  give  more
details.  I  knew  that  secret  of  the  district.  It  was  guarded  by  the  Indians,
and  was  made  known  to  two  independent  circles.  Neither  of  them  succeeded,
but  the  day  will  come  that  will  uncover  the  gold."

It  was  suggested  that  this  meant  Heavenly  truth.

"  I  spoke  of  earthly  gold."

Mr.  Wedgwood  said  the  writing  was  so  faint  he  thought  power  was
failing.

"  Yes,  nearly  gone.  I  wrote  during  my  five  years  of  work.  It  kept  my
heart  alive."

Mr.  Wedgwood  writes  : —

I  could  not  think  at  first  where  I  had  ever  heard  of  Brainard,  but  I  learn
from  my  daughter  in  London  that  my  sister-in-law,  who  lived  with  me  forty  or
fifty  years  ago,  was  a  great  admirer  of  Brainard,  and  seemed  to  have  an  account
of  his  life,  but  I  am  quite  certain  that  I  never  opened  the  book  and  knew
nothing  of  the  dates,  which  are  all  correct,  as  well  as  his  having  been  a  mis-
sionary to  the  Susquehannahs.

In  another  letter  Mr.  Wedgwood  writes  : —

I  see  the  name  is  Brainard,  not  ard,  as  I  had  supposed,  and  this  removes  a
difficulty  in  the  writing.  Planchette  had  written  Braine,  and  said  that  was
right  as  far  as  it  went,  which  it  would  not  have  been  if  the  name  had  been
Brainard.  My  daughter  has  sent  me  extracts  from  his  life,  stating  that  he  was
born  in  1718,  and  not  1717  as  planchette  wrote.  But  Mrs.  R.'s  Biographical
Dictionary  says  that  he  died  in  1747,  aged  30.

Mrs.  R.  writes  that  she  had  no  knowledge  whatever  of  David  Brainerd
before  this.

Extract  from  Biographical  Dictionary  sent  by  Mr.  Wedgwood  : —

Brainerd,  David.  A  celebrated  American  missionary,  who  signalised  him-
self by  his  successful  endeavours  to  convert  the  Indians  on  the  Susquehanna,
Delaware,  &c.  Died,  aged  30,  1747.

It  is  perhaps  noteworthy  in  connection  with  the  last  sentence  of  the
planchette-writing  that  in  the  life  of  Brainerd  by  Jonathan  Edwards
extracts  given  from  his  journal  show  that  he  wrote  a  good  deal,  e.g.
"  Feb.  3,  1744.  Could  not  but  write  as  well  as  meditate,"  &c.  "  Feb.  15,
X745'  Was  engaged  in  writing  almost  all  the  day."  He  invariably  speaks
of  comfort  in  connection  with  writing.

864  A.  Experiments  by  Professor  Rossi- Pagnoni.  I  give  extracts
from  the  report  on  these  experiments  by  Mr.  H.  Babington  Smith,  C.S.I., —
a  member  of  the  Council  of  the  S.P.R. — published  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  v.  pp.  549-65.

Professor  Rossi- Pagnoni  is  Director  of  the  Ginnasio  or  Public  School
at  Pesaro,  a  small  town  on  the  east  coast  of  Italy,  a  little  to  the  north


864A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  459

of  Ancona.  In  the  year  1871  he  was  led  to  take  an  interest  in  Spiritualism,
and  began  daily  to  practise  automatic  writing  under  the  advice  and  direc-
tion of  a  friend  who  had  frequently  obtained  communications  from  spirits,
as  he  believed,  by  that  means.  He  held  a  lead  pencil  in  his  hand,  allow-
ing its  point  to  rest  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  but  not  touching  the  table  with
his  arm,  and  waited  for  results.  For  the  first  forty-three  days  the  move-
ments of  the  pencil  were  incoherent  and  unintelligible.  On  the  forty-
fourth  a  name  was  written ;  and  from  that  time  onwards  the  facility  and
distinctness  of  the  writing  increased,  and  communications  of  considerable
length  were  often  obtained.

These  experiments,  and  also  experiments  in  table-rapping,  which  had
been  tried  by  Professor  Rossi  and  a  small  circle  of  friends,  were  discon-
tinued in  the  year  1877,  owing  to  the  increased  claims  of  scholastic  duties
upon  the  Professor's  time.  In  1886  he  found  leisure  to  resume  them  and
was  then  joined  by  Dr.  Moroni,  Municipal  doctor  at  Pesaro,  who  brought
to  the  sittings  a  hypnotic  subject  of  his,  named  Isabella  Carzetti.  The
sittings  gradually  developed  into  spiritualistic  seances,  with  Carzetti  in  the
hypnotic  state  as  speaking  medium,  purporting  to  be  controlled  by  the
spirits  of  deceased  persons.  Mr.  Smith,  however,  after  examining  the
evidence,  concluded  that  the  medium  showed  no  proof  of  any  super-
normal powers.

In  the  year  1877  Professor  Rossi  published  a  pamphlet  entitled,
Intorno  ai  Fenomeni  Spiri tici,  Lettera  air  Onorando  Signor  Conte  Terenzio
Mamiani.  This  contains,  besides  other  matter,  reports  of  the  more
striking  results  obtained  in  the  earlier  series  of  experiments,  which  were
concerned  chiefly  with  automatic  writing.

In  November,  1888,  Mr.  Smith  paid  a  short  visit  to  Pesaro  and  had
the  opportunity  of  seeing  and  making  extracts  from  the  records  of  the
sittings  and  other  documents.  Among  these  were  the  original  automatic
manuscripts,  which  have  been  preserved  from  the  beginning.

The  following  are  some  of  the  cases  of  automatic  writing  : —

In  April  1872  a  friend  asked  Rossi  to  evoke  the  spirit  of  a  relation,  formerly
living  near  Modena,  who  had  been  dead  about  two  years.  "  I  had  never  known
her,"  says  Rossi,  "  and  my  friend  told  me  what  I  was  to  ask  her  on  his  account.
I  did  as  I  was  asked,  and  after  the  answer  was  obtained,  to  my  great  astonish-
ment (for  a  similar  thing  had  never  happened  before)  I  felt  my  hand  impelled
to  draw,  one  after  the  other,  two  flowers,  with  their  little  leaves.  After  this
addio  was  written,  and  the  movement  ceased.  The  following  day  I  took  the
answer  to  my  friend  and  told  him  of  the  curious  drawings.  *  Do  not  be  sur-
prised,' said  he.  '  Know  that  she  was  very  fond  of  drawing,  and  also  every
time  that  she  writes  by  my  hand,  she  makes  me  draw  something.'  "

This  account  is  confirmed  by  a  document  dated  December  28th,  1888,  and
signed  by  Cesare  Perseguiti,  barrister,  who  states  that  he  is  the  friend  men-
tioned by  Rossi,  and  that  the  account  of  the  incident  is  perfectly  true  in  all
particulars.


460  APPENDICES  [864  A

With  regard  to  the  character  of  the  writing  produced,  Rossi  says
{Letter  to  Mamiani,  p.  133)  : —

It  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  say  that  my  ordinary  handwriting  is  ugly
and  always  of  one  pattern.  Nevertheless,  when  writing  as  a  medium,  I  have
had  very  various  forms  of  caligraphy  according  as  various  beings  made  com-
munication. When  these  beings  presented  themselves  again,  often  unex-
pectedly and  after  a  long  interval,  they  reproduced  their  former  handwriting.
Moreover,  in  that  uncomfortable  position  of  hand  and  arm  I  have  had  cali-
graphic  forms  so  perfect  that  I  could  not  reproduce  them  when  writing  at
ease.

This  statement  by  itself  is  too  vague  to  be  of  much  value  as  evidence  ;
but  the  following  documents  confirm  it,  and  give  more  precise  informa-
tion as  to  the  persons  whose  writing  was  reproduced,  and  as  to  the  degree
of  likeness  obtained  : —

PESARO,  January  isf,  1889.

I  have  a  lively  recollection  of  having  come  sometimes  to  your  house  in
1873,  to  take  part  in  spiritualistic  experiments  with  the  table  and  with  writing.
One  evening,  after  some  experiments  with  the  table,  I  asked  you  to  summon
my  dear  writing-master,  Luigi  Brunetti,  to  write.  He  had  at  that  time  been
dead  for  some  years.  .  .  .  You  set  yourself  to  try  the  experiment,  the  pencil
resting  vertically  upon  the  paper,  and  your  wrist  and  elbow  raised.  When  the
motion  of  the  hand,  which  you  assured  us  was  spontaneous,  began,  there
appeared,  after  the  signature  of  Brunetti,  some  lines  of  writing  of  various  sizes.
The  first  was  extremely  small — so  that  a  magnifying  glass  was  necessary  to
read  it  and  to  see  its  great  precision.  The  following  lines  were  of  middle  size,
and  the  last  large.  This,  I  recollect,  was  a  beautiful  verse.  I  remember  that
I  immediately  bore  witness  to  those  present — in  accordance  with  the  truth —
that,  specially  in  the  larger  character,  the  manner  of  writing  and  the  hand  of
my  dear  master  were  clearly  to  be  seen.

So  much  for  the  truth,  which  now,  also,  I  willingly  confirm.

(Signed)  CLETO  MASINI,

Professor  of  Writing  and  Book-keeping  at  the  Royal
Technical  School  of  Pesaro.

When  Mr.  Smith  was  at  Pesaro  he  saw  the  original  MS.  here  referred
to,  and  states  that  the  writing  was  pretty  and  regular,  and  entirely  different
from  Professor  Rossi's  usual  hand.

PESARO,  January  2nd,  1889.

I  comply  with  your  wish  and  willingly  declare,  as  I  have  a  lively  recol-
lection of  the  fact,  that  towards  the  end  of  1873  I  had  occasion  to  go  to  your
house.  .  .  .  You  showed  me  certain  communications,  written  in  pencil,  which
you  said  you  had  received  from  the  spirit  of  the  lamented  Signer  Alessandro
Paterni,  uncle  of  my  wife.  I  said  that  the  writing  of  the  name  and  surname  j
seemed  to  me  very  like  the  real  signature  of  my  deceased  connection.  You
asserted  that  you  had  never  seen  his  signature,  and,  in  fact,  it  was  very  pro-
bable that  it  was  entirely  unknown  to  you.

PIETRO  BONINI,  Captain.


865  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  461

In  the  following  case  a  message,  apparently  telepathic,  was  received
by  means  of  raps  and  automatic  writing.

(Letter  to  Mamiani,  p.  143)  : —

On  November  2ist,  1873,  about  half-past  ten  in  the  evening,  Rossi  was  in  his
study.  He  had  been  correcting  proofs  for  more  than  an  hour,  and  was  tired
and  rather  cold.  In  consequence  he  intended,  when  his  work  was  finished,  not
to  go  to  the  cafe,  as  was  then  his  custom  almost  every  evening  about  eleven,  but
to  warm  himself  a  little  with  a  walk  through  the  streets.  He  then  perceived  two
slight  but  very  distinct  raps  close  to  him  on  a  side  door  opening  into  an  inner
room  in  which  there  was  no  one.  He  paid  no  attention  to  these,  trying  to
persuade  himself  that  they  were  due  to  natural  causes.  Half-an-hour  after-
wards he  had  finished  his  work  and  was  going  out ;  but  at  the  moment  when
he  had  his  hand  upon  the  door  of  his  rooms,  to  shut  it  after  him,  he  heard  a
loud  knock  upon  it  as  if  given  with  the  fist.  He  had  no  doubt  that  this  was
spiritualistic  in  character,  and  returning  at  once  to  his  room,  sat  down  to  write.
He  fully  expected  to  receive  a  warning  against  going  out  that  evening  for  fear
of  some  dangerous  encounter.  Instead,  however,  of  any  such  warning  the
following  message  appeared :  "  My  sincere  friendship  leads  me  to  warn  you
that  you  are  desired  by  S.1  (i.e.  Stanislao  Cecchi)  :  go,  therefore,  to  see  him."
This  message  was  signed  with  the  name  of  a  dead  person  in  whose  name
messages  had  been  obtained  on  other  occasions.  Rossi  considered  it  extremely
improbable  that  Cecchi  (an  acquaintance  with  whom  he  was  not  then  intimate)
would  wish  to  see  him  ;  but  went  at  once  to  the  cafe  where  he  was  generally  to
be  found  at  that  hour.  As  he  approached,  he  saw  Stanislao  and  some  friends
coming  out  of  the  cafe.  "  He  had  no  sooner  seen  me,"  continues  Rossi,  "  than
he  came  to  meet  me,  and  said  he  had  need  of  a  certain  favour  from  me.
Knowing  from  some  conversations  which  I  had  had  with  him  that  he  was  a
disbeliever  (in  Spiritualism),  I  caught  at  the  opportunity  and  answered  that  I
would  willingly  do  him  the  service,  on  condition  that  he  would  at  once  accom-
pany me  to  my  house.  .  .  .  We  went  to  my  house  together,  we  entered  into  the
room  together,  and  I  showed  him  on  my  table  the  message  which  had  caused
me  to  go  in  search  of  him.  ...  He  subsequently  gave  an  account  of  the
occurrence  to  some  friends,  though  without  adopting  my  explanation,  and,  so
far  as  he  was  able,  loyally  bore  witness  to  its  truth."

Stanislao  Cecchi  is  now  dead,  and  therefore  direct  confirmation  of  this
account  cannot  be  obtained;  but  in  a  letter  written  in  1889,  a  friend  of
his — Carlo  Cinelli — at  Professor  Rossi's  request  gives  his  recollections
of  what  he  had  heard  from  Cecchi  at  the  time,  and  these  correspond  with
Professor  Rossi's  account.

865  A.  The  next  case  is  taken  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.
p.  107,  being  there  quoted  from  an  article  in  the  Arena  for  August  1891,
entitled  "  Psychic  Experiences,"  by  Sara  A.  Underwood ; 2  with  In-

1  I  believe  that  the  name,  and  not  merely  the  initial,  was  written.     The  initial  only
is  given  in  the  printed  account,  because  at  that  time  Professor  Rossi  was  not  at  liberty
to  publish  the  name. — H.  B.  S.

2  See  also  Automatic  or  Spirit  Writing,  with  other  Psychic  Experiences,  by   Sara
A.  Underwood  (Chicago,  1896).


462  APPENDICES  [865  A

troductory  Remarks  by  B.  F.  Underwood  (known  to  me),  who  writes
thus:

The  statements  in  this  paper  as  to  what  was  written  in  my  presence  pur-
porting to  be  communications  from  "spirits,"  and  as  to  the  circumstances
under  which  it  was  written,  are  scrupulously  correct.  The  "  communications,"
it  is  certain,  are  from  an  intelligent  source.  Mrs.  Underwood  is  the  person  by
whose  hand  they  are  put  in  form.  That  she  is  not  labouring  under  a  mistake
in  thinking  that  she  is  unconscious  of  the  thought  expressed  until  she  has  read
the  writing, — if,  indeed,  such  a  mistake  in  a  sane  mind  is  possible, — I  am  cer-
tain. Sometimes,  owing  to  the  illegibility  of  the  writing,  she  has  to  study  out
sentences.  The  writing  varies  in  style,  not  only  on  different  evenings,  but  on
the  same  evening ;  it  is  apparently  the  writing  of  not  fewer  than  twenty  per-
sons, and  generally  bearing  no  resemblance  whatever,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  to
Mrs.  Underwood's  handwriting,  which  is  remarkably  uniform.  The  communi-
cations are  unlike  in  the  degrees  of  intelligence,  in  the  quality  of  thought,  and  in
the  disposition  which  they  show.  Detailed  statements  of  facts  unknown  to
either  of  us,  but  which,  weeks  afterwards,  were  learned  to  be  correct,  have
been  written,  and  repeated  again  and  again,  when  disbelieved  and  contradicted
by  us.  All  the  writing  has  been  done  in  my  presence,  but  most  of  it  while  I
have  been  busily  occupied  with  work  which  demanded  my  undivided  attention.
The  views  expressed  are  often  different  from  my  own,  and  quite  as  frequently,
perhaps,  opposed  to  Mrs.  Underwood's  views.

Mrs.  Underwood  writes  as  follows  : —

The  modus  operandi  is  the  simplest  possible.  As  I  remembered  that  Mr.
Underwood  was  rather  averse  to  the  planchette  experiments  of  former  years,
thinking  them  unwholesome  and  deteriorating  in  their  tendency,  I  at  first  said
nothing  to  him  of  my  new  psychical  experiments,  though  these  were  made
oftenest  in  his  presence  in  the  evening  when  we  both  sat  at  one  writing  table,
near  each  other,  busied  with  our  individual  literary  work.  As  I  experimented
in  his  absence  as  well  as  in  his  presence,  I  soon  found  that  I  got  the  most
coherent  writings  when  he  was  present.  Indeed  I  could  get  nothing  coherent,
and  very  frequently  nothing  at  all,  when  he  was  away,  but  when  he  was  present
the  communications  began  to  grow  strangely  interesting,  and  as  he  was  called
upon  repeatedly,  I  felt  obliged  to  invite  his  attention,  when  the  most  surprising
answers  were  given,  which  roused  his  curiosity  and  interest.  It  has  been  ex-
plained that  his  presence  is  necessary  for  me  to  obtain  writing,  as  "  blended
power  is  best."  Two  or  three  times,  at  the  suggestion  of  this  intelligence,  we
have  asked  two  of  our  intimate  literary  friends — non-Spiritualists — to  be  pre-
sent, but  each  time  with  comparative  failure ;  afterwards  we  were  informed
that  the  cause  of  failure  was  the  introduction  of  persons  unused  to  the  condi-
tions, who  broke  up  the  harmonious  relations  necessary  to  communication;  in
time  they  could  be  of  help.

It  would  take  a  volume  to  present  all  the  interesting  statements  as  to  an
advanced  stage  of  existence,  only  hidden  from  us  because  of  the  inadequacy
of  our  sense  perceptions,  and  by  the  conditions  imposed  upon  us  at  this  stage
of  our  progress,  which  have  been  given  from  this  source.  Explanations  have
been  made  why  communication  through  the  agency  of  certain  persons,  though
not  through  all,  is  possible.  The  conditions,  it  is  alleged,  are  not  entirely  de-
pendent upon  the  superior  intelligence  or  morality  of  the  persons  with  whom


865A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  463

the  intelligences  can  become  en  rapport.  These  invisibles  declare  that  they  are
as  seriously  and  anxiously  experimenting  on  their  side  to  discover  modes  of
untrammelled  communication  with  us,  as  we  on  our  side  ought  to  be,  if  what
they  write  be  true,  and  if  such  a  thing  is  possible.  "  Spirits  "  they  persistently
insist  upon  being  called.  In  this  paper  I  can  give  only  a  statement  of
some  things  which  do  not  seem  explicable  on  the  hypothesis  of  mind-
reading,  thought-transference,  hypnotism,  or  subconsciousness.  In  all  these
experiments  I  have  been  in  a  perfectly  normal  state.  The  only  physical
indication  of  any  outside  influence  is  an  occasional  slight  thrill  as  of  an
electric  current  from  my  shoulder  to  the  hand  which  holds  the  waiting
pen.  Step  by  step  I  have  been  taught  a  series  of  signals  to  aid  me  in
correctly  reading  the  communications.  I  have  no  power  to  summon  at  will
any  individual  I  wish.  I  have  repeatedly,  but  in  vain,  tried  to  get  messages
from  some  near  and  dear  friends.  It  has  been  explained  that  on  their  side,
as  on  ours,  certain  "  conditions  "  must  exist  in  order  to  get  in  "control."
When  "  eh  ?  "  is  written  I  know  that  the  operator  at  the  other  end  of  the  line
is  ready  to  communicate.  When  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence  or  a  word
"  gone  "  or  "  change  "  is  written,  I  understand  that  the  connection  is  broken,
and  I  must  not  expect  the  completion  of  that  message.  When  a  line  like  this

is  drawn,  it  is  a  sign  that  that  sentence  is  completed  or  the  communication

ended.  So  with  other  things.  Rhymes  are  often  unexpectedly  written,  especially
if  the  "  control "  professes  to  be  a  poet,  and  they  are  dashed  off  so  rapidly  that
I  do  not  understand  their  import  until  the  close,  when  I  can  read  them  over.
Impromptu  rhyming  is  a  feat  utterly  impossible  to  either  Mr.  Underwood  or
myself.  Names  persistently  recur  which  are  unknown  to  us.  Many  different
handwritings  appear,  some  of  them  far  superior  to  my  own.  When  I  first
began  to  get  communications  I  destroyed,  in  a  day  or  two  after  they  were
written,  the  slips  of  paper  containing  the  writing,  but  as  the  developments
became  more  interesting,  Mr.  Underwood  suggested  that  they  be  preserved
for  reference.  I  acted  on  this  suggestion,  and  thus  in  the  instances  of  facts
given  outside  our  own  knowledge,  I  am  enabled  to  give  the  exact  wording  of
each  communieation.  Our  questions  were  asked  viva  voce,  and  as  they  were
often  suggested  by  what  had  been  previously  written,  I  either  at  the  time  or
soon  afterwards  wrote  them  just  above  the  reply.  I  am  not,  therefore,  trust-
ing at  all  to  memory  in  the  statements  I  shall  make.

A  gentleman  of  this  city  (whom  I  will  call  John  Smith,  but  whose  real
name  was  a  more  uncommon  one)  with  whom  Mr.  Underwood  had  been
acquainted  many  years,  but  of  whose  family  relations  he  knew  little,  died
here  more  than  a  year  ago.  Mr.  Underwood  had  met  him  but  once  in  the
year  previous  to  his  death,  he  having  been  away  on  account  of  failing  health,
staying,  we  understood,  with  a  daughter  recently  married,  whose  home  was
in  Florida.  The  first  name  of  this  married  daughter,  or  of  any  of  Mr.
Smith's  daughters  except  one,  was  unknown  to  Mr.  Underwood.  I  had  met
one  of  his  daughters  whose  name  I  knew  to  be  Jennie.  I  also  knew  that
there  was  another  named  Violet.  I  was  not  sure,  however,  whether  this  was
the  name  of  the  married  one,  or  of  another  unmarried,  but  had  the  impres-
sion that  Violet  was  unmarried.  One  evening,  while  waiting  for  automatic
writing  with  no  thought  of  Mr.  Smith  in  my  mind,  and  Mr.  Underwood  sitting
near  me  at  the  table  with  his  thoughts  concentrated  on  an  article  he  was
preparing,  this  was  written  :  "John  Smith  will  now  enter  into  conversation  with


464  APPENDICES  [865  A

B.  F.  Underwood."  I  read  this  to  Mr.  Underwood,  who  laid  aside  his  pen,
and  in  order  to  test  the  matter,  asked  if  Mr.  Smith  remembered  the  last  time
they  met,  soon  after  his  return  from  the  South,  and  a  short  time  previous  to
his  death.  There  was  some  delay  in  the  answer,  but  soon  reply  came,  "  On
Madison  Street."  "  Whereabouts  on  Madison  ?"  was  asked.  "  Near  Washing-
ton." "  At  what  hour  ?  "  "  About  10  A.M.,  raining."  As  it  was  rarely  that  Mr.
Underwood  was  in  that  part  of  the  city  at  so  early  an  hour,  and  especially  on  a
rainy  day,  I  doubted  the  correctness  of  this  reply,  blit  Mr.  Underwood  recalled
to  my  rmnd  the  unusual  circumstance  which  made  it  necessary  for  him  to  be  in
that  vicinity  on  the  day  and  at  the  hour  named,  on  which  he  and  Mr.  Smith,
he  distinctly  remembered,  last  met.  Only  a  few  words  passed  between  them  on
account  of  the  rain.  After  this,  writing,  purporting  to  be  from  Mr.  Smith,
came  frequently.  Very  soon  something  was  written  which  induced  Mr.
Underwood  half  sportively  to  inquire  whether  there  was  anything  which
troubled  Mr.  Smith,  anything  which  he  wished  he  had  done,  but  had  omitted,
before  his  death.  The  answer  came,  "  One  thing — change  deeds  on  Violet's
account.  None  of  my  wife's  are  at  my  daughter's  disposal.  All  in  her  own
disposal."  Mr.  Underwood  asked  if  it  was  meant  that  he  had  not  left  his
property — for  he  was  a  man  of  some  wealth — as  he  now  wished  he  had.  "  You
are  right,"  was  written,  "  want  all  my  girls  to  share  alike."  "  Which  daughter
do  you  refer  to  ?  "  was  asked.  "Went  away  from  her  in  Florida — Violet,"  was
the  answer.  I  remarked,  "  Why,  I  thought  Violet  was  one  of  the  unmarried
girls,  but  it  must  be  that  that  is  the  name  of  the  married  daughter."  Then  Mr.
Underwood  was  strongly  urged  to  call  on  Mr.  Smith's  married  son,  James,  with
whom  Mr.  Underwood  had  a  slight  acquaintance,  and  tell  him  of  this  com-
munication. "  Clearly  state  my  desire  that  my  daughter  Violet  share  equally
with  her  sisters."  Of  course  this  was  utterly  out  of  the  question.  At  that  time
we  had  no  intention  of  informing  any  one  of  our  psychic  experience,  and  if
we  had,  Mr.  James  Smith  would  have  thought  us  insane  or  impertinent  to  come
to  him  with  so  ridiculous  a  story,  the  truth  of  which  we  ourselves  strongly
doubted.  Pages  were,  however,  written  concerning  the  matter  in  so  earnest
and  pleading  a  manner  that  I  came  to  feel  conscience-stricken  at  refusing  to
do  what  was  asked,  and  to  shrink  from  seeing  Mr.  Smith's  name  appear.
Once  was  written,  "  Say  to  James  that  in  my  new  position,  and  with  my  new
views  of  life,  I  feel  that  I  did  wrong  to  treat  his  sister  Violet  as  I  did.  She
was  not  to  blame  for  following  out  her  own  convictions,  when  I  had  incul-
cated independent  thought  and  action  for  all."  This  and  other  sentences  of
the  kind  seemed  to  convey  the  idea  that  Violet  had  in  some  way  incurred  his
displeasure  by  doing  according  to  her  own  will  in  opposition  to  his.  This
was  puzzling  to  us,  as  we  knew  that  in  her  marriage,  at  least,  the  daughter  we
thought  to  be  Violet  had  followed  her  father's  wishes.

A  few  weeks  later,  however,  came  an  unlooked-for  verification  of  Mr.
Smith's  messages.  In  a  conversation  between  Mr.  Underwood  and  a  business
friend  of  Mr.  Smith,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  all  his  affairs,  regret  was
expressed  that  so  wealthy  a  man  had  left  so  little  for  a  certain  purpose.  Mr.
Underwood  then  inquired  as  to  what  disposition  had  been  made  of  his  property,
and  was  told  that  he  had  left  it  mainly  to  his  wife  and  children — so  much  to  this
one,  and  that.  "  But  Violet,"  continued  Mr.  Underwood's  informant,  "  was  left
only  a  small  amount,  as  Mr.  Smith  was  angry  because  she  married  against  his
wishes."  "  Why,"  remarked  Mr.  Underwood,  "  I  understood  that  he  approved


865A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  465

of  the  match,  and  the  fact  that  he  accompanied  herself  and  husband  to
Florida,  and  remained  with  them  some  time,  would  seem  to  indicate  that."
"  Oh,  you  are  thinking  of  Lucy,  the  eldest  girl ;  her  marriage  was  all  right,  but
Violet,  one  of  the  younger  daughters,  going  to  Florida  with  her  [Lucy's]  hus-
band, fell  in  love  with  a  young  man  of  whom  her  father  did  not  approve,
so  she  made  a  runaway  marriage,  and  on  account  of  his  displeasure,  Mr.
Smith  left  her  only  a  small  sum."  The  intelligence  writing  was  aware  of  facts
unknown  to  either  Mr.  Underwood  or  myself,  and  no  other  persons  were  in  the
room  when  these  communications  were  given.

In  the  Arena  for  June  1892  Mr.  Underwood  continues  : —

My  presence  has  been  and  is  now  one  of  the  conditions  of  Mrs.  Underwood's
getting  connected  and  coherent  writing.  Only  a  few  words  and  a  sentence  or
two  have  been  written  occasionally  in  my  absence.  Once  when  I  was  absent
from  home  the  peculiar  sensation  which  had  always  been  felt  in  Mrs.  Under-
wood's right  hand  before  the  writing  began,  was  felt  in  the  left  hand,  with
which  a  name  was  written  with  letters  reversed,  and  she  could  read  it  only
when  impressed  to  do  so.  She  held  it  before  the  mirror.  It  was  the  name  of
a  person  two  hundred  miles  distant,  who  was  still  alive,  but,  as  was  subse-
quently learned,  in  an  unconscious  state  at  the  time,  and  very  near  death,
which  occurred  two  or  three  days  afterwards.

The  word  "  death  "  is  never  used  except  with  "  so-called "  before  it,  or
"  which  is  a  new  birth,"  or  some  other  explanatory  or  qualifying  expression.
The  writing  purports  to  be  from  extra-mediumistic  and  extra-mundane  sources
— from  invisible  human  beings  who  once  inhabited  this  earth.  The  writing
always,  whether  purporting  to  be  from  a  person  of  high  or  low  degree,  claims
that  the  controlling  intelligence  is  a  spirit — a  discarnate  human  being.  Any
intimation  that  the  communicating  intelligence  may  be  the  medium's  sub-
conscious ego,  a  fraction  of  which  only  rises  to  the  level  of  conscious  knowledge,
is  met  with  responses  to  the  effect  that  it  is  strange  anybody  can  believe  such
a  vagary.  One  claim,  to  which  there  has  never  been  exception  in  any  writing
purporting  to  be  a  message,  is  that  a  "  spirit,"  a  discarnate  human  being,  moves
the  hand  that  holds  the  pen.  Generally  names  and  dates  are  not  given  ;  and
when  they  are,  they  are  as  liable  to  be  wrong  as  correct.  In  answer  to  questions
as  to  the  reason  of  this,  it  has  been  said  substantially  that  memories  and
reminiscences  are  only  gathered  up  as  the  departed  are  able  to  come  in  contact
with  persons  and  objects  of  earth.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  I  get  tired  and
nervous  when  this  writing  is  prolonged ;  it  exhausts  me  much  more  than  it
does  Mrs.  Underwood,  on  whom  it  never  leaves  any  depressing  influence.

The  intelligence  which  seems  to  be  extraneous,  which  invariably  claims
to  be  a  departed  spirit,  now  one,  now  another,  is  sometimes  inferior  intellec-
tually to  the  medium ;  at  other  times,  in  certain  lines  of  thought,  in  the  use
of  words,  and  in  the  statement  of  facts,  the  intelligence  that  directs  the  pen
evinces  larger  knowledge  than  Mrs.  Underwood  consciously  possesses.  The
spelling  is  sometimes  different  from  her  own,  and  the  style  is  often  stilted,  and
even  grandiose,  while  her  style  is  simple  and  natural.  In  some  cases  the
writing  relates  to  what  is  entirely  unknown  to  the  writer — to  her  ordinary
consciousness — though  in  some  of  these  cases  I  can  conceive  it  as  possible,
and  deem  it  probable,  that  the  writing  relates  to  what  has  been  noted  or
learned  by  the  passive  consciousness,  and  is  evoked  therefrom  even  though
there  is  no  recognition  of  its  having  been  included  in  the  person's  experience.
VOL.  n.  2  G


466  APPENDICES  [867  A

But  in  other  cases  the  writing  has  contained  evidence  of  knowledge  that  Mrs.
Underwood  never  could  have  obtained  in  any  known  way.  She  gave  one  or
two  instances  in  the  August  Arena.  I  will  relate  another  of  her  experiences
which,  in  my  opinion,  proves  that  there  are  supernormal  methods  of  obtaining
knowledge.

One  morning  a  message  purporting  to  be  from  a  young  man  recently
deceased  was  received.  Neither  Mrs.  Underwood  nor  I  had  ever  seen  his
handwriting.  We  knew  his  name  only  as  William  S.  The  message  was
signed  "Z.  W.  S."  At  the  time  I  remarked  that  I  did  not  believe  there  was
any  Z  in  his  name,  and  in  this  opinion  Mrs.  Underwood  concurred.  A  few
days  afterwards  we  met  the  father  and  the  mother  of  the  young  man,  who  were
so  impressed  with  the  resemblance  between  the  handwriting  and  that  of  their
son  that  they  wished  to  take  the  writing  with  them.  There  was  a  Z  in  the
name,  but  it  was  the  initial  of  his  second  name,  and  not  of  the  first,  as  it  was
written.  In  the  presence  of  the  young  man's  mother,  Mrs.  Underwood's  hand
was  moved  to  write,  and  the  lady  asked  if  her  father  would  give  a  test  by
writing  his  name.  The  first  name,  Solomon,  was  written  slowly  ;  and  after  a
pause,  the  surname  was  written  very  quickly.  Mrs.  Underwood  did  not  know
and  never  had  known  the  name,  which  was  written  correctly;  and  Mr.  S.,
who  is  a  lawyer  and  a  man  of  critical  and  discriminating  mind,  and  his  wife
both  declared  that  the  signature  closely  resembled  that  of  the  old  gentleman.
Some  days  ago  I  wrote  to  Mr.  S.,  asking  him  whether,  after  further  reflection,
he  could  suggest  a  possible  explanation  of  what  Mrs.  Underwood  wrote  without
recourse  to  any  occult  theory.  He  replied  and  referred  to  the  message  pur-
porting to  be  from  his  son,  thus :  "  I  have  compared  it  with  signatures  of  our
boy.  As  I  told  you  in  Chicago  at  the  time,  the  writing  bears  a  very  strong
resemblance  to  his  writing.  Mrs.  Underwood  did  not,  in  my  opinion,  either
consciously  or  unconsciously,  have  any  knowledge  of  Will's  full  name.  The
writing,  while  quite  similar  to  Will's,  is  very  different  from  Mrs.  Underwood's.
My  wife's  father's  name  had  not  been  mentioned  at  all.  Never  had  been  in
Mrs.  Underwood's  presence.  I  don't  think  she  had  ever  met  a  member  of  Mrs.
S.'s  family  by  that  name,  yet  she  certainly  wrote  the  name  of  Mrs.  S.'s  father,
Solomon  M.}  very  plainly,  when  asked  to  write  the  name  of  the  person  who  had
just  written  that  he  had  something  to  say.  This  writing  was  also  very,  very
similar  to  the  handwriting  of  the  old  gentleman."

Fully  aware  that  incidents  long  forgotten  may  be  recalled,  that  possibly
no  lapse  of  memory  is  irrevocable,  and  that  under  certain  conditions  from  the
submerged  self  may  be  sent  up  memories  which  cannot  be  distinguished  from
newly-acquired  knowledge,  still,  I  am  confident  that  Mrs.  Underwood's  hand
has  written  names  and  statements  of  facts  not  only  once,  but  several  times,
which  were  not  and  never  had  been  any  part  of  her  conscious  knowledge.

867  A.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  343-48.

In  Proceedings,  vol.  v.  p.  434,  is  given  a  case  translated  from  Psychische
Studien,  February  1889,  pp.  67—9,  which  describes  a  communication
made  to  Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm  concerning  the  death  of  a  M.  August
Duvanel.  M.  Aksakoff  has  kindly  sent  me  additional  matter  of  high
interest  bearing  on  this  case,  which  I  here  translate  from  his  letter  dated
May  9th,  1889  (new  style).  It  will  be  well  first  to  reprint  the  case  as  it
stood  in  Psychische  Studien.


867  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  467

On  January  iQth,  1887  (says  M.  Aksakoff),  I  received  a  visit  from  the  engineer
Kaigorodoff,  who  resides  in  Wilna.  He  narrated  to  me  the  following  circum-
stances. He  had  as  governess  for  his  children  Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm,  a  Swiss,
from  the  town  of  Neufchatel,  who  possessed  the  gift  of  automatic  writing.  At
a  stance  held  at  nine  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  January  I5th,  at  the  house  of
Herr  Kaigorodoff,  at  Wilna,  the  following  communication  was  given  in  French
in  his  presence.  I  have  been  shown  the  original,  and  quote  this  from  a  copy
of  it.  The  medium,  who  was  in  her  normal  state,  asked : —

"  Is  Lydia  here  ?  "  (This  was  a  personality  which  had  manifested  itself  at
previous  sittings.)

"  No,  Louis1  is  here,  and  wishes  to  impart  a  piece  of  news  (une  nouvelle)  to
his  sister."

"What  is  it?"

"  A  person  of  thy  acquaintance  passed  away  (est  partie)  about  three  o'clock
to-day."

"  What  am  I  to  understand  by  this  ?  "

"That  is  to  say,— he  is  dead."

"Who?"

"August  Duvanel."

"  What  was  his  illness  ?  "

"  The  formation  of  a  clot  of  blood  (d'un  engorge?nent  de  sang).  Pray  for  the
redemption  of  his  soul."

Two  weeks  later  Herr  Kaigorodoff,  who  was  again  in  St.  Petersburg,  showed
me  a  letter  from  David  Stramm,  the  father  of  the  medium,  dated  from  Neuf-
chatel, on  January  i8th,  1887  (new  style);  thus  written  three  days  after  the
death  of  Duvanel.  This  letter  was  received  at  Wilna  on  January  23rd.  In  it
her  father  informs  her  of  the  event  in  the  following  words.  I  copy  them  liter-
ally from  the  original : —

"  My  much  loved  daughter.  ...  I  will  now  tell  thee  a  great  piece  of  news
(uncgrande  nouvelle].  August  Duvanel  died  on  January  1 5th,  about  three  o'clock
in  the  afternoon.  It  was,  so  to  speak,  a  sudden  death,  for  he  had  only  been  ill
a  few  hours.  He  was  attacked  by  blood-clotting  (engorgement  de  sang)  when
he  was  at  the  bank.  He  spoke  very  little,  and  everything  that  he  said  was  for
thee.  ...  He  commended  himself  to  thy  prayers.  These  were  his  last  words."

The  difference  in  time  between  Wilna  and  Switzerland  is  about  an  hour.  It
would  thus  be  four  o'clock  in  Wilna  when  Duvanel's  death  occurred,  and  five
hours  later  this  piece  of  news  was  communicated  by  automatic  writing.

But  who  was  Duvanel  ?  And  why  should  his  death  be  "  a  great  piece  of
news  "  for  Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm  ?  In  reply  to  questions  which  I  put  to  him
in  writing,  Herr  Kaigorodoff  gave  me  the  following  explanation:  "When
Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm  lived  with  her  parents  in  Neufchatel,  this  Herr  Duvanel
wanted  to  marry  her.  But  he  was  met  with  a  decided  refusal  on  the  part  of  the
young  lady.  As  her  parents,  on  the  other  hand,  were  in  favour  of  the  marriage,
and  endeavoured  to  persuade  her  to  consent  to  it,  she  resolved  to  leave  her
fatherland  and  take  a  situation  as  a  governess.  The  last  communication  she
had  with  Duvanel  was  some  time  before  her  departure,  in  the  year  1881.  She

1  The  name  of  a  deceased  brother  of  the  medium,  who  usually  manifests  at  her
seances.  Louis  died  in  1869,  aged  eleven  months.  At  the  beginning  of  the  seances,
about  the  end  of  1886,  he  was  the  first  to  communicate,  announcing  himself  as  his  sister's
"spirit  protector." — A.  A.


468  APPENDICES  [867  A

did  not  keep  up  any  correspondence  with  him.  She  had  seen  Duvanel's  family
only  two  or  three  times  in  all.  A  year  after  her  departure  he  left  Neufchatel,
and  remained  in  Canton  Zurich  until  his  death."

To  this  M.  Aksakoff  adds,  in  a  letter  to  me  (May  Qth,  1889)  :  —

I  have  delayed  answering  your  letter  of  April  ist,  because  on  receiving  it  I
wrote  to  Colonel  Kaigorodoff  and  to  Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm  for  further  details,
which  seemed  to  me  needful  for  the  completion  of  our  critical  judgment  on  the
Duvanel  case.  I  have  just  received  their  letters,  dated  April  i6th  and  April  i8th.

I  will  begin  answering  your  questions.

(1)  This  case  was  published  in  Psychische  Studien  for  February  1889,  but
it  had  been  written  by  me  in  February  1888,  which  explains  my  saying  that  I
had  lately  received  it.

(2)  I  find  in  my  book  of  memoranda  a  notice  dated  January  7th  (i9th)  of
M.  Kaigorodoff's  visit  and  his  communication  concerning  the  death  of  Duvanel.

(3)  M.  Kaigorodoff  is  a  military  engineer,  living  at  present  at  Grodno,  a  seat
of  provincial  Government  in  West  Russia.     In  the  autumn  of  1886  M.  Kaigoro-
doff endeavoured  to  hypnotise  Mdlle.  Emma,  but  soon  she  began  to  speak  and
write  in  mediumistic  fashion.     (M.  Kaigorodoff  was  not  wholly  a  novice  in
Spiritualism,  having  been  present,  some  ten  years  earlier,  at  a  very  elementary
series  of  stances.)     Automatic  writing,  however,  seemed  to  fatigue  the  medium,
and  the  method  of  trance-utterance  was  usually  preferred.     The  medium  saw
and  described  the  [deceased]  persons  in  whose  name  she  spoke.     M.  Kaigoro-
doff asked  questions  in  Russian,  and  the  medium  answered   in  German  or
French.     M.  Kaigorodoff,  who  was  a  widower,  naturally  desired  a  personal  and
absolutely   conclusive  message  from   his   wife.     She   (the  influence  speaking
through   E.  S.  as  Madame   Kaigorodoff)  replied  that  she  could  give  such  a
message  only  by  impressing  the  medium  during  her  ordinary  sleep ;  and  she
effected  her  purpose  by  causing  the  medium  to  see,  in  a  dream,  a  series  of  four
scenes  [tableaux]  ;  which  Mdlle.  Emma  described  to  M.  Kaigorodoff  and  in
which  he  recognised  the  perfect  representation  of  an  episode  in  his  married
life.     These  dream-communications  form  a  special  feature  in  the  mediumship
of  Mdlle.  Stramm;  the  same  subject  being  sometimes  thus  treated  for  a  week
continuously.

[On  this  point  M.  Aksakoff  adds,  February  I5th,  1890:  "M.  Kaigorodoff
informs  me  of  the  following  peculiarity  of  his  wife's  (he  married  Mdlle.  Stramm
as  his  second  wife  in  1889)  : — During  her  ordinary  sleep  one  can  enter  into
conversation  with  her.  She  continues  to  sleep,  answering  questions,  and
describing  the  fantastic  dreams  which  she  sees.  In  her  replies  she  generally
uses  the  third  person.  On  awaking,  she  remembers  nothing.  If  during  her
sleep  M.  Kaigorodoff  makes  some  passes  over  her  face  she  immediately  passes
into  magnetic  (somnambulic)  sleep:  and  the  character  of  her  conversation
entirely  changes.  In  her  ordinary  sleep  'spirits'  never  appear  on  the  scene;
in  the  secondary  form  of  sleep,  always.  A  few  reverse  passes,  and  the  mag-
netic sleep  gives  place,  with  a  sigh,  to  the  ordinary  sleep."]

(4)  As  to  your  question  whether  the  communications  have  or  have  not
included  "  many  definite  statements  found  to  be  untrue,"  [as  is  the  case  with
so  many  similar  series,]  M.  Kaigorodoff  cannot  recollect  any  such  statements.
As  an  instance  to  the  contrary,  he  reminded  me  of  a  prediction  made  March
2nd,  1887,  of  which  he  informed  me  in  his  letter  of  August  25th,  1887  (still  in


867A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  469

my  hands).  It  was  announced  to  Mdlle.  E.  that  her  sister  (who  is  in  Switzer-
land) would  be  delivered  in  five  months  of  a  boy,  who  would  not  live  more  than
three  or  four  years.  Mdlle.  Emma  did  not  even  know  at  the  time  that  her
sister  was  expecting  a  baby.  In  fact  the  sister  was  delivered  of  a  boy  at  the
end  of  July,  iSSy.1

I  pass  on  to  the  case  of  Duvanel,  which  needs  some  details  to  complete  it.

The  first  question  which  presents  itself  to  the  mind  is  as  follows  :  "  What
proof  have  we  that  Mdlle.  Emma  had  not  received  a  telegram  announcing
Duvanel's  death?"  I  asked  this  question  of  M.  Kaigorodoff  by  letter;  I  give
an  abstract  of  his  reply.

(1)  The  death  of  Duvanel  took  place  (by  Wilna  time)  at  about  4.30  P.M.
On  that  day,  from  7  P.M.  till  the  beginning  of  the  seance,  M.  Kaigorodoff,  as
he  positively  remembers,  was  constantly  with  Mdlle.  E. ;  and  even  supposing
that  the  telegram  had  been  despatched  half-an-hour   after  A.  D.'s  death   (!),
nevertheless  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  a  telegram  sent  from  Switzer-
land to  have  been  received  and  delivered  at  Wilna  in  the  short  interval  between
5  and  7  P.M.     On  that  day,  moreover,  Mdlle.  E.  did  not  leave  the  house  after
3  P.M.

(2)  All  Mdlle.  E.'s  correspondence  was  addressed,  care  of  Colonel  Kaigoro-
doff.

(3)  The  telegram  could  not  have  been  received  without  the  knowledge  of
the  servants  and  the  children.     There  would  have  been  no  reason  for  keeping
it  secret.

(4)  The  relations  of  Mdlle.  E.  are  poor  persons,  and  there  was  not  sufficient
motive  for  the  immediate  communication  of  this  piece  of  news.

But  might  not  a  telegram  have  been  sent  by  the  friends  or  family  of
Duvanel?  Considering  that  all  relations  between  Duvanel  and  Mdlle.  E.  had
been  broken  off  in  1881,  such  a  telegram  would  have  had  no  reasonable  object.
Moreover,  in  my  letter  to  Mdlle.  E.,  I  had  begged  her  to  tell  me  what  was  the
exact  place  of  D.'s  death  and  whether  those  who  lived  with  him  could  have
known  her  address.  To  this  she  replied  in  her  letter  of  April  i6th,  1889.  "  D.
died  in  a  little  hamlet  of  the  Canton  of  Zurich,  called,  I  think,  Hirchd,  but  I
am  not  sure,  for  my  brother  [from  whom  I  inquired]  had  himself  forgotten  the
name.  D.  lived  alone,  and  had  only  one  brother,  who  lived  in  another  town."
Impossible,  therefore,  that  a  telegram  should  have  been  despatched  immediately
from  that  quarter.

When  M.  Kaigorodoff  came  to  see  me  the  second  time,  in  January  1887,
with  the  letter  of  Mdlle.  E.'s  father,  I  was  struck  with  the  identity  of  the  ex-
pression, "  un  engorgement  de  sang,"  employed  in  the  trance-message,  which
was  in  French,  and  also  in  the  father's  letter,  which  was  likewise  in  French,  to
explain  the  cause  of  D.'s  death.  This  identity  of  phrase  appeared  very  strange,
not  to  say  suspicious.  I  drew  M.  Kaigorodoff 's  attention  to  it,  and  begged  him
to  ask  the  medium  about  it,  as  soon  as  a  stance  gave  the  opportunity.  This
identity  of  expression  suggested  a  curious  action  of  telepathy.

This  is  what  M.  Kaigorodoff' s  letter,  just  received,  says  on  the  subject  : —

"On  the  day  after  the  stance  of  January  3rd  (i5th),  1887,  Mdlle.  E.,  not
expecting  to  receive  a  letter  from  her  father  with  the  confirmation  of  the  fact
of  D.'s  death,  wrote  to  her  sister  in  Switzerland,  stating  that  she  had  had  a

1  One  prediction  has  since  proved  erroneous ;  viz.,  that  Madame  Kaigorodoff  her-
self would  have  a  boy ;— whereas  her  child  is  a  girl.


4/0  APPENDICES  [867  A

vision  as  though  D.  were  dead,  and  asking  whether  this  was  really  the  case.
The  dream  was  an  expedient  used  because  Emma's  relations  had  no  knowledge
of  Spiritualism,  still  less  of  E.'s  personal  proceedings  in  that  direction.  The
letter  of  Mdlle.  E.'s  sister  arrived  ten  days  after  her  father's  letter.  The  sister,
not  knowing  that  their  father  had  already  announced  D.'s  death,  desired  to  hide
the  fact  from  her  [for  a  reason  presently  to  be  shown]  and  answered  that  D.
was  not  dead,  but  gone  to  America."

M.  Kaigorodoff,  after  a  six  weeks'  absence,  returned  to  Wilna  at  the  be-
ginning of  March  1887.  At  the  first  stance  held,  early  in  March,  he  begged
of  Louis  (the  controlling  spirit)  to  explain  the  contradiction  between  the  letters
of  the  father  and  the  sister  of  Mdlle.  E.  touching  the  death  of  Duvanel.  The
medium  was  entranced,  and  spoke  in  the  name  of  Louis.  M.  Kaigorodoff  took
notes,  and  this  is  word  for  word  the  answer  which  was  given : —

"  He  is  dead;  only  [her]  sister  does  not  wish  that  she  should  know  of  his
death,  because  it  was  not  of  a  stoppage  of  blood  (engorgement]  as  I  had  written."
(The  message  of  January  yd  Osth)  1887,  had  been  given  by  automatic  writing,
in  French.)  "  I  could  not  tell  the  truth  frankly  (directemenf),  for  her  health
would  have  been  affected  by  it."

"  Where  and  how,  then,  did  he  die  ? "

"  He  died  in  the  Canton  of  Zurich ;  but  he  killed  himself,  and  she  must  not
know  it.  She  must  remain  ignorant  of  this,  for  if  she  learns,  even  indirectly,
of  his  self-inflicted  death,  her  health  may  suffer.  You  must  not  speak  to  her
of  the  matter,  for  she  suspects  the  truth."

"  How  does  it  happen,  then,  that  the  identical  expression,  stoppage  of  blood,
is  found  both  in  your  message  and  in  the  father's  letter  ?  "

"  It  is  I  who  inspired  him  with  that  expression."

As  you  perceive,  the  case  becomes  increasingly  complicated  and  interesting.
In  point  of  fact,  Mdlle.  E.,  some  days  after  the  message  of  January  3rd  (isth)
did  in  fact  see  in  a  dream  Duvauel  covered  with  blood  (ensanglanti).  The  con-
tradictory statements  in  the  letters  (of  her  father  and  sister)  led  her  to  suspect
that  the  truth  was  being  concealed  from  her,  and  that  there  had  really  been  a
suicide.  It  was  only  in  the  autumn  of  1887,  when  Mdlle.  E.  made  a  journey  to
Switzerland  to  see  her.  relations,  that  she  learnt  all  the  truth,  confirming  the
second  message.

The  fears  of  Louis  and  of  her  relations  as  to  the  bad  effect  which  the  news
of  the  suicide  might  have  upon  Mdlle.  E.  were  in  fact  exaggerated.  For
Mdlle.  E.  had  left  Switzerland  in  1881,  and  up  till  the  message  of  January
3rd  (i5th),  1887,  had  received  no  news  of  Duvanel.  Some  time  after  Mdlle.
E.'s  departure  Duvanel  left  Neufchitel  for  Geneva,  where  he  was  employed  at
a  bank; — which  explains  the  phrase  in  the  father's  letter,  saying  that  D.  had
died  of  a  stoppage  of  blood  "while  he  was  at  the  bank."  But  of  late  he  had
lived  in  a  little  hamlet  of  the  Canton  of  Zurich.  All  this  Mdlle.  Emma  learnt
on  her  visit  to  her  relations.

After  all  these  facts,  however,  the  problem  as  to  the  possibility  of  a  tele-
pathic influence  from  the  parents  of  Mdlle.  E.  is  not  yet  decided.  To  clear
up  this  point  we  must  know  the  exact  day  when  the  father  of  Mdlle.  E.  learnt
the  death  of  Duvanel,  and  we  must  know  the  details  he  then  heard.
Mdlle.  E.'s  relations  had  heard  the  news  of  D.'s  suicide  on  the  very  day  of  his
death ;  and  if  it  had  been  decided  in  family  discussion  that  they  would  conceal
from  her  the  manner  of  his  death,  and  adopt  the  expression  "  stoppage  of


868A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  471

blood"; — then  one  might  still  conjecture  that  there  had  been  a  telepathic
transmission  of  thought.

But  the  father's  letter  was  written  January  i8th,  and,  as  Mdlle.  E.  says
[in  her  letter  of  April  i6th,  1889],  it  is  probable  that  the  meeting  in  the  train
[when  the  father  heard  of  Duvanel's  death  from  Duvanel's  brother]  took
place  on  the  i;th,  and  thus  after  the  sitting  of  January  3rd  (i5th).  In  that
case,  if  telepathy  there  were,  it  would  be  needful  to  seek  the  inspirer  (the
"agent  provocateur!")  in  some  factor  outside  the  minds  of  Mdlle.  E.  or  her
relations.

But  this  probability  is  not  enough ;  and  the  essential  question  as  to  the  day
when  Mdlle.  E.'s  relations  learnt  the  death  of  Duvanel  is  not  yet  determined.
I  will  write  again  on  this  point  to  the  ci-devant  Mdlle.  Stramm,  who  is  now
Madame  Kaigorodoff ;  for  the  Colonel  in  his  last  letter  to  me  announces  his  mar-
riage with  Mdlle.  Emma  Stramm.  I  will  beg  her  to  ask  her  father  to  fix  as
precisely  as  possible  the  day  of  his  meeting  with  Duvanel's  brother.  The  reply
shall  be  sent  to  you  at  once.

Thus,  then,  we  have  in  this  case  of  spiritualistic  communication  :  (i)  the
news  of  a  death  at  a  distance  ;  (2)  the  manner  of  death  ;  (3)  the  place  of  death ;
all  unknown  to  the  medium.

On  June  24th  (July  6th)  1889,  M.  Aksakoff  again  wrote  to  me  as
follows : —

M.  Kaigorodoff  has  had  the  kindness  to  send  me  in  original  the  letter  of
Madame  KaigorodofFs  sister.  I  enclose  a  copy.  As  you  perceive,  the  father
learnt  the  news  of  Duvanel's  death  on  January  i/th,  two  days,  therefore,  after
the  death  itself,  and  two  days  after  the  news  of  the  death  was  received  at
Wilna  in  Russia.  The  circumstance  that  this  news  was  heard  by  M.  Stramm
in  a  merely  accidental  way,  and  only  on  the  day  of  the  funeral,  proves  that  in
fact  all  relations  between  Duvanel  and  the  Stramm  family  had  been  suspended.
The  letter  of  Mdlle.  Bertha  is  dated  from  Rochefort ;  that  is  a  small  town,  at
twenty  minutes'  railway  journey  from  Neufchatel;  and  it  is  there,  strictly
speaking,  and  not  at  Neufchatel,  that  the  Stramm  family  reside.

Copy  of  part  of  Mdlle.  Bertha  Stramm's  letter  to 'her  sister,  Madame
Kaigorodoff,  dated  Rochefort,  June  i6th,  1889.

"  Duvanel  died  January  i5th,  and  papa  learnt  the  news  on  the  I7th,  for  he
met  Duvanel's  brother,  who  was  setting  out  for  the  funeral.  The  brother  was
to  leave  for  America  a  few  days  later.  It  is  I  who  have  recollected  this,  by
searching  my  memory,  for  papa  is  old  and  feeble  and  does  not  now  remember
anything  of  the  matter.  I  cannot  tell  you  the  name  of  the  village  where  the
death  occurred."

868  A.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  355-57.  For  the  follow-
ing case  also  I  am  indebted  to  M.  Aksakoff.

THE  PERELIGUINE  CASE.

Document  I. — Copy  of  report  of  stance  held  November  i8th,  1887,  in  the
house  of  M.  Nartzeff,  at  Tambof,  Russia.

Present:  M.  A.  Nartzeff  [landed  proprietor,  belonging  to  the  Russian
nobility,  in  the  Government  of  Tambof]  ;  Madame  A.  Slepzof  [aunt  of  M.


472  APPENDICES  [868  A

Nartzeff];  Madame  Ivanof  [M.  Nartzeff's  housekeeper];  M.  N.  Touloucheff
[official  physician  of  the  municipality  of  Tambof].

The  sitting  began  at  10  P.M.  at  a  table  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  by
the  light  of  a  night-light  placed  on  the  mantelpiece.  All  doors  closed.  The
left  hand  of  each  was  placed  on  the  right  hand  of  his  neighbour,  and  each  foot
touched  the  neighbour's  foot,  so  that  during  the  whole  of  the  sitting  all  hands
and  feet  were  under  control.  Sharp  raps  were  heard  in  the  floor,  and  after-
wards in  the  wall  and  the  ceiling,  after  which  the  blows  sounded  immediately
in  the  middle  of  the  table,  as  if  some  one  had  struck  it  from  above  with  his  fist ;
and  with  such  violence,  and  so  often,  that  the  table  trembled  the  whole  time.

M.  Nartzeff  asked  :  "  Can  you  answer  rationally,  giving  three  raps  for  yes,
one  for  no  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  Do  you  wish  to  answer  by  using  the  alphabet  ?  "
"  Yes."  "Spell  your  name."  The  alphabet  was  repeated,  and  the  letters  in-
dicated by  three  raps — "  Anastasie  Pe're'liguine."  "I  beg  you  to  say  now  why
you  have  come  and  what  you  desire."  "  I  am  a  wretched  woman.  Pray  for
me.  Yesterday,  during  the  day,  I  died  at  the  hospital.  The  day  before
yesterday  I  poisoned  myself  with  matches."  "  Give  us  some  details  about
yourself.  How  old  were  you?  Give  a  rap  for  each  year."  Seventeen  raps.
"  Who  were  you  ?"  "I  was  housemaid.  I  poisoned  myself  with  matches."
"  Why  did  you  poison  yourself  ?  "  "I  will  not  say.  I  will  say  nothing  more."

After  this  a  heavy  table  which  was  near  the  wall,  outside  the  chain  of  hands,
came  up  rapidly  three  times,  towards  the  table  round  which  the  chain  was
made,  and  each  time  it  was  pushed  backwards,  no  one  knew  by  what  means.
Seven  raps  (the  signal  agreed  upon  for  the  close  of  the  sitting)  were  now  heard
in  the  wall;  and  at  11.20  P.M.  the  stance  came  to  an  end.

(Signed)       A.  SLEPZOF,  N.  TOULOUCHEFF,  A.  NARTZEFF,  A.  IVANOF.

I  certify  that  this  copy  is  in  complete  accordance  with  the  original.

A.  NARTZEFF.

Document  II. — The  undersigned,  having  been  present  at  the  stance  of
November  i8th,  1887,  at  the  house  of  M.  A.  N.  Nartzeff,  hereby  certify  that  they
had  no  previous  knowledge  of  the  existence  or  the  death  of  Anastasie  PeVd-
liguine,  and  that  they  heard  her  name  for  the  first  time  at  the  above-mentioned
stance.

N.  P.  TOULOUCHEFF,  ALEXIS  NARTZEFF,  A.  SLEPZOF,  A.  IVANOF.

TAMBOF,  April  6th,  1890.

Document  III.— Letter  of  Dr.  Touloucheff  to  M.  A.  Aksakoff.

TAMBOF,  rue  du  Stminaire,  April  i$th,  1890.

SIR,— At  the  sitting  held  at  M.  Nartzeff's  house,  November  i8th,  1887,  we
received  a  communication  from  an  intelligence  giving  the  name  of  Anastasie
Pe're'liguine.  She  asked  us  to  pray  for  her;  and  said  that  she  had  poisoned
herself  with  lucifer  matches,  and  had  died  on  the  I7th  of  that  month.  At  the
first  moment  I  did  not  believe  this;  for  in  my  capacity  as  physician  of  the
municipality  I  am  at  once  informed  by  the  police  of  all  cases  of  suicide.  But
since  Pe're'liguine  had  added  that  her  death  had  taken  place  at  the  hospital ;
and  since  at  Tambof  we  have  only  one  hospital,  that  of  the  "Institutions  de
Bienfaisance,"  which  is  in  no  way  within  my  official  survey,  and  whose  autho-
rities, in  such  cases  as  this,  themselves  send  for  the  police  or  the  magistrate ; —


868B]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  473

I  sent  a  letter  to  my  colleague,  Dr.  Sundblatt,  the  head  physician  of  this
hospital.  Without  explaining  my  reason,  I  simply  asked  him  to  inform  me
whether  there  had  been  any  recent  case  of  suicide  at  the  hospital,  and,  if  so,
to  give  me  the  name  and  particulars.  I  have  already  sent  you  a  copy  of
his  reply,  certified  by  Dr.  Sundblatt's  own  signature.  The  original  is  at
M.  Nartzeff' s  house,  with  the  protocols  of  the  seances.

N.  TOULOUCHEFF.

Document  IV.— Copy  of  Dr.  Th.  Sundblatt's  letter  to  Dr.  Touloucheff.

November  igth,  1887.

MY  DEAR  COLLEAGUE, — On  the  i6th  of  this  month  I  was  on  duty;  and  on
that  day  two  patients  were  admitted  to  the  hospital,  who  had  poisoned  them-
selves with  phosphorus.  The  first,  Vera  Kosovitch,  aged  thirty-eight,  wife  of  a
clerk  in  the  public  service  .  .  .  was  taken  in  at  8  P.M.  ;  the  second,  a  servant  in
the  insane  ward  [a  part  of  the  hospital],  Anastasie  Pe're'liguine,  aged  seventeen,
was  taken  in  at  10  P.M.  This  second  patient  had  swallowed,  besides  an  in-
fusion of  boxes  of  matches,  a  glass  of  kerosine,  and  at  the  time  of  her  admission
was  already  very  ill.  She  died  at  I  P.M.  on  the  I7th,  and  the  post-mortem
examination  has  been  made  to-day.  Kosovitch  died  yesterday,  and  the  post-
mortem is  fixed  for  to-morrow.  Kosovitch  said  that  she  had  taken  the  phos-
phorus in  an  excess  of  melancholy,  but  Pe're'liguine  did  not  state  her  reason  for
poisoning  herself.  TH.  SUNDBLATT.

Copy  of  letter  certified  by  Th.  Sundblatt  and  Alexis  Nartzeff.

Document  V.— Letter  of  M.  A.  Nartzeff  to  M.  Aksakoff,  May  i6th,  1890.

[M.  Nartzeff  writes  a  letter  in  English  and  one  in  French,  which  I  abridge
and  combine.]

In  answer  to  your  letter  I  inform  you  that  my  aunt's  housekeeper  is  not  a
housekeeper  strictly  speaking,  but  rather  a  friend  of  the  family,  having  been
nearly  fifteen  years  with  us,  and  possessing  our  entire  confidence.  She  could
not  have  already  learnt  the  fact  of  the  suicide,  as  she  has  no  relations  or  friends
in  Tambof,  and  never  leaves  the  house.

The  hospital  in  question  is  situated  at  the  other  end  of  the  town,  about
five  versts  from  my  house.  Dr.  Sundblatt  informs  me,  on  the  authority  of
the  Proces  verbal  of  the  inquest,  that  Pe're'liguine  was  able  to  read  and  write.
[This  in  answer  to  M.  Aksakoff 's  inquiry  whether  the  deceased  could  have
understood  alphabetic  communication.]

Sittings  were  held  at  Tambof,  April  i885~October  1889,  but  in  no  other
instance  were  irrefutable  proofs  obtained.  Generally  the  manifestations  were
of  a  trivial  character.  Twice  or  thrice  we  received  communications  apparently
serious,  but  on  inquiry  these  were  found  to  be  untrue.

It  is  remarkable  that  this  veridical  message  should  have  stood  alone,
but  its  correctness  obviously  was  not  due  to  chance.

868  B.     From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  280-84.

The  following  case  was  sent  to  us  by  Dr.  H.  D.  R.  Kingston,  of
Macra,  Eltham,  Kent,  an  Associate  of  the  S.P.R.  Of  the  narrator,
Mr.  F.  Hodgson,  he  says  :  —

Mr.  F.  Hodgson  was  then  (1889)  a  photographer  at  Wynberg.  He  had
at  one  time  been  employed  as  photographer  to  the  Challenger  expedition


474  APPENDICES  [868  B

during  part  of  the  voyage,  and  he  had  also  gone  in  the  same  capacity  with
Mr.  Palgrave  on  a  Commission  to  Great  Namaqualand  and  to  Damaraland.
I  have  copies  of  many  of  the  photographs  he  then  took,  the  negatives  of
which  are  the  property  of  the  Colonial  Government.  I  found  him  a  careful
and  competent  man  in  developing  some  scientific  photographs  of  my  own,  and
also  particularly  intelligent,  and  I  should  say  perfectly  trustworthy  as  a  witness.
You  will  see  that  he  has  made  up  the  case  with  some  care  ...

HENRY  D.  R.  KINGSTON,  M.D.

The  narrative  was  enclosed  in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Kingston,  dated  Wynberg,
July  1890,  and  is  as  follows  : —

Statement  re  curious  manifestations  in  house  of  Mrs.  Kamp,  beginning  on
night  of  June  I4th,  and  still  continuing,  though  greatly  diminished  in  power.

On  Saturday  night,  June  I4th,  1890,  Alida  Sophia  Kamp,  widow,  residing
in  Wolfe  Street,  Wynberg,  her  daughter,  Sophia  Alida  Kamp,  and  Catherine
Mahoney,  who  resides  in  the  same  house,  retired  to  rest  at  a  little  before
ii  P.M.,  and,  from  the  time  of  retiring  to  rest  until  that  of  rising,  were
unable  to  sleep  on  account  of  strange  and  unearthly  noises,  for  which  they
could  find  no  explanation,  although  they  instituted  a  rigorous  search  for  the
cause.  The  noises,  as  they  described  them  to  me  next  morning,  resembled  the
dragging  about  of  chairs  in  their  bedrooms  and  the  dragging  about  of  heavy
boxes  over  an  uneven  floor  in  the  loft  over  their  heads.  This  loft,  which  I
know,  having  been  in  it,  contains  absolutely  nothing  which  could  account  for
the  noises,  even  had  there  been  any  one  upstairs  to  drag  anything  it  contained
about ;  but  owing  to  the  way  in  which  this  loft  is  fastened  up,  it  would  have
been  quite  impossible  for  any  one  to  enter  it.  I  could  not  on  the  Sunday
morning,  from  their  description  of  what  they  had  heard,  find  any  rational
solution  of  the  mystery,  and,  at  their  request,  consented  to  occupy  one  of  the
bedrooms  that  night  (Sunday,  i$th).

Before  retiring,  however,  I  suggested  that  we  should  hold  a  stance  in  the
room  in  which  I  was  about  to  sleep.  This  was  agreed  to,  and  we  formed  a
circle  consisting  of  Christian  Kamp  (son  of  Alida  Sophia  Kamp),  Alida  Sophia
Kamp,  Catherine  Mahoney,  and  myself,  and  Janet  Kamp,  wife  of  Christian
Kamp  (seating  ourselves  around  a  small  table).  The  table  very  shortly  showed
an  inclination  to  move  about,  and  in  fact  did  sway  about  considerably,  but  this
was  all  we  could  obtain,  so  we  dropped  the  sitting.

We,  however,  decided  after  deliberation  to  hold  a  stance  in  the  adjoining
bedroom,  but  this  time  Catherine  Mahoney  declined  to  sit,  so  that  we  had  only
[four]  out  of  the  former  [five]  sitters.  The  results  were,  however,  better,  as  we
soon  had  distinct  raps  and  at  once  asked  the  communicating  influence  to  rap
three  times  if  it  could  communicate  its  name  to  us  if  we  established  an  easy
code.  The  three  raps  came  at  once,  and  I  (who  acted  as  conductor)  then
asked  it  to  give  one  rap  at  each  letter  forming  its  name  on  my  going  audibly
through  the  alphabet.  The  result  was  LEWIS,  which  caused  Mrs.  A.  S.
Kamp  to  think  it  was  her  departed  husband,  whose  name  had  been  Louis.
This  hypothesis,  however,  I  was  not  inclined  to  accept,  as  I  thought  her
husband,  if  present,  would  not  have  wrongly  spelt  his  name.  We,  however,
could  not  get  the  influence  to  change  his  orthography,  so  we  had  to  proceed  to
ask  if  it  would  spell  out  any  message  by  the  same  code,  to  which  three  raps
responded,  and  we  again  proceeded.  The  result  was  TO  WARN,  at


868B]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  475

which  stage  of  the  proceedings  Mrs.  Kamp  showed  signs  of  great  uneasiness,
thinking  the  message  was  a  warning  of  her  coming  death,  and  being  still
persuaded  that  her  late  husband  was  communicating.  As  I  did  not  know
positively  to  the  contrary,  and  was  afraid  some  unpleasant  communication  was
about  to  be  given,  we  dropped  the  stance,  I  intending  to  resume  it  at  some
future  time  with  sitters  not  related  to  the  family.

Shortly  after  we  all  retired  to  our  beds,  and  I  kept  a  candle  burning  in
my  room  until  past  midnight,  as  I  had  an  interesting  novel  to  read.  I  then
blew  it  out  and  was  asleep  in  a  few  minutes.  Shortly  after  2  A.M.  (Monday)
I  was  awakened  by  the  sound  of  a  chair  being  dragged  over  the  floor  of
the  room  in  which  I  slept,  followed  almost  immediately  by  a  sound  as  of
some  very  heavy  body  being  dragged  about  in  a  room  overhead  (a  very  loud
noise  which  would  have  awakened  anybody).  Miss  Kamp  then  called  out
from  the  adjoining  room,  which  was  only  divided  from  mine  by  a  wooden
partition,  "  Do  you  hear  the  noise  ?  What  can  it  be  ?  "  Just  after  she  had
spoken  I  heard  a  sound  like  a  half  full  box  of  matches  falling  on  the  floor.
I  decided  it  was  about  time  to  get  up  and  investigate,  so  sprung  out  of  bed
and  felt  for  the  matchbox  in  the  candlestick  and  [found]  it  was  not  there.
I  had  carefully  placed  it  there  on  going  to  bed  and  was  at  a  loss  to  account
for  its  disappearance.  I  had  some  others,  however,  in  the  pocket  of  my
waistcoat,  and  knowing  where  I  had  hung  this  garment  I  went  to  it,  and
taking  the  matches  out  of  the  pocket,  struck  a  light  and  lighted  the  candle.
I  then  found  the  other  box  of  matches  lying  on  the  floor  about  two  feet
from  the  candlestick.  It  seemed  to  me  also  that  a  chair  in  the  room
occupied  a  somewhat  different  position  to  what  it  had  done  when  I  fell
asleep,  but  of  this  I  could  not  be  sure ;  but,  to  be  sure  whether  it  moved
again,  I  placed  some  empty  scent  bottles,  which  I  found  on  a  shelf,  one
against  each  leg  of  the  chair.  I  then  went  to  sleep  again,  and  on  again
waking  found  the  chair  had  been  moved  quite  four  inches  to  the  N.W.,  as
all  the  legs  were  away  from  the  bottles  I  had  placed  against  them.  Of  course,
as  regards  the  falling  of  the  matchbox  and  the  actual  change  of  position  of
the  chair,  I  can  only  give  you  my  unsupported  testimony,  but  those  who  slept
in  the  next  room  will  be  able  to  testify  to  having  heard  the  apparent  moving  of
the  chair  in  my  room  before  they  heard  me  jump  up  to  investigate.  This
occurred  on  Sunday  night,  June  I5th.

Now  comes  the  strangest  part  of  the  affair.  Up  to  this  time  none  of  us
could  make  out  why  any  one  of  the  name  of  Lewis  should  disturb  our  rest,
as  none  of  us  were  or  had  been  intimately  acquainted  with  any  one  of  that
name,  unless  we  were  prepared  to  accept  the  very  hypothetical  idea  that  it
was  the  late  Mr.  Kamp,  who  had  forgotten  how  to  spell  his  name  properly
(a  theory  which  would  not  have  said  much  for  the  educational  establishments
of  the  shadowy  land).

On  Monday  morning,  June  i6th,  I  got  my  copy  of  the  Cape  Times  as
usual,  and,  among  other  items  of  news,  found  an  account  of  the  death  of  a
man,  NAME  UNKNOWN,  who  had  been  killed  by  an  engine,  on  the  night  of  the
I4th,  near  Woodstock,  at  about  8.45  P.M.  None  of  us  at  the  time  in  any  way
connected  this  with  the  noises  which  had  disturbed  us,  as  there  was  no
apparent  connection.

In  Tuesday's  issue  of  the  same  paper  there  was  the  account  of  the  inquest
on  this  man  (still  name  unknown).  On  Tuesday  evening  I  was  sitting  in  Mrs.
Kamp's  shop,  when  a  coloured  woman  came  in  and  in  the  course  of  conversa-


476  APPENDICES  [868  B

tion  said,  "  Did  Mrs.  Kamp  hear  of  the  man  that  was  killed  on  the  railway  on
Saturday  night  ?  "  "  Yes  !  "  said  Mrs.  Kamp,  "  I  see  they  don't  know  who  he
was."  "  Oh  yes !  "  said  the  coloured  woman,  "  his  name  is  Jim  Lewis.  I  know
him,  because  he  lived  with  my  sister."  This  set  us  all  on  quite  a  new  track,
and  we  began  to  wonder  what  connection  there  might  be  between  the  events.
In  favour  thereof  the  facts  were  these : —

1.  This  man  had  been  killed  at  8.45  P.M.  on  the  night  of  the  i^tk.

2.  Mrs.  Kamp  did  not  close  her  shop  till  ten  that  night,  and  retired  to  rest
about  eleven,  and  from  that  hour  the  noises  commenced.

3.  None  of  us  heard  of  the  accident  until  we  read  of  it  on  the  \6th.

4.  Never  until  the  night  of  the  I4th  had  any  nocturnal  disturbances  occurred
in  the  house.

5.  The  disturbing  spirit  on  the  evening  of  the  i$th  gave  the  name  of  Lewis.
I  should  have  mentioned,  perhaps,  that  on  Tuesday  night,  iyth  inst.,  we

held  another  stance,  at  which  Christian  Kamp,  Mr.  Hay,  and  myself  sat.  On
this  night  also  we  got  the  name  of  Lewis  spelt  out,  and  the  message,  "  /  am
unhappy  because  they  do  not  know  who  I  am"  On  being  interrogated  further,
he  said  that  he  was  the  spirit  of  the  man  Lewis  killed  on  the  railway.  At  the
time  I  did  not  attach  much  importance  to  this  stance,  as  we  got  scarcely  any-
thing fresh,  but  it  is  as  well  to  mention  it.

Thursday's  (igth)  issue  of  Cape  Times  contained  the  completion  of  the
inquest  on  this  man,  and  stated  that  his  name  was  RICHARD  YOUNG.  Mrs.
Kamp  then  had  another  interview  with  the  woman  (his  sister-in-law)  who  had
told  her  (Mrs.  Kamp)  previously  that  the  man's  name  was  Jim  Lewis,  and
asked  her  why  she  had  said  his  name  was  Lewis,  when  it  turned  out  his  name
was  Young.  On  this  the  woman  got  quite  indignant,  and  declared  positively
that  his  name  was  Jim  Lewis,  no  matter  what  name  the  paper  might  give  him  ;
that  she  had  known  him  a  long  time,  as  he  was  her  brother-in-law.

I  am  finishing  this  on  July  24th,  1890,  and  the  nocturnal  disturbances  still
continue  in  the  house  of  Mrs.  Kamp,  and  no  amount  of  investigation  can  assign
any  but  a  spiritual  origin  to  them.

We,  the  undersigned,  having  read  the  above,  declare  it  to  be  a  true  account
of  the  occurrences  therein  described.

FREDERICK  HODGSON.

SOPHIA  ALIDA  KAMP.

ALIDA  SOPHIA  KAMP.

KATE  MAHONEY.

We,  the  undersigned,  declare  that  we  sat  at  a  stance  in  the  house  of  Mrs.
Kamp  (Alida  Sophia  Kamp)  on  the  night  of  June  i5th,  1890,  and  that  we  heard
raps  which  spelt  out  the  name  of  Lewis  and  the  words  TO  WARN.

F.  HODGSON.

ALIDA  SOPHIA  KAMP.

C.  F.  KAMP.

J.  S.  KAMP.

We,  the  undersigned,  sat  at  a  stance  in  the  house  of  Mrs.  Kamp  (Alida
Sophia  Kamp)  on  the  night  of  Tuesday  (June  I7th),  and  the  name  of  Lewis
was  then  spelt  out  by  raps,  and  the  message,  "  I  am  unhappy  because  they
don't  know  who  I  am,"  and  the  communicating  influence  further  stated  that  he
had  been  killed  by  an  engine  on  the  night  of  the  I4th.

FREDERICK  HODGSON.
C.  F.  KAMP.


869A]  TO     CHAPTER    VIII  477

We,  the  undersigned,  sat  at  a  stance  on  the  night  of  Wednesday,  June  i8th,
in  the  house  of  Alida  Sophia  Kamp,  and  the  communicating  influence  rapped
out  the  name  of  Lewis,  and  stated  that  it  was  the  spirit  of  a  man  of  that  name
who  had  been  killed  by  an  engine  on  the  night  of  June  I4th.

FREDERICK  HODGSON.

J.  P.  CRUSE.

C.  A.  LIETHAR.

C.  F.  KAMP.

868  C.     I  may  here  briefly  refer  to  the  case  of  the  "  Woodd  knock-
ings,"   given   in    full    in  Proceedings   S.P.R.,    vol.    xi.    pp.    538-42.     In
several  families  there  is  a  tradition  that  some  special  sign  precedes  or
accompanies  the  transition  of  the  head  of  the  house,  or  of  certain  of  its
members  ;  and  in  the  case  of  the  Woodd  family  I  have  received  evidence
of  the  persistence  of  the  same  type  of  "  warning  " — which  took  the  form
of    knocks — during   a   period   of    three    centuries.      Seven   cases    were
recorded  in  detail  respectively  in  about  1661,   1664,  1674,   1784,   1872,
1893,   and    1895.     Of  the   three  most   recent   instances   circumstantial
and  corroborative  evidence  is  given,  which  seems  to  make  it  clear  that
the  knocks  were  not  ordinary  sounds  misinterpreted.     Such  cases  sug-
gest that  there  may  be  in  some   families  a  hereditary  aptitude  for  the
same  type  of  percipience.

869  A.     The  following  is  part  of  an  account  which  was  printed  in  the
Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  216-19   (February  1888),  having  been  fur-
nished to  me  at  that  time  by  Mrs.  FitzGerald  of  19  Cambridge  Street,
Hyde  Park  Square,  London,  W.,  and  her  son  Mr.  Desmond  FitzGerald,
at  one  time  a  member  of  the  Council  of  the  S.P.R.     Mrs.   FitzGerald
revised  the  abstract  of  her  papers  before  they  were  printed  in  the  Journal.

Mrs.  FitzGerald  and  her  daughter-in-law,  Mrs.  Desmond  FitzGerald,  have
been  for  some  years  in  the  habit  of  sitting  quietly  together  to  receive  messages
by  slight  tilts  of  a  table.  Mr.  FitzGerald  has  occasionally  joined  the  group,
but  strangers  have  rarely  been  admitted,  and  the  communications  have  been
throughout  of  a  very  private  kind.  .  .  .

I  cite  a  case  in  connection  with  a  Mr.  E., — an  intimate  friend  of
Mrs.  FitzGerald's, — whose  true  name  has  been  communicated  to  me.

Mr.  E.,  when  on  his  deathbed,  sent  for  Mrs.  FitzGerald  to  come  and  see
Lim.  She  visited  him  in  his  chambers  in  the  Albany  and  said  farewell,  he
being  then  past  hope,  and  his  death  expected  at  any  moment.  He  blessed  her
and  promised  to  watch  over  her.  Afterwards  his  spirit  was  one  of  the  habitual
and  most  trusted  communicants,  and  Mrs.  F.  believed  herself  able  to  feel  sure
of  his  identity  when  he  came.  After  many  such  messages,  she  alluded  one  day
to  his  death  in  the  Albany.  "  I  did  not  die  in  the  Albany,"  was  tilted  out.
Shocked  at  what  seemed  the  intrusion  of  some  lying  spirit  in  the  friend's  name,
Mrs.  F.  solemnly  repeated  the  question,  "You  died  in  the  Albany,  did  you
not?"  The  answer  was  an  emphatic  No.  This  was  repeated  several  times,
and  then  Mrs.  F.  was  so  pained  and  bewildered  at  the  breakdown  of  her
cherished  belief  in  this  spirit's  identity  and  trustworthiness  that  for  a  con-


478  APPENDICES  [869  B

siderable  time  she  sought  no  further  communication.  She  had  no  thought
of  testing  the  truth  of  the  message,  as  she  considered  that  she  absolutely  knew
that  Mr.  E.  had  died  in  his  chambers.  It  was  not  till  some  months  later
that  a  common  friend  accidentally  mentioned  that  Mr.  E.  had  been  removed
from  the  Albany  at  his  own  wish,  when  almost  at  the  point  of  death,  with  the
idea  that  he  would  be  better  nursed  in  a  private  house.

It  is  deeply  to  be  regretted  that  Mrs.  F.  did  not  inquire  from  the  communi-
cating spirit  where  he  had  died.  If  the  address  had  been  given  the  test  would
have  been  excellent.  No  further  facts,  it  appears,  can  now  be  got  from  Mr.
E.'s  spirit.  The  coincidence  is  therefore  reduced  to  a  single  fact ;  but  that  one
fact  is  a  striking  one,  and  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  in  Mrs.  FitzGerald's
mind.


B.  The  following  case  was  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  for
May  1899  (vol.  ix.  pp.  65-8),  having  been  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  Michael
Petrovo-Solovovo,  of  St.  Petersburg,  now  Hon.  Secretary  for  Russia  to
the  S.P.R.

Mr.  Solovovo  writes  : —

In  the  following  pages  I  have  endeavoured  to  present  all  the  evidence
obtainable  concerning  an  instance  of  an  automatic  message,  which  appears  at
first  sight  to  be  due  to  some  other  cause  than  "  unconscious  cerebration."

The  amount  of  information  unknown  contained  in  the  following  message  is
certainly  very  slight,  but  still  the  unexpectedness  of  the  fact  that  it  was  in  the
sea  and  not  in  a  river  that  the  soldier  was  drowned  may  be  considered  entitled
to  some  weight.  The  most  interesting  feature  of  the  case,  however,  appears  to
me  to  have  been  the  circumstance  that  the  mediums  did  not  see  the  letters  of
the  alphabet.  This  is  stated  by  both  of  them  as  well  as  by  the  third  person
present  at  the  sitting.  .  .  .

Now,  a  message  obtained  under  such  conditions  would  involve  at  the  very
least  telepathy  in  a  strangely  continuous  form  from  M.  Starck  [to  his  wife
and  daughter] ;  and  makes  it  increasingly  possible  that  the  "  veridical "  part  of
the  communication  may  have  sprung  from  a  supernormal  source  too ;  whilst
otherwise  we  might  have  put  it  down  with  more  plausibility  either  to  uncon-
scious reasoning  or  to  chance  coincidence.

Most  of  the  "  Skrytnikoff  case  "  as  presented  here  appeared  in  No.  48  of  the
Rebus  (a  Russian  Spiritistic  paper,  the  editor  of  which  is  well  known  to  me),  in
1898.  .  .  .

DOCUMENT  I.

Extract  from  a  letter  by  Lieut.-Col.  Starck  to  Baron  N.  Rausch  von  Trau-
benberg.    Rtbus,  No.  48,  1898,  p.  417.

On  January  22nd,  1898,  I  made  Z and  J 1  sit  down  at  a  table.     I

wrote  down  the  alphabet,  placed  upon  it  a  saucer  with  a  pointer  and  their
hands  upon  it — and  the  writing  began.  Though  a  firm  believer,  from  what  I
had  read,  in  mediumistic  phenomena,  I  was  still  amazed.  I  bandaged  their
eyes  with  the  same  result ;  the  letters  are  pointed  out  exactly  and  correctly ;  the
mental  contents  are  present.  No  trance.  All  the  writers  are  in  a  perfectly
normal  state.  They  are  keeping  their  hands  on  the  saucer  with  eyes  blind-

1  M.  Starck's  daughter  and  wife.


869B]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  479

folded  ;  I  read  and  write  down.  I  put  down  questions  aloud  or  in  writing,  and
get  answers  which  I  do  not  expect,  and  the  contents  of  which  do  not  correspond
to  either  Z.'s  or  J.'s  mental  level.  I  am  looking  upon  it  as  a  mystification—
by  whom,  I  do  not  know ; —then  suddenly  we  get:  "  I  have  the  honour  to
present  myself,  Your  High  Nobility,1— Skrytnikoff."  This  appeared  so  unex-
pectedly and  had  such  a  meaning  that  I  had  to  get  up  from  [sheer]  emotion
and  to  suspend  the  sitting  for  about  five  minutes.  Skrytnikoff  was  a  soldier
who  had  served  in  my  regiment  here,  in  Caucasia,  and  was  drowned  in  Pzezu-
appe  river  in  June  or  July  of  last  year  when  I  was  no  more  on  active  service ;  I
had  learnt  about  this  event  by  accident,  and  had  only  once  spoken  about  it  in
the  autumn.  We  sit  down  at  the  saucer  again  and  get :  "  I  was  drowned  in
the  sea,  far  away."  I  feel  perplexed.  From  what  had  been  communicated  to
me  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  I  thought  he  had  been  drowned  in  the  river.
Then  I  get:  "  Doubovik  (the  local  chief  of  district,  i.e. pristav).  Go  to  him."
In  the  morning  I  go  to  Doubovik,  and  without  saying  what  the  matter  was,
I  ask  whether  he  knows  anything  about  Skrytnikoff  who  was  drowned — and
receive,  as  I  expected,  a  negative  answer,  because  in  such  cases  inquests,  &c.,
are  held  by  the  military  authorities  themselves.  During  our  conversation  in
the  office  the  secretary  interferes  and  says :  "  No,  I  think  there  is  something
about  Skrytnikoff  in  the  papers."  A  search  is  made  in  the  papers  and  a proces
verbal  found  by  the  bailiff  or  desiatnik  of  Lazarevskoe  village,  of  no  special
importance,  but  in  which  the  sentence  occurred  :  "  The  horse  swam  out,  but  he
[Skrytnikoff]  was  carried  into  the  sea."  Now  this  is  very  natural :  the  river,
which  is  generally  shallow,  but  swift  and  deep  during  high  water,  must  have
carried  him  into  the  sea.

DOCUMENT  II.

Extract  from  Lieut.-CoL  Starch's  letter  to  M.  Aksakoff,  dated  Sept.  $th
[i7///],  1898.  Sotchi  [Black  Sea  province — Tchernomorskaya  Youbernia].
Rebus,  No.  48,  1898,  p.  417.

SIR, — My  relative,  Baron  N.  A.  Rausch  von  Traubenberg,  has  informed  me
of  your  wish  to  print  the  contents  of  my  letter  to  him  concerning  the  soldier
Skrytnikoff  who  was  drowned,  and  has  asked  me  to  send  you  my  consent.
This  I  do  at  present  with,  of  course,  my  whole  signature  ;  and  beg  you — should
it  be  of  interest — to  append  to  my  letter  :  (i)  An  attestation  by  Doubovik,  the
then  chief  of  the  Sotchi  district ;  (2)  a  copy  of  the  proces  verbal j  and  (3)  the
original  leaf  of  paper  with  the  notes  of  the  sitting.  ...  In  the  original  [account]
of  the  sitting  the  signature  [S.'s]  is  unfinished  because  I  got  up  from  the  table  in
great  excitement;  I  was  struck  by  the  unexpectedness  and  the  reality  of  the
message,  though  I  had  read  almost  everything  on  the  subject  and  felt  quite
sure  of  the  possibility  of  such  phenomena.  The  following  words  were  obtained
after  I  had  sat  down  at  the  table  again;  my  wife  and  daughter  having  not  left
the  table  at  all.  I  only  told  them  there  was  something  convincing  in  the  mes-
sage. Then  I  was  extremely  astonished  by  the  information  as  to  his  having
been  drowned  in  the  sea,  whilst  I  was  quite  sure  this  had  occurred  in  the  river,
as  the  only  information  I  had  accidentally  had  on  the  subject  from  a  former
colleague  of  mine  was  to  the  effect  that  Skrytnikoff  was  drowned  in  Pzezuappe
river,  his  chiefs  being  convinced  of  it  till  now.  I  knew  no  details  whatever
about  .  .  .  Skrytnikoff,  and  only  the  idea  as  to  his  having  been  drowned  in  a

1  A  Russian  military  formula.


480  APPENDICES  [870  A

river  could  have  originated  in  my  head  and  among  my  household— and  this
only  as  a  transitory  long  since  forgotten  impression ;  it  was  once  mentioned
in  the  autumn,  and  I  am  not  even  quite  sure  of  it.

The  graces  verbal  gave  me  but  little  that  was  new,  but  the  words  "  he  was
carried  away  by  the  water  into  the  sea,"  gave  my  thoughts  an  impulse  [in  the
direction]  that  it  had  actually  been  so,  i.e.  that  he  was  drowned  in  the  sea :
there  is  not  more  than  half  a  verst  from  the  spot  where  the  river  is  crossed  to
the  sea,  it  being  a  mountain  stream  and  in  high  water.  Of  course  he  was
quickly  carried  into  the  sea ;  his  weapon  (a  sabre,  I  think)  being  found  cast
ashore  on  the  sea  coast,  not  far  from  the  river.  A  year  before  I  had  been  his
chief,  and  am  sure  he  felt  kindly  towards  me  as  the  other  soldiers  did.

The  present  message  was,  I  think,  obtained  at  the  third  seance.  The  condi-
tions were  as  follows :  the  alphabet  written,  not  in  order,  on  a  leaf  of  paper,
and  a  saucer  with  a  pointer  upon  it ;  my  wife  and  daughter,  with  eyes  blind-
folded, kept  their  hands  upon  the  saucer,  and  I  wrote  down  the  letters.  .  .  .

[M.  Starck  further  states  that  his  daughter  is  now  sixteen  and  in  good
health.]  [Signed]  N.  STARCK.

M.  Starck's  letter  was  followed  in  the  Rebus  by  a  copy  of  the  proces  verbal
drawn  up  by  Mouhortoff,  a  police  official,  which  states  that  in  the  night  of
September  7th  (iQth)  Peter  Skrytnikoff,  a  soldier  of  the  Vardony  military  post,
when  crossing  Pzezuappe  river,  was  carried  away  by  the  water  together  with
the  horse,  which,  however,  escaped  and  was  taken  charge  of  by  soldiers  of  the
Lazarevskce  post ;  as  for  S.,  "  he  was  carried  away  by  the  water  into  the  sea,"
and  his  body  never  found,  though  carefully  searched  for.

The  Rebus  also  gave  a  statement  by  M.  Doubovik  confirmatory  of  M.
Starck's  account  of  his  visit  to  him  the  day  after  the  sitting :  proces  verbal  of
Skrytnikoff's  death  found,  &c.

In  reply  to  Mr.  Solovovo's  questions,  M.  Starck  informed  him  that
his  wife  and  daughter  knew  Skrytnikoff,  having  seen  him  several  times ;
also  that  he  himself  did  not  touch  the  saucer  during  the  communication.
Mme.  and  Mdlle.  Starck  also  sent  Mr.  Solovovo  statements  which  he
combined  into  one  as  follows  : —

January  12/24,  1899.     SOTCHI.

We  find  M.  Starck's  account  concerning  a  communication  from  the  soldier
Skrytnikoff  who  was  drowned,  printed  in  Rebus,  No.  48,  1898,  to  be  correct.
During  the  incident  described  our  eyes  were  bandaged  and  we  positively  could
not  see  the  alphabet.

re-     *A^     5  JEANNETTE  STARCK.
\  ZENAIDE  STARCK.

870  A.  The  following  account  (taken  from  thejournat  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.
p.  284)  is  translated  and  abridged  from  the  Vessillo  Spiritista  for  June
1900,  where  it  appeared  under  the  title  of  "A  Good  Proof  of  Spirit
Identity."

NAPLES,  January  2Oth  [1900].

On  the  evening  of  January  I2th,  1900,  during  the  usual  weekly  sitting,  in
the  presence  of  Sig.  G.  V.  de  Simone,  his  wife  and  two  young  daughters,  C.


870A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  481

Orsini  and  the  present  writer,  a  good  proof  of  identity  which  had  been  asked  for
was  received  from  the  spirit  of  Arturo  de  Capua.  It  had  been  asked  for  under
conditions  which  excluded  every  possibility  of  voluntary  or  involuntary,  con-
scious or  unconscious  suggestion,  as  it  was  impossible  that  what  was  unknown
and  always  had  been  unknown  to  all  present  should  be  suggested,  and  this
makes  it  of  more  value  than  a  volunteered  proof,  which  might  have  been
prepared  beforehand  by  the  medium.

This  spirit  of  Arturo  has  given  in  many  sittings  many  moral  and  intellectual
proofs  of  his  personality  which  were  recognised  by  his  mother  and  brother  Avo.
G.  de  Capua.  The  Neapolitan  verses  which  he  improvised  (and  I  say  impro-
vised, because  the  suggestion  was  made  at  the  moment),  written  with  extreme
rapidity  through  the  medium  Signorina  O.  de  S.,  resemble  closely  in  form  and
matter  those  written  by  him  during  his  life  on  earth.

Proofs  of  this  sort,  however,  although  perhaps  convincing  to  those  present
are  of  little  value  to  strangers,  who  want  records  of  facts  which  exclude  any
such  hypothesis  as  telepathy  or  self-suggestion  on  the  part  of  the  medium.
Therefore  on  this  evening  I  asked  the  spirit  of  Arturo  if  he  had  any  precise
recollections  of  his  earthly  existence,  and  if  he  could  give  me  some  fact,  of  his
own  choice.

He  answered  me  by  automatic  writing  thus :  "  My  dear  Cavalli,  I  have,
it  is  true,  advanced;  but  I  recognise  you,  in  a  state  of  calm  which  I  have
acquired,  and  which  formerly  I  did  not  possess  ;  as  for  my  remembrances,
know  that  not  only  does  it  give  me  great  fatigue  to  recall  them,  but  it  also
causes  me  great  pain ;  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  I  rarely  seek  to  revive
them."

Then  I  replied  that  I  did  not  wish  to  cause  him  pain,  and  would  content
myself  with  asking  him  to  give  the  names  he  remembered  of  his  dearest
friends.

None  of  those  present  had  known  Arturo  when  living,  much  less  the  persons
or  names  of  persons  with  whom  he  was  acquainted.  So  this  would  be  a  good
proof.  The  spirit  willingly  assented.  After  a  short  time  he  wrote  with  his
accustomed  rapidity  :  "  Emilia,  Paolo,  Elena,  Annina,  and  the  lady  who  gave
me  the  cigarette,  and  whose  name  I  cannot  recall.  Those  are  the  people  of
whom  I  was  very  fond,  after  my  intimate  friends,  and  who  are  still  dear  to  me."
"  So  far  good,  but  the  best  part  is  still  wanting,"— I  observed—"  the  surnames.
Do  you  remember  them  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  Can  you  and  will  you  give  them  ?  "  "  I
cannot."  "At  least  tell  me  if  the  four  names  have  different  surnames."  He
answered  that  the  two  first  had  different  surnames,  and  the  two  last  the  same.
Immediately  afterwards  he  expressed  a  desire  to  write  again  and  wrote,  "  I
add  to  these  Carlo  Ricci,  whom  I  still  love  so  much ;  do  not  be  so  exacting,  do
you  understand  ?  "  The  spirit  insisted  that  all  this  was  correct  and  expressed
anger  when  I  doubted  it.

As  soon  as  I  saw  his  brother,  Guglielmo,  I  showed  him  the  communica-
tions. They  were  all  absolutely  correct,  the  names  given,  and  the  lady  of  the
cigarette,  but  Carlo  Ricci  struck  him  above  everything !  "  He  was  Arturo's
dearest  friend,"  his  brother  told  me.

Although  older  than  Arturo,  Carlo  Ricci  and  his  father  had  always  had  the
greatest  consideration  for  him,  and  Arturo  was  devoted  to  them  both  and  pre-
ferred their  company  to  any  other.

Arturo's  mother,  whom  I  also  questioned,  confirmed  everything  that  her
son  Guglielmo  had  said.  .  .  .

VOL.  n.  2  H


482  APPENDICES  [871  A

But  to  return  to  the  communication  given  by  the  spirit  of  Arturo  on  the
evening  of  the  I2th,  we  can  add  another  valuable  particular.  He  gave  the
names  of  four  persons,  as  we  have  said;  among  these  was  one  Paolo.  When
asked  about  him  at  a  following  sitting  he  answered  by  automatic  writing:
"  Paolo  is  the  father  of  the  lovely  Nanninella."  This  was  correct,  and  when
asked  for  some  further  particulars  of  the  lady  who  gave  him  the  cigarettes —
amongst  other  things,  whether  there  were  dear  friends  of  the  lady's  living  in  the
same  place  with  her, — he  answered  :  "  The  lady  has  dear  friends  near  her,  and
they  are  of  my  family."  Both  these  facts  had  been  absolutely  correct  at  the
time  of  his  death.  But  the  interesting  point  is  this — that  when  asked  to  name
friends  living  in  the  same  place  as  the  lady,  he  named  his  family.  Those  pre-
sent at  the  sitting,  and  all  who  knew  Arturo's  family,  knew  that  for  some  months
they  had  changed  their  home.  The  spirit,  however,  apparently  judging  from
the  past,  did  not  think  of  their  present  changed  habitation,  and  concluded  that
they  were  still  living  near  the  lady.  V.  CAVALLI.

As  witness  of  the  facts  narrated  above,  I  affirm  that  they  are  perfectly
true.  C.  ORSINI.

Similar  testimonies  are  given  by  Vincenzo  de  Simone  and  Guglielmo  de
Capua.

871  A.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  124-27,  quoted  from
The  Holy  Truth,  by  Hugh  Junor  Browne,  pp.  63-71.

In  this  [automatic  writing]  we  were  unsuccessful,  until  it  came  to  the  turn
of  my  eldest  daughter,  a  girl  of  eleven  years  of  age,  to  take  the  pencil  in  hand.
Immediately  on  her  doing  so  her  hand  was  influenced  to  write,  causing  her  to
be  considerably  alarmed.  She  called  out,  "  Oh,  mamma  !  I  am  so  frightened,
my  hand  is  moving."  We  all  pacified  her  as  much  as  possible,  and  on  taking
up  the  paper  we  found  her  hand  had  written  on  it  quite  legibly,  though  in
rather  tremulous  characters,  quite  different  from  her  ordinary  writing,  the
following  sentence :  "  Helen,  Grace,  Browne,  I  am  come  to  see  you.  Your
beloved  aunt.  You  will,"  &c.,  &c.  The  remainder  of  the  writing  was  too  faint
to  decipher.  The  name  written  above  is  that  of  my  second  daughter,  between
five  and  six  years  of  age,  who  is  called  after  two  of  her  aunts,  my  sisters;  one
of  whom,  the  wife  of  an  officer  in  the  Indian  army,  passed  away  many  years
ago,  having  died  on  her  passage  home  from  India,  and  whose  spirit  we  after-
wards ascertained  influenced  the  girl's  hand  to  write  this  message  to  her  little
niece  and  namesake.  We  had  a  number  of  communications  through  the  same
source  that  evening  from  different  spirit-friends,  and  since  that  time,  except  on
two  occasions,  when  she  said  she  felt  no  influence  (a  reason  for  which  after-
wards was  given),  whenever  my  eldest  girl  sits  down  for  the  purpose  of  com-
municating with  our  spirit-friends,  her  hand  is  almost  immediately  influenced
to  write.  Her  hand  has  written  as  many  as  forty  pages  of  large  notepaper
within  half-an-hour,  which  in  her  ordinary  handwriting  would  take  her  several
hours  to  copy.

My  daughter  is  quite  unaware  of  what  she  is  writing  and  describes  the
sensation  of  the  influence  as  though  electricity  were  running  down  her  arm
from  the  shoulder.  This  is  what  is  termed  mechanical  writing  mediumship.
She  often  writes  far  beyond  her  own  powers  of  comprehension  on  subjects  of
which  she  has  not  the  least  conception,  spelling  words  correctly  which  she  does


871  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  483

not  understand,  and  of  which,  when  read  over,  she  inquires  the  meaning — such
words  as  clairvoyantly,  physically,  £c.  At  other  times  she  spells  small  words
incorrectly  which  in  her  ordinary  writing  she  would  spell  correctly.  She  has
written  in  French,  of  which  language  she  knows  but  the  rudiments ;  she  has
written  in  Chinese  characters,  and  also  in  the  Kaffir  language,  of  neither  of
which  does  she  understand  a  word.  She  has  written  in  blank  verse,  which,
though  it  would  not  stand  the  scrutiny  of  a  critic,  is  decidedly  beyond  her
powers  in  this  line,  she  being  more  of  a  romp  than  a  student.

My  daughter  has  frequently  been  influenced  to  write  messages  to  strangers
from  their  spirit-friends,  giving  them  particulars  about  things  of  which  she
could  not  possibly  know  anything,  and  signing  correctly  the  names  of  their
spirit-friends  in  spirit-life  of  whom  she  had  never  before  heard.  Her  mother
and  I  have  thought  of  a  question  to  put  to  one  of  our  spirit-friends  when  she
was  not  present,  and  calling  her  into  the  room  have  given  her  a  pencil  and
paper,  and  she  has  written  a  correct  reply  to  the  question  mentally  asked,  and
signed  the  name  of  the  spirit-friend  of  whom  we  thought.  She  can  write  either
looking  away  from  or  on  to  the  paper.  A  difference  can  be  seen  in  the  writing
from  each  of  our  spirit-friends.  If  I  see  even  the  word  "  yes  "  written  through
her,  I  can  generally  tell  what  spirit  is  influencing  the  medium's  hand.  I  have
seen  her  write  the  letters  upside  down,  backwards,  left-handed,  and  in  various
ways  quite  impossible  for  the  child  to  do  herself,  and  sometimes  so  fast  you
can  hardly  see  her  hand  join  the  letters,  and  at  other  times  slow ;  sometimes
in  a  very  small  hand,  at  others  in  bold  text-writing.

On  one  occasion  it  was  written  through  my  daughter's  hand  that  I  was  to
take  a  bottle  of  a  specific  I  have  for  rheumatism  to  a  Mr.  Reed,  directing  me
to  inquire  at  a  shop  in  the  next  street  to  where  he  used  to  live  and  I  would  be
directed  to  where  he  then  resided.  I  had  formerly  given  a  man  of  this  name
some  of  this  mixture,  which  had  relieved  him  of  the  pain,  but  had  not  seen  or
heard  of  him  for  months,  and  I  was  not  aware  that  he  had  removed  from  where
he  then  lived.  On  calling  at  his  former  residence  I  found  he  had  removed,
and  on  calling  as  instructed  at  the  shop  indicated  I  was  told  where  Reed  then
lived.  I  found  him  confined  to  his  bed,  suffering  acutely  from  rheumatism,
and  gave  him  the  specific.

I  may  mention  another  incident  which  occurred.  One  day  when  out  walk-
ing with  my  wife  I  met  a  black  man  whom  I  had  never  seen  before,  but  whom  I
recognised  as  a  Kaffir  from  large  holes  made  in  his  ears  peculiar  to  that  race.
I  accosted  him  in  his  native  tongue,  at  which  he  seemed  rather  surprised,  and
I  gave  him  my  address,  telling  him  to  call  on  me.  This  he  did  just  as  we
were  sitting  down  to  investigate  this  subject.  I  told  the  servant  to  show  him
into  the  room,  and  on  asking  if  any  of  his  spirit-friends  were  present,  my
daughter's  hand  wrote  out  several  Kaffir  names,  which  on  my  reading  out  to
him  he  recognised,  and  which  evidently  caused  him  great  astonishment.  On
asking  if  they  had  any  message  for  him,  a  sentence  was  written  in  the  Kaffir
language,  some  of  the  words  of  which  were  beyond  my  comprehension.  On
my  reading  the  message  out  to  the  Kaffir  he  understood  every  word  of  it  except
one.  This  I  pronounced  in  various  ways  to  try  to  make  him  comprehend,  but
all  to  no  purpose,  when  my  daughter's  hand  was  influenced  to  write,  "  Click
with  the  mouth."  This  reminded  me  of  a  peculiar  click  which  frequently  ac-
companies the  sounding  of  the  letter  "  T  "  in  the  Kaffir  language,  and  on  my
pronouncing  this  word  he  understood  the  meaning  of  it  at  once.  I  may  state


484  APPENDICES  [871  A

my  daughter  does  not  know  a  word  of  Kaffir,  having  been  born  several  years
after  I  was  last  in  that  country.  I  inquired  who  influenced  her  hand  to  write,
as  the  art  of  writing  is  generally  unknown  to  Kaffirs,  and  was  informed  my  old
friend  H.  S.,  whose  native  name  was  "  Nonquambeen,"  had  written  the
message  at  the  request  of  the  Kaffir's  spirit-friends.  I  may  add  H.  S.  was  a
well-educated  man,  whose  memory  I  hold  in  regard,  and  who  when  in  this  life
could  talk  the  Kaffir  language  fairly,  having  been  an  old  settler  in  Natal.  I
explained  to  my  Kaffir  visitor  that  the  Insleseea,  or  souls  of  his  friends,  were
present,  at  which  he  seemed  rather  terrified.  I  assured  him  there  were
numbers  of  my  spirit-friends  present  also,  and  that  my  children  frequently
described  both  the  spirits  of  my  friends  and  of  some  of  his  countrymen  who
were  in  my  employ,  and  others  whom  I  knew  many  years  ago.  This  only
seemed  to  increase  his  fear.  I  think  I  have  referred  to  Chinese  having  been
written  through  my  daughter's  hand  imperfectly,  and  on  my  remarking  that  I
did  not  think  it  was  like  the  Chinese  characters,  I  was  informed  by  one  of  my
Anglican  spirit-friends  that  it  was  the  first  time  the  Chinese  spirit  had  in-
fluenced a  medium  to  write,  and  that  he  would  improve  by  practice.  On  show-
ing it  to  a  Chinese  (there  were  thirteen  or  fourteen  pages  of  it)  he  could  not
make  out  many  of  the  characters,  but  here  and  there  he  said,  "  That  means
sound,"  "That  means  twenty,"  and  so  on,  and  remarked,  "This  like  little
China  boy's  writing,  not  know  write  good."

One  day,  while  receiving  communications  through  my  daughter's  hand,  I
observed  written,  "  Put  down  that  balloon."  I  remarked  to  my  wife,  "  What
on  earth  have  they  to  do  with  balloons  in  spirit-life  ? "  She  smiled,  and  told
me  that  our  daughter  had  in  her  left  hand  one  of  those  pink  india-rubber  toy
balloons,  which  she,  childlike,  had  been  trying  to  inflate  with  her  breath
whilst  her  right  hand  was  writing  the  communications.  I  was  sitting  on  the
medium's  right-hand  side,  and  was  so  interested  in  the  communications  as
written  that  I  had  not  taken  notice  what  she  was  doing  with  her  left  hand,
on  which  side  my  wife  sat.  At  another  time,  in  reply  to  a  query  by  me  on
some  deep  theological  matter,  through  my  daughter's  hand  it  was  written,
"  How  can  you  expect  an  answer  to  such  a  question  through  a  child's
organisation?"  I  have  several  reams  of  paper  filled  with  communications
received  through  my  daughter's  hand.

The  incident  of  the  young  child's  writing  is  given  in  the  same  book
(p.  71),  being  then  of  quite  recent  date.  I  will,  however,  give  here  the
account,  of  course  much  later,  but  concordant,  and  in  some  points  fuller,
which  was  given  to  me  at  the  interview  mentioned  in  section  871.

October  yd,  1891.

When  our  daughter  Nelly  was  nearly  five  years  old,  she  had  not  learned
a  single  letter  of  her  alphabet.  She  had  certainly  received  no  instruction
whatever.  One  day  her  elder  sister  was  writing  automatically.  To  please  the
child,  we  put  a  pencil  in  her  hand.  Presently  we  observed  that  she  had  written
some  words,  and  on  looking  we  saw  that  the  words  were,  "I  am  a  mesmeric
medium."  [Words  "  I  am  a  "  not  present  in  earlier  account.]  She  had  been
under  our  eyes  all  the  time.  The  words  were  written  in  a  small  angular  lady's
handwriting.  I  then  asked  my  elder  daughter's  "  guide,"  the  late  Dr.  Godfrey
Howitt,  to  explain  this.  Instead  of  the  accustomed  writing,  a  message  came


872A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  485

in  the  writing  of  my  elder  sister,  the  late  Mrs.  Colonel  Kelso,  to  the  effect :
[here  I  give  the  correct  wording  as  in  earlier  record]  "  She  will  be  very
mediumistic,  but  is  too  young  to  be  influenced;  do  not  let  her  sit  until  she  is
older,  or  you  will  injure  her  health."  We  did  not  let  her  write  automatically
for  some  years  afterwards  ;  then  she  did  write  for  some  little  time,  and  then
the  power  left  her.  HUGH  JUNOR  BROWNE.

ELIZABETH  BROWNE.

872  A.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  122-24.

The  following  case  came  to  Dr.  Hodgson  from  a  group  of  persons  who
may  not  be  very  critical,  but  who  are  plainly  sincere.  The  phenomenon
alleged,  however  surprising,  involves  but  a  simple  act  of  observation,  and
should  have  been  easy  to  note  and  remember.

FLUSHING,  July  igth,  1890.

MR.  RICHARD  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — It  affords  me  pleasure  to  respond
to  your  inquiry  concerning  the  item  of  spirit  writing  through  the  hand  of  a
little  child  just  four  years  of  age  who  had  no  knowledge  of  its  letters,  unaided
and  untaught.

My  wife  had  a  niece  who  passed  to  spirit-life  twenty  years  ago,  who  was  in
life  strongly  attached  to  her,  and  whenever  we  come  in  contact  with  a  medium-
istic person  she  invariably  makes  her  presence  known  to  us.  My  daughter,
fifteen  years  of  age,  and  another  young  lady  of  the  same  age,  opened  a  school
for  small  children  in  a  little  room  used  for  a  Sunday  School  by  the  Baptist
society,  where  the  event  took  place.  It  was  approaching  Easter,  and  to  add  to
the  coming  exercises,  the  little  girl  was  especially  invited  to  join  them  in  re-
hearsing their  pieces,  as  most  all  the  pupils  were  members  of  the  Mission
Sunday  School.  The  first  morning  of  her  attendance  a  slate  and  pencil  were
given  her  to  keep  her  quiet ;  she  scribbled  awhile,  when  it  was  noticed  that  she
had  written  very  distinctly  the  name  Emma.  As  it  was  known  that  the  child
had  never  been  inside  of  a  school  before,  and  that  she  knew  no  single  letter  of
the  alphabet,  it  was  a  great  surprise.  The  slate  belonged  to  some  of  the  pupils,
hence  was  not  preserved  by  the  young  ladies.  I  regretted  the  loss  of  such  a
rare  test  of  spirit  control,  and  urged  them,  should  such  a  thing  ever  occur  again,
to  preserve  it.  The  child  attended  the  day  following,  and  instead  of  slate  a
leaf  from  a  tablet  and  lead  pencil  were  given  her.  After  she  had  amused  her-
self awhile  she  returned  the  paper,  and  it  was  seen  that  a  number  of  attempts  to
write  the  name  Emma  had  been  made.  As  she  handed  in  the  paper  she  said,
"  Nozer,"  and  another  sheet  was  given,  with  an  improvement ;  the  third  was
given,  when  upon  either  side  was  written  with  bold  running  hand,  "  your  aunt
Emma,"  quite  as  large  and  perfect  as  the  above.

True,  she  was  aunt  to  the  little  one  whose  little  hand  she  was  holding.
The  pressure  upon  the  paper  of  the  first  two  sheets  was  uneven,  and  it
requires  close  attention  to  follow  some  portions  of  the  first  attempt,  but  in
the  last  she  seems  to  have  overcome  all  difficulties  and  accomplished  her  pur-
pose of  giving  us  a  fact  of  spirit  control.

Little  Etta  has  passed  on  to  the  higher  life  within  a  year  of  this  event.

It  is  fair  to  say  her  parents  were  not  Spiritualists.  They  took  the  child  and
gave  her  paper  and  pencil,  but  failed  to  get  satisfactory  results.

That  little  circle  of  innocent  children  singing  their  songs  had  created  an
atmosphere  of  harmony  favourable  for  that  sensitive  little  child  to  receive


486  APPENDICES  [872  A

the  impress  or  control  of  a  decarnate  spirit.  Those  familiar  with  pheno-
mena of  this  kind  will  readily  appreciate  the  difference  in  conditions. — Yours
truly,  A.  E.  HEMPSTEAD.

This  is  to  certify  that  we  were  present  and  witnessed  the  writing  of  little
Etta,  as  described  in  the  foregoing  statement,  and  know  that  neither  Etta  nor
any  other  pupil  present  at  the  time  could  have  written  the  messages  of  their
own  abilities.  [Signed]  LAURA  HEMPSTEAD.

L.  A.  K.

I  am  the  mother  of  little  Etta,  and  know  she  had  not  been  taught  the
alphabet,  or  how  to  hold  her  pencil.  [Signed]  MRS.  B.  W.  TERRY.

In  another  letter  Mr.  Hempstead  adds  : —

NEWTOWN,  N.Y.,  October  i6tA,  1890.

In  reply  to  your  last  inquiry  I  will  say  Etta's  message  was  written  just
before  Easter.

The  messages  we  still  have,  although  somewhat  difficult  to  read,  as  they
were  in  pencil,  and  the  uneven  pressure  upon  the  paper  requires  close  atten-
tion. We  did  not  ink  it  over,  as  we  wished  to  preserve  its  purity.  Remem-
ber she  held  the  pencil  between  the  middle  fingers  of  her  left  hand,  as  she  was
not  taught  the  art  of  holding  her  pencil.  I  have  written  in  ink  upon  their
margins  in  the  order  that  she  wrote  them.

Will  gladly  loan  them  to  you,  trusting  they  will  be  duly  returned.

NEWTOWN,  November  \tyh,  1890.

DEAR  SIR,— By  a  strange  grouping  of  circumstances  your  letter,  little
Etta's  mother,  the  young  lady  who  witnessed  the  writing,  all  came  into  our
home  here  in  Newtown  together,  bringing  the  mail  with  them,  as  if  uncon-
sciously directed,  so  I  am  prepared  to  return  your  paper  promptly.  They  all
read  it,  and  without  hesitation  gave  their  signatures.  In  the  case  of  Miss
K.,  she  said  she  would  rather  not  have  her  name  mentioned  publicly  on  account
of  her  connection  with  the  church,  &c.,  which  you  may  readily  understand.

The  mother  explained  that  the  child  was  left-handed,  and  L.  did  not  remem-
ber about  the  manner  in  which  she  (Etta)  held  the  pencil.  But  my  daughter  is
positive,  and  one  not  likely  to  forget  so  novel  a  feature.  Hoping  the  above  will
suffice,  I  remain,  very  truly  yours  for  humanity,  A.  E.  HEMPSTEAD.

Dr.  Hodgson  adds  : —

October  y>tk,  1890.

Mr.  Hempstead  has  kindly  sent  me  the  writings  by  the  little  girl  Etta  for
my  inspection.  There  are  three  small  sheets  of  paper  with  several  attempts  at
writing  on  both  sides  of  each  sheet.  There  are  indications  of  "Aunt"  and
"  Emma  "  on  the  first  and  second  sheets  ;  Emma  being  written  tolerably  well
on  the  second  sheet.  The  enclosed  tracing  is  of  the  last  attempt.

An  account  (seen  by  me  and  concordant  with  the  above)  had  been  sent
by  Mr.  Hempstead  to  the  Banner  of  Light  immediately  after  the  incident,
and  was  printed  May  4th,  1889.  I  nave  seen  tne  tracing  of  the  last-written
phrase,  "  your  aunt  Emma."  It  is  a  free  scrawl,  resembling  the  planchette-
writing  of  an  adult  rather  than  the  first  effort  of  a  child.


873A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  487

873  A.  The  following  experience  of  Mr.  W.'s  is  quoted  from  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  463  :—

October  zbth,  1894.

.  .  .  The  following  is  an  account  of  an  experience  I  had  last  April.

In  the  afternoon,  I  was  riding  eastward  towards  Schenectady,  N.Y.,  on
the  N.Y.C.  and  H.R.  road.  I  intended  to  get  off  at  Schenectady,  and  take
a  train  from  there  to  Troy,  and  at  Troy  get  a  train  on  the  Fitchburgh  and
Hoosac  Tunnel  Road.  I  asked  the  conductor  whether  I  would  be  able  to
make  good  connections  at  Schenectady,  also  at  Troy.  He  informed  me  that
I  would  at  Schenectady,  but  at  Troy  I  would  not,  for  the  reason  that  I  would
not  arrive  in  Troy  until  five  minutes  after  the  departure  of  the  train  on  the
F.  and  H.  T.  He  told  me  that  I  would  not  arrive  in  Troy  until  5.5,  and
my  train  departed  at  just  five  o'clock,  and  that  it  was  the  last  one  for  the
week.  This  was  Saturday.  I  asked  him  if  he  could  suggest  any  way  for
me  to  get  my  train  or  reach  my  desired  place  of  destination,  but  he  said  he
could  not.  It  seemed  certain  that  I  must  lay  off  in  Troy  over  Sunday.
The  conductor  passed  on,  and  I  meditated,  but  to  no  purpose.  After  some
time  I  took  a  pencil  and  paper,  and  thought,  but  did  not  write,  "  Well,  I
think  I  shall  not  get  through  to-night,  I  am  very  sorry."  Instantly  the

pencil  wrote,  "  You  will  reach to-night,"  naming  the  place  I  was  bound

for.  I  replied,  by  thought,  "  Why,  it's  impossible,  how  can  I  ?— the  train
out  of  Troy  leaves  five  minutes  before  my  train  arrives."  The  answer  was,

"Yes,  but  you  will  get  to to-night,"  again  naming  my  place  of  destination.

Again  I  thought,  "  Pray,  tell  me  how  I  am  to  do  so."  The  answer  was,  "  Oh,

never  mind  how,  I  tell  you  you  will  arrive  in all  right  to-night."  I  urged

the  impossibility  of  the  matter,  but  that  was  stoutly  denied.  I  pleaded  for
an  explanation,  but  it  was  written  that  I  needed  none,  and  that  none  would
be  given  me.  I  asked  for  instruction  and  it  was  written  that  they  had  none
to  give.  I  insisted  on  the  fact  that  I  could  not  get  the  train,  but  this  was  not
conceded.

On  arriving  at  Schenectady  I  found  my  train  for  Troy,  and  as  I  boarded
it,  I  asked  the  trainman  if  we  would  arrive  in  Troy  in  time  for  me  to  get  a
train  on  the  Fitchburgh  and  Hoosac  Tunnel  Road.  He  replied,  "  No,"  very
promptly,  and  added,  "it  leaves  five  minutes  before  we  arrive."  I  took  my
seat.  When  the  conductor  came  along  I  tried  hard  to  appear  innocent,  and
asked  him  if  I  would  get  to  Troy  in  time  to  get  a  train  out  on  the  Fitchburgh
and  Hoosac  Tunnel  Road.  I  said  I  hoped  to,  for  I  was  very  anxious  to

arrive  at that  night.  His  reply  was,  "  We  do  not  arrive  in  Troy  until

five  minutes  after  five,  and  the  train  on  that  road  pulls  out  at  just  five,  and
it's  the  last  train."  He  passed  on  picking  up  tickets,  and  I  settled  back  into
my  seat.  It  seemed  as  if  the  last  chance  was  gone,  and  I  could  not  help  but
wonder  what  would  be  written,  so  I  observed  mentally,  "  Well,  you  see  your
prediction  is  wrong,  do  you  not  ? "  And  then  came  to  me  what  seemed  to
be  the  height  of  foolishness,  "  Why,  you  will  get  there  all  right,  just  as
I  told  you."  No  explanation  being  vouchsafed,  I  fell  to  planning  what
I  would  do  in  the  city  of  Troy  over  Sunday,  for  I  had  no  hope  of
getting  out.

After  a  while  the  conductor  came  back  and  took  a  seat  just  behind  me,
and  leaning  over  towards  me  he  said,  "  So  you  would  very  much  like  to  get
that  train,  would  you?"  "Yes,  sir,"  I  said.  "Well,"  continued  he,  "there


488  APPENDICES  [873  A

is  just  one  way  that  is  possible  for  you  to  do  it,  if  you  are  a  good  runner  and
willing  to  take  chances."  Of  course  I  asked  how.  Said  he,  "  I  don't  advise
any  one  to  do  it,  but  it  is  possible  to  jump  off  this  train,  for  we  stop  before  we
reach  the  Troy  Dep6t,  and  run  and  jump  on  to  that  train  while  it  is  going  out.'*
And  he  took  a  pencil  and  drew  the  railroads  and  the  dep6t  (a  Union  one)
about  like  this  [diagram  omitted  here].

And  then  he  went  on  to  explain :  "  We  are  not  allowed  to  run  into  tht
depot  until  the  train  for  Saratoga  and  the  one  on  the  Fitchburgh  and  H.  T.  A
have  both  pulled  out,  which  they  both  do  at  just  five  o'clock.  We  should
arrive  at  our  stopping  place  X  at  about  five.  You  could  get  off  there  and  run
across  the  Saratoga  track  and  over  to  Z  [a  point  on  the  Fitchburgh  line]  and
jump  on  to  that  train.  There  is  a  street  from  a  point  near  X  to  Z."

At  X,  as  our  train  stopped,  I  jumped  from  it  and  ran  to  point  Z  and  caught
my  train  which  was  passing  at  that  point.

When  seated  in  the  car  I  gave  the  pencil  one  more  chance,  and  it  was
written :  "  I  see  you  are  on  board  all  right;  don't  you  think  I  knew  what  I  vras
telling  you  ?  "

I  had  no  further  trouble  in  reaching  the  desired  place  that  night.

I  will  say  that  I  was  not  aware  of  any  of  the  material  facts  prior  to  their
appearing  as  I  have  stated  them.  I  had  not  consulted  any  time-table  or
otherwise  learned  as  to  the  times  on  which  these  trains  were  to  arrive  or
depart :  and  /  knew  nothing  of  the  train  stopping  outside  the  Troy  Depot  or  of
the  possibility  of  getting  from  it  and  running  up  the  street  and  catching  the
train  I  wished  to  take.  I  never  had  the  slightest  idea  of  such  a  thing  until
the  conductor  laid  the  plan  before  me  just  as  I  have  stated  it.  I  was  travelling
alone.  I  did  not  know  the  conductor  or  anybody  that  I  saw.

I  had  no  occasion  to  look  up  or  inform  myself  as  to  trains  at  Troy  for  the
reason  that  I  expected  to  travel  on  the  West  Shore  Road  instead  of  the  N.Y.C.
and  H.R.R. ;  but  I  missed  the  train  on  the  West  Shore  Road  and  so  took  the
N.Y.C.  and  H.R.R.  as  the  best  thing  possible  under  the  circumstances.  On
the  West  Shore  Road  my  journey  would  not  have  been  through  Schenectady
and  Troy,  but  would  have  been  to  Rotterdam  Junction  on  the  West  Shore
Road,  and  there  I  would  have  connected  with  a  train  on  the  Fitchburgh  and
Hoosac  Tunnel  Road,  all  very  nicely.

I  think  this  experience  is  quite  unique.     Perhaps  some  one  can  explain  it.

W.

N.Y.,  Nwcmber  8tb,  1894.

In  accordance  with  your  suggestion,  I  send  you  herewith  a  further  state-
ment that  you  may  subjoin.  I  think  it  covers  your  inquiry.

C W .

About  two  years  prior  to  that  I  had  travelled  from  Schenectady  to  Troy,
and  out  of  Troy  on  F.  and  H.  T.  R. ;  but  at  that  time  the  train  did  not  stop
outside  of  Troy  Dep6t.  I  had  travelled  in  years  previous,  that  is,  from  five
to  twenty  years  ago,  several  times  on  trains  between  Schenectady  and  Troy,
but  none  of  them  ever  stopped  outside  of  Troy  Dep6t.  I  had  not  been  in

since  the  trip  of  two  years  before.  Prior  to  that  I  had  been  in  that  place

perhaps  once  in  two  years,  for  a  day.

It  might  be  well  to  add  that  no  friend  of  mine  at or  elsewhere  knew

any  of  these  facts,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  belief.  After  arriving  at


874  A]  TO     CHAPTER    VIII  489

I  told  my  friends,  but  none  of  them  had  known  of  the  matters.     I  feel

confident  that  no  friend  or  acquaintance  of  mine  knew  I  was  to  travel  from
Schenectady  to  Troy,  and  that  none  of  them  had  made  or  heard  of  a  connection
in  that  way.  From  talks  with  them  I  know  they  did  not.

874  A.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  432~37-
The     following   appeared   in   the    Religio- Philosophical  Journal    for
November  ist,  1890: —

STATEMENT  OF  DR.  SUDDICK.

For  some  time  past  we  have  been  holding  spiritual  stances,  or  circles,
regularly  every  Tuesday  and  Friday  evening  at  our  home  in  Cuba,  Mo.,  and
have  gotten  and  are  getting  many  messages,  truthful  and  otherwise,  although
the  untruthful  ones  are  few  comparatively  and  are  generally  so  from  known
causes,  such  as  misunderstanding  of  question  asked,  inharmony  in  circle,  &c.,
&c.  Most  remarkable  was  a  "  Prophecy  and  its  Fulfilment,"  a  hurried  state-
ment of  which  appeared  in  the  Better  Way  of  October  i8th.  Two  friends  had
called  in,  namely,  Charles  H.  Cottnam,  bookkeeper  for  the  firm  of  Newman
and  Jones,  general  merchants,  and  James  E.  Hollow,  jun.,  of  the  firm  of
Hollow  &  Son,  dealers  in  stoves,  hardware,  and  furniture,  both  doing  business
at  this  place.  Then  my  wife  and  I  sat  around  a  small  walnut  centre  table,
placing  our  hands  on  its  top  surface  in  the  usual  manner,  and  in  about  ten  or
fifteen  minutes  the  table  began  to  move,  indicating  the  presence  of  our  spirit
friends,  or  some  intelligence  with  the  power  to  move  it,  and  answer  questions
intelligently,  as  we  found  by  asking.  The  lamp  was  sitting  on  a  piano  in  the
corner  of  the  room,  turned  down  so  as  to  make  a  subdued  or  mellow  light,  but
not  so  low  but  that  we  could  see  what  time  it  was  by  our  watches  as  we  sat  at
the  table,  or  jot  down  the  communications  as  they  were  spelled  out.

Mr.  Cottnam  had  a  friend,  Mr.  Chris.  Varis,  a  prominent  hotel-keeper  of
St.  James,  Phelps  County,  Mo.,  and  a  former  resident  of  this  place.  His
disease  was  a  chronic  affection  of  the  throat.  Mr.  C.  had  called  on  him  a  few
days  previous  and  found  him  very  weak  and  sinking  fast.  He  could  take  no
solid  food,  and  all  the  nourishment  he  got  was  by  painful  swallowing  a  little
eggnog  or  milk.  His  attendant  physician,  Dr.  Headlee,  of  St.  James,  told
Mr.  Cottnam  that  he  thought  Mr.  Varis  could  live  but  a  few  days  at  most,
and  from  his  appearance  Mr.  Cottnam  was  of  the  same  opinion.  After  many
other  questions  were  asked  and  answered,  the  table  answering  by  tipping  two
of  its  feet  two  or  three  inches  off  the  floor,  and  then  striking  it  again,  once
for  no,  twice  for  don't  know,  and  three  times  for  yes,  Mr.  C.  asked,  "  Do
you  know  my  friend  Chris.  Varis,  of  St.  James,  Mo.?"  "Yes."  "Is  he
any  better  than  when  I  was  with  him  last?"  "No."  "Is  he  worse?"
"  Yes."  "  Will  I  have  time  to  get  to  him  before  he  passes  out  if  I  take  the
next  train?"  "Yes."  "  Will  he  live  over  to-morrow  ?"  "Yes."  "  Do  you
know  when  he  will  pass  out?"  "Yes."  Then  the  table  rocked  back  and
forth  slowly,  the  feet  striking  the  floor  forty  times,  making  forty  distinct
raps,  much  to  the  surprise  of  all  present,  as  we  were  expecting  him  to  pass
out  much  sooner.  We  counted,  and  found  that  the  time  indicated  would  be
October  8th ;  so  to  make  sure  we  were  right  we  asked,  "  Will  he  pass  out  on
October  8th  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  In  the  forenoon  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  Will  a  telegram  be
sent  to  me  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  to  that  effect?  "  "  Yes."


490  APPENDICES  [874  A

A  night  or  two  after  the  above-described  seance  Mr.  Cottnam  sat  at  another
house  with  different  sitters,  and  received  the  following  confirmation  of  the
above.  He  says :  "  We  had  been  sitting  only  a  few  minutes  when  the  table
began  to  move.  I  asked,  *  Is  the  spirit  demonstrating  a  friend  of  mine  ? '
'  Yes.'  (Indicated  by  three  distinct  tips  of  the  table.)  '  Will  you  spell  your
name?'  'Yes.'  The  alphabet  was  called  in  the  usual  way,  and  the  letters
signalled  by  tips  spelled  Ben  Walker.  '  Are  you  my  friend,  Ben  Walker,  of
St.  Louis  ? '  '  Yes.'  '  I  was  not  aware  of  your  demise ;  when  did  you  pass
out  ?  '  Three  distinct  tips.  '  Does  that  mean  that  it  has  been  three  days
since  you  passed  out  ?'  'Yes.'  '  Is  your  body  buried  ?'  'No.'  '  Will  it  be
buried  to-morrow  ? '  *  Yes.'  '  Do  you  know  my  friend  Chris.  Varis  ?  '  '  Yes.'
«  Will  he  pass  out  on  October  8th  ?'  'Yes.'  '  Are  you  sure  of  this  ?'  'Yes.'"

Mr.  Cottnam  was  not  aware  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Walker,  and  rather
doubted  the  truth  of  the  message  about  him.  The  Globe  Democrat  of  the
next  day,  however,  confirmed  the  truth  of  his  death,  and  stated  that  the  inter-
ment was  deferred  until  his  son  arrived  from  a  distant  city.

The  prediction  about  Mr.  Varis  became  an  open  secret,  and  was  talked  of
freely  through  the  town  from  the  morning  of  August  3oth  until  October  8th,
when  a  telegram  came  over  the  wires  informing  Mr.  C.  that  Mr.  Varis  died
that  morning  at  six  o'clock.

I  append  a  letter  from  Dr.  Headlee,  the  physician  who  attended  Mr.  Varis,
which  corroborates  the  account  just  given.  I  also  send  the  signatures  of
twelve  of  our  best  citizens  in  further  confirmation,  and  the  signatures  of  the
sitters.  Many  more  names  could  be  obtained,  but  I  judge  the  following  to  be
sufficient.  S.  T.  SUDDICK,  M.D.

CUBA,  Mo.

ST.  JAMES,  Mo.,  October  i&Vfc,  1890.

DEAR  DOCTOR, — About  a  week  previous  to  the  death  of  Mr.  Chris.  Varis
I  was  in  Cuba,  and  a  friend  was  inquiring  about  him.  I  told  him  that  on  the
evening  before  I  did  not  think  he  would  survive  the  night,  but  on  that
morning  he  had  rallied  a  little,  that  the  chances  all  were  that  he  would  not
last  twenty-four  hours.  He  then  told  me  that  he  (Mr.  V.)  would  live  until
the  eighth  day  of  October,  and  that  he  would  die  on  that  day ;  this  he  did,
dying  at  6  A.M.

Mr.  Varis  was  sick  about  seven  or  eight  months,  and  for  the  last  three  was
expected  to  die  at  any  time.— Respectfully  yours,  S.  H.  HEADLEE.

CUBA,  Mo.,  October  \$th,  1890.

To  ALL  WHOM  IT  MAY  CONCERN  : — This  is  to  certify  that  we,  the  under-
signed citizens  of  Cuba,  Mo.,  did,  prior  to  the  death  of  Mr.  Chris.  Varis,  of
St.  James,  Mo.,  which  occurred  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  of  October  1890,
hear  a  prophecy  to  the  effect  that  he  would  die  on  the  morning  of  that  day.

We  heard  that  his  death  was  foretold  at  a  stance,  at  the  house  of  Dr.
S.  T.  Suddick,  in  the  town  of  Cuba,  Mo.,  on  the  night  of  August  the  29th,
or  forty  days  prior  to  that  event.
S.  T.  SUDDICK,  M.D.

I  received  message  for  Cottnam  October  8th,  from  St.  James.

CHAS.  C.  KENT,
Telegraph  Operator  at  Cuba.

JAS.  E.  HOLLOW,  Jun.,  one  of  the  circle  of  August  29th.
LONGSTREET  SIMPSON,  Clerk  in  Store.


874A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  491

I.  P.  BRICKEY,  Proprietor,  Cuba  Hotel.

E.  A.  EVANS,  Real  Estate  Agent.

F.  R.  HARDESTY,  Druggist.
W.  T.  HUNTER,  Blacksmith.

C.  H.  COTTNAM,  one  of  the  circle  of  August  29th.

Dr.  V.  L.  SHELP,  Dentist.

Dr.  J.  H.  MARTYN,  Physician  and  Surgeon.

GEO.  ASKINS,  Hotel  Clerk.

Mrs.  LOUISE  FARLEY  SUDDICK,  one  of  the  circle  of  August  29th.

J.  A.  ROST,  Shoemaker.

J.  A.  CAIMS,  Clerk  in  Store.

B.  F.  JOHNSON,  Notary  Public.

The  letter  from  which  the  following  is  an  extract,  and  of  which  the
original  was  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  Dr.  Suddick,  fixes  the  date  of  the

seance.

CUBA,  Mo.,  August  2$tA,  1890.

D.  E.  PERRYMAN,  Bonne  Terre,  Mo.

DEAR  FRIEND, —  .  .  .  30th.  We  had  a  nice  little  circle  last  night,  in
our  parlour,  and  good  phenomena,  so  far  as  table-tipping  goes.  Myself,  wife,
and  two  neighbours  composed  the  circle.  There  were  about  a  hundred  ques-
tions asked,  and  all  were  answered  correctly,  so  far  as  we  know.

One  gentleman  was  requested  to  go  to  a  sick  friend,  and  was  told  the
number  of  days  he  would  live,  &c.  &c.  S.  T.  SUDDICK.

(This  extract  appeared  in  the  Religio- Philosophical  Journal.)  Dr.
Suddick  says  that  the  letter  was  returned  to  him  at  his  own  request,  and
writes : —

You  will  find  that  the  first  seven  or  eight  lines  were  written  August  29th
and  the  remainder  of  the  letter  on  the  3oth,  or  part  before  and  part  after  the
sitting.

Mrs.  Suddick  sends  the  following  account  of  the  sitting  : —

CUBA,  Mo.,  November  qth,  1890.

Replying  to  your  favour  of  the  5th  inst.,  requesting  my  confirmation  of  the
"  prophecy  "  of  which  my  husband  wrote,  I  can  say  that  I  was  one  of  the
sitters :  the  se'ance  having  taken  place  at  our  house.  There  were  two  other
sitters  besides  my  husband  (Dr.  Suddick)  and  self,  namely,  J.  E.  Hollow,
jun.,  and  C.  H.  Cottnam.  The  message  was  given  in  answer  to  questions
put  by  Mr.  Cottnam  concerning  his  friend  Mr.  Varis.  He  did  not  call  the
name  of  the  latter  at  the  time  of  the  sitting,  but  only  spoke  of  him  as  "  my
friend,"  and  I,  for  one,  did  not  know  at  the  time  to  whom  he  referred.  (I  think
perhaps  the  other  sitters  did.)  I  heard  casually  the  next  day  through  a  neigh-
bour lady  that  Mr.  Varis,  of  St.  James,  was  expected  to  die  at  any  time,  and
associating  the  two  incidents,  I  concluded  he  was  the  sick  friend  of  whose
demise  Mr.  C.  had  been  questioning  the  "  spirits,"  and  on  inquiring  found  that
I  had  surmised  correctly.

At  the  sitting  Mr.  Cottnam  asked  a  number  of  questions  about  his  sick
friend,  among  which  were,  "  Will  he  be  alive  when  I  arrive  there  ?  "  "  Will  he


492  APPENDICES  [874  A

die  to-morrow?"  "Will  he  die  the  day  after?"  &c.  After  receiving  negative
answers  to  the  last  two — and  perhaps  the  question  whether  he  would  live  a
week  was  asked, — I  do  not  distinctly  remember — he  requested  the  controlling
power  to  rap  once  for  every  day  that  his  friend  would  yet  live,  and  the  table
rapped  forty  times:  each  of  the  sitters  counted  the  raps  as  they  were  given
distinctly  by  the  table  rising  on  one  side  off  the  floor  and  striking  down  again.
On  counting  the  forty  days  from  that  date  we  found  that  the  time  of  his  death
as  prophesied  would  fall  on  the  8th  of  October.  (The  date  of  the  prophecy
was  August  29th.)  Mr.  C.  asked  if  the  8th  of  October  was  the  day  on  which  he
would  die,  and  the  table  rapped  three  times,  the  conventional  signal  for  "  Yes."
He  then  asked  if  the  demise  would  take  place  in  daytime  or  at  night ;  in  the
forenoon  or  afternoon,  &c.,  and  received  answers  that  it  would  be  in  the  day-
time, and  in  the  forenoon.

At  several  other  stances,  held  at  the  home  of  Mr.  Brickey  and  other  places,
these  questions  were  again  asked,  and  the  answers  repeated  that  Mr.  Varis
would  die  on  the  morning  of  October  8th,  as  at  the  first  sitting.  Of  these  dates
I  am  perfectly  confident.

It  may,  and  it  may  not,  be  superfluous  to  add,  that,  unlike  my  husband,  I
am  not  a  confirmed  believer  in  the  spiritual  origin  of  those  phenomena  which
we  have  from  time  to  time  witnessed,  such  as  movements  of  the  table  by  some
unknown  power  ;  intelligent  answers  to  questions  ;  messages  given  through  the
alphabet,  &c.,  but  have  been  undecided  whether  to  attribute  them  to  telepathy,
thought-transference,  or  some  other  unknown  mental  or  magnetic  quality  re-
siding in  the  sitters  themselves,  or  whether,  as  so  many  believe,  it  is  really
through  the  direct  agency  of  the  disembodied.

Wishing  your  Society  much  success  in  its  rational  and  most  scientific  way
of  dealing  with  these  occult  problems,— I  am,  very  truly,

LOUISE  F.  SUDDICK.

Dr.  Hodgson  has  also  received  letters  from  Mr.  I.  P.  Brickey,  Mr.  E.
A.  Evans,  and  Mr.  J.  A.  Rost,  confirming  the  authenticity  of  their  testi-
mony quoted  above.  Mr.  Brickey  states  that  it  was  at  his  house  that  the
seance  at  which  the  prophecy  was  confirmed  was  held.

Mr.  Evans  writes  : —

CUBA,  Mo.,  November  8th,  1890.

Touching  the  matter  cited  in  yours  of  the  4th  inst.,  I  desire  to  say  that  my
signature  subscribed  to  the  published  statement  of  Dr.  Suddick,  relative  to  the
prophesied  death  of  Chris.  Varis,  of  St.  James,  Mo.,  is  authentic.  Further,  in
this  connection  I  desire  to  say  that  I  never  attended  a  se'ance,  as  it  is  called,  I
believe,  in  my  life,  have  no  experience  in  that  line,  and  have  no  personal  know-
ledge upon  which  to  base  belief  nor  unbelief  of  Spiritualism.  But  I  was  told
by  parties  that  met  at  Dr.  Suddick's  residence,  some  weeks  before  the  demise
of  Chris.  Varis,  that  by  raps  with,  or  on  a  table,  I  do  not  know  which,  they
were  told  that  Varis  would  die  in  forty  days,  or  October  8th,  and  he  did  die  on
the  date  as  given.  EUGENE  A.  EVANS.

There  remained  an  important  question  to  determine :  whether  Mr.
Varis  had  known  of  the  prophecy,  making  it  possible  that  it  had  brought


876A]  TO     CHAPTER    VIII  493

about  its  own  fulfilment.     The  following  letter  and  statement  give  the
result  of  Dr.  Suddick's  inquiries  on  this  point  :—

CUBA,  Mo.,  December  2yd,  1890.

I  received  your  recent  letter  several  days  ago,  but  thought  it  would  perhaps
be  more  satisfactory  to  you  and  your  Society  for  me  to  go  and  see  Mrs.  Varis,
widow  of  Mr.  Chris.  Varis,  myself.  So  yesterday  (Sunday)  I  boarded  the  noon
train,  and  on  arriving  found  Mrs.  Varis  and  her  two  daughters,  young  ladies,
very  intelligent  and  clever  people.  On  introducing  the  subject,  just  a  shade  of
vexation  passed  over  Mrs.  V.'s  face,  and  she  made  haste  to  say,  "  We  are  not
Spiritualists,  and  knew  nothing  of  the  prophecy  until  we  saw  it  in  the  Crawford
Mirror,  at  least  two  weeks  after  Mr.  Varis'  death.  I  was  very  much  vexed,  as
we  believe  nothing  in  such  foolishness.  ..."

I  explained  that  the  parties  who  had  signed  their  names  to  the  paper  had
not  intended  it  to  appear  in  the  local  press.  Mrs.  V.  said  she  had  felt  very
badly  about  having  her  husband's  name  bandied  about  in  that  way  in  a  news-
paper, but  when  Mr.  Cottnam  explained  the  matter,  and  Dr.  Headlee  said  he
knew  of  the  prophecy,  and  that  the  morning  of  the  8th  of  October  had  been
specified  as  the  time  in  which  he  should  die,  a  week  or  more  before  his  death
occurred,  she  felt  that  there  must  be  some  truth  in  it,  as  she  could  not  doubt
Dr.  Headlee.

"  Mrs.  Varis,  did  your  husband  know  anything  about  the  prophecy  before
his  death  ?  "

"  No,  indeed,"  she  said,  "  none  of  us  knew  anything  about  it  until  two  weeks
after  his  death."

"  Might  not  Dr.  Headlee  have  said  something  to  him  about  it  during  one  of
his  visits,  without  your  knowing  it  ?"

"  Oh  dear  no,"  she  said,  "  I  was  always  present  at  these  visits,  and  know  no
such  talk  occurred  at  any  of  them.  No,  I  am  positive  Dr.  Headlee  never
mentioned  it,  and  that  Mr.  V.  never  knew  it."

I  then  wrote  up  the  little  memorandum  enclosed,  and  she  signed  it,  or  rather
her  daughter  did,  at  her  request,  in  my  presence.  .  .  .

I  then  went  out  and  found  Dr.  Headlee,  and  he  said  in  answer  to  my
questions : —

"  No,  I  know  positively  that  Mr.  V.  knew  nothing  of  the  prophecy ;  no  one
in  St.  James  knew  anything  of  it  but  myself,  and  I  did  not  want  him  to  find  it
out-"  S.  T.  SUDDICK.

To  ALL  WHOM  IT  MAY  CONCERN  :— This  is  to  certify  that  I  am  positive
that  my  husband  knew  nothing  whatever  of  the  prophecy  of  his  death,  made  at
a  spiritual  circle  held  at  the  home  of  Dr.  S.  T.  Suddick,  in  Cuba,  Mo.,  on
August  29th  last.  We  did  not  hear  of  it  for  about  two  weeks  after  his  death.
We  are  not  Spiritualists.  [Signed]  MRS.  A.  VARIS.

876  A.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  353-55.
In  an  article  in  Psychische  Studien,  March  1889  (p.  131),  the  editor
(Mr.  Alexander  Aksakoff),  writes  : —

I  am  personally  acquainted  with  the  following  case :— My  friend  and  fellow-
student  at  the  Lyceum,  Privy  Councillor  (Geheimrath)  Baron  Konstantin  K.,
told  me,  twenty  years  ago,  that  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  his  uncle,  Baron


494  APPENDICES  [876  A

Paul  K.,  at  Warschau,  his  will  could  not  be  found,  though  it  was  thoroughly
searched  for ;  and  that  it  was  discovered  in  a  secret  drawer  (Fache),  entirely
in  consequence  of  a  communication  received  by  Prince  Emile  Wittgenstein,
in  which  the  place  was  described.

In  Psychische  Studien  for  December  1889  (pp.  568-69),  M.  Aksakoff
gives  further  particulars  as  follows  : —

Since  the  previous  notice  of  this  case,  I  have  made  the  acquaintance  of  Paul
von  Korf,  a  son  of  Baron  von  Korf,  who  resides  in  the  Port  Strasse,  St.  Peters-
burg. He  has  given  me  the  following  account  of  the  circumstances : —

His  father,  General  Paul  von  Korf,  died  at  Warschau  on  April  ;th,  1867.
It  was  known  that  he  had  made  a  will,  but  after  his  death  it  could  not  be  found.
In  the  month  of  July  1867  his  sister,  the  Baroness  Charlotte  von  Wrangel,  was
living  with  her  sister-in-law,  Madame  D.  von  Obuchow,  in  the  town  of  Plock
(pronounced  Plozk),  not  far  from  Warschau.  Her  mother,  the  widow  of
General  von  Korf,  was  travelling  abroad ;  and  in  her  mother's  absence  she  was
entrusted  with  the  opening  of  her  correspondence.  Among  the  letters  thus
received  and  opened  was  one  from  Prince  Emile  von  Wittgenstein  (also  abroad)
addressed  to  the  widow  of  General  von  Korf,  in  which  he  informed  her  that  a
spiritualistic  communication  had  been  received  by  him  in  the  name  of  her  de-
ceased husband,  indicating  the  place  where  his  will  would  be  found.  The
Baroness  von  Wrangel,  who  knew  how  much  trouble  the  absence  of  this  will
had  given  to  her  elder  brother  [Baron  Joseph  Korf]  who  was  engaged  in  the
administration  of  the  property,  and  who  was  at  that  time  in  Warschau,  went  at
once,  with  her  sister-in-law,  to  Warschau,  to  inform  him  of  the  important  con-
tents of  the  letter  of  Prince  von  Wittgenstein.  Her  brother's  first  words  were
that  he  had  just  found  the  will ;  and  when  the  letter  of  Prince  von  Wittgenstein
was  read,  it  was  apparent,  to  the  astonishment  of  those  present,  that  the  place
indicated  in  the  spiritualistic  communication  where  the  will  would  be  found  was
precisely  that  in  which  the  Baron  had  at  last  found  it.

Baron  Paul  von  Korf  promised  me  that  he  would  look  for  this  letter  of  Prince
von  Wittgenstein's,  which  he  had  in  his  hand  less  than  two  years  ago,  when
arranging  the  family  papers.  But  up  to  the  present  time  he  has  not  been  able
again  to  find  it.  He  fears  it  may  have  been  unintentionally  destroyed  with,
useless  correspondence.

In  a  letter  dated  St.  Petersburg,  February  26th,  1890,  M.  Aksakoff  adds
the  following  particulars,  with  two  letters,  of  which  translations  are  here
given : —

I.  Original  letter  from  Baron  Paul  Korf  (son  of  the  Baron  Korf  whose  will
is  concerned)  to  M.  Aksakoff,  countersigned  by  Baron  Paul's  sister,  Baroness
Charlotte  Wrangel,  and  testifying  to  the  exactness  of  the  fact  as  stated  in
Psychische  Studien,  1888,  p.  568.

PETERSBURG,  January  zgfb,  1890.

SIR, — I  have  read  with  great  interest  your  communication,  inserted  in
Psychische  Studien  (p.  568),  concerning  the  will  of  my  late  father.  The  facts
are  there  related  with  perfect  accuracy.  I  am  afraid  that  I  burnt  the  letter  o£


876B]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  495

Prince  Emile  Wittgenstein  about  a  year  ago,  when  I  was  arranging  the  papers
of  my  late  father,  which  were  at  his  country  seat. — Accept,  &c.,

(BARON)  PAUL  KORF.

I  add  my  signature  to  that  of  my  brother,  to  confirm  the  contents  of  his
letter.  BARONESS  C.  WRANGEL,  NEE  BARONESS  KORF.

II.  Copy  of  a  letter  from  Prince  Emile  de  Sayn-Wittgenstein,  published  in
the  work,  Souvenirs  et  Correspondance  du  Prince  Entile  de  Sayn-Wittgenstein-
Berlebourg  (Paris,  1889),  vol.  ii.  p.  365.

WARSAW,  July  ijtk,  1867.

It  seems  an  age,  my  dear  parents,  since  I  have  had  any  news  of  you  ;  my
mother's  last  letter  was  dated  June  5th.  I  have  occupied  myself  much  with
Spiritualism  of  late,  and  my  mediumistic  faculties  have  developed  themselves
in  an  astonishing  way.  I  write  often  with  great  facility  in  various  kinds  of
writing ;  I  have  had  direct  communications  from  the  spirit  which  haunts  Berle-
bourg,  a  woman  of  our  family  who  killed  herself  102  years  ago.  I  have,  more-
over, obtained  a  very  singular  result.  One  of  my  friends,  Lieut.-General  Baron
de  Korf,  deceased  some  months  since,  manifested  himself  to  me  (without  my
having  thought  of  him  the  least  in  the  world),  to  enjoin  upon  me  to  indicate  to
his  family  the  place  where  his  will  had  been  maliciously  hidden  ;  that  is  to  say,
in  a  chest  of  drawers  in  the  house  where  he  died.  I  did  not  know  that  the
family  were  looking  for  this  will,  and  had  not  found  it.  Well,  they  found  it  in
the  very  place  which  the  spirit  had  indicated  to  me.  It  is  a  document  of  great
importance  for  the  management  of  his  property,  and  for  the  settlement  of  ques-
tions which  will  arise  when  his  children  attain  their  majority.  Here  are  facts
which  can  stand  criticism.  EMILE  WITTGENSTEIN.

III.  Prince  Emile  Wittgenstein  died  in  1878,  at  Tegernsee,  in  Bavaria.

IV.  As  to  the  date  of  the  letter  of  Prince  Sayn-Wittgenstein  to  the  widow
of  Baron  Korf.     Here  is  what  I  have  been  able  to  learn  in  a  last  interview  with
his  son,  Baron  Paul  Korf.     The  marriage  of  his  daughter,  Baroness  Charlotte
Korf,  with  Baron  Wrangel  took  place  at  Warsaw,  June  I7th,  1867.     A  week
after  that  event  the  Baroness  Wrangel  left,  with  her  sister-in-law,  Madame
Obuchow,  for  the  town  of  Plock,  and  her  mother  went  abroad.     At  that  date
the  will  had  not  been  found.     And  since  the  letter  of  Prince  Emile  Wittgen-
stein to  his  parents,  in  which  he  informs  them  of  the  finding  of  the  will  by
spiritual  communication,  is  dated  July  I7th,  1867,  it  follows  that  the  letter  of
Prince  Emile  Wittgenstein  to  the  widow  of  Baron  Korf,  enclosing  that  com-
munication, and  consequently  the  communication  itself,  must  have  been  re-
ceived between  June  I7th  and  July  I7th,  1867.

V.  As  to  the  place  where  the  will  was  found.     I  asked  Baron  Paul  Korf :
"  Is  it  a  fact  that  the  will  was  found  '  in  a  chest  of  drawers '  (armoire)  as  was
predicted  in  the  communication?"     He  answered:  "That  is  what  both  my
sister  and  I  heard."

VI.  The  elder  son  of  Baron  Korf,  who  busied  himself  at  Warsaw  with
the  affairs  of  the  inheritance,  was  named  Baron  Joseph  Korf,  and  has  since
died.

876  B.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  238-42.

The  following  case  of  a  communication  indicating  the  whereabouts


496  APPENDICES  [876  B

of  a  missing  note  of  hand  was  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  Judge  W.  D.
Harden,  of  Savannah,  Georgia,  who  is  well  known  to  him  : —

345  W.  THIRTY-FOURTH  STREET,  NEW  YORK,

October  yd,  1888.

DR.  RICHARD  HODGSON, — My  DEAR  SIR,— Thinking  that  you  may  pos-
sibly be  back  from  your  vacation,  I  send  you  with  this  the  account  of  the
finding  of  the  note  by  Mrs.  B.  and  the  letter  to  me  from  Dr.  Knorr.

W.  D.  HARDEN.

SAVANNAH,  GA.,  September  i6tA,  1888.

Judge  W.  D.  HARDEN,

DEAR  FRIEND, — This  morning,  when  I  paid  a  professional  visit  to  Mrs.
B.'s  sick  son,  she  showed  me  a  rough  draft  of  the  statement  she  intended  to
send  to  you.  .  .  .

I  think  I  need  to  add  very  little  to  Mrs.  B.'s  statements.  You  are
acquainted  with  the  modus  operandi  of  the  communications  with  the  sliding
rod,  the  rod  and  the  alphabet  board  being  at  B.'s  house,  the  same  you  saw  at
Miss  Maggie  R.'s.  In  order  to  facilitate  your  description  for  Dr.  H.  I  send
you  a  paper  model  of  the  rod  and  a  printed  alphabet  (with  other  convenient
inscriptions),  that  is  to  be  pasted  near  the  two  (right  and  left)  edges,  leaving
a  space  between  of  sufficient  width  for  the  points  of  the  rod  to  point  out  the
desired  letters.

I  have  to  remark  that  a  couple  of  days  after  the  death  of  Miss  Nina  B.'s
fiance  (Mr.  N.  H.)  I  assisted  her  to  get  into  communication  with  him.  We
succeeded,  Miss  Nina  turning  out  to  be  feebly  mediumistic,  and  many  com-
munications were  received  from  him.

This  attracted  Major  B.'s  attention.  He  tried  then  with  me  (the  major
was  then  an  agnostic),  and  found  that  he  also  was  mediumistic,  and  he  got
communications  from  his  father  and  his  uncle  that  were  so  characteristic  that
he  became  convinced  of  the  reality  of  spirit  communion.  So  when  the  major
departed,  last  spring  or  summer,  he  was  well  acquainted  with  the  modus
operandi  of  spirit  communion ;  and  therefore  the  very  day  after  his  departure
we  could  receive  a  few  words  from  him.  Later  on  we  received  many  messages
from  him.

I  think  I  was  present  at  the  stance  when  he  stated  that  the  note  was
deposited  somewhere,  but  could  not  tell  where.  It  looks  as  if  at  that  time
he  had  not  yet  discovered  the  whereabouts  of  the  note,  but  continued  hunting
for  it,  and  at  last  discovered  it.

L.  KNORR,  Savannah.

Judge  HARDEN, — In  compliance  with  your  request  I  will  state :  After  my
honoured  husband  Major  Lucius  B.'s  departure  from  this  life,  I  was  in  distress
of  mind  that  none  could  understand  but  one  surrounded  by  similar  circum-
stances. Of  his  business  transactions  I  knew  but  little.  After  a  week  or
two  of  stunning  agony,  I  aroused  myself  to  look  into  our  financial  condition.
I  was  aware  that  he  had  in  his  keeping  a  note  given  by  Judge  H.  W.  Hopkins
to  some  several  hundred  which  was  due,  and  I  searched  all  the  nooks  and
corners  of  his  secretaire,  manuscript,  letters,  memorandum-books,  read  several
hundred  letters  ;  but  all  for  naught.  For  two  months  I  spent  most  of  the  time
going  over  and  over,  but  with  the  same  result.  I  finally  asked  him  at  a  stance
about  the  note.


876B]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  497

Q.    "  Have  you  deposited  the  note  anywhere  ? "     A.  "  I  have."
Q.    "  Where  ?  "     No  answer.

Finally  I  wrote  to  Judge  H.  (who  had  written  me  about  it) :  "  I  had  as
well  tell  you  the  note  has  not  been  found.  I  cannot  imagine  where  it  is."
This  was  on  Friday.  The  following  Sunday,  about  four  o'clock,  my  daughter
Nina,  who  possesses  some  singular  power,  proposed  we  try  if  we  could  not
get  a  communication  from  our  loved  ones.  While  she  went  to  get  a  little
arrangement  (a  rod  that  worked  on  a  board  upon  which  the  letters  of  the
alphabet  were  printed)  I  sat  in  my  room  alone,  thinking,  if  it  were  possible
for  Major  B.  to  see  the  heart  filled  to  overflowing  with  anguish,  and  added  to
this  the  mind  distressed  by  business  cares,  would  he  not  communicate  with  me
and  try  to  give  some  consolation  or  assistance.

But  I  did  not  express  my  thoughts  to  any  one.  Nina  returned,  and  after
a  little  conversation  we  put  our  hands  on  the  rod  and  it  promptly  spelt
"  Look  in  my  long  drawer  and  find  Willie."  I  became  excited,  ran  to  the
bureau  and  pulled  out  the  bottom  drawer,  turned  the  contents  upon  the  floor,
and  commenced  to  search.  Under  all  the  things  was  a  vest;  in  its  little
breast  pocket  was  the  note.

Major  B.  was  in  the  habit  of  calling  the  bottom  drawer,  where  only  his
under-garments  were  kept,  "  My  long  drawer,"  to  designate  it  from  several
small  drawers  set  aside  for  his  use.  The  vest  was  the  only  garment,  other
than  underwear,  in  the  drawer.  The  vest  was  the  one  taken  off  him  when
he  first  became  ill.  He  was  unconscious  during  the  first  day  of  his  illness.
The  vest  was  put  in  the  drawer  after  or  during  his  illness  by  my  friend,  I
think,  who  assisted  in  caring  for  him  while  sick.

The  drawer  had  not  been  opened  that  we  knew  of  after  he  left  us  until
the  note  was  discovered.  Although  I  had  moved  to  another  room,  I  gave
instructions  that  the  bottom  drawer  was  not  to  be  disturbed.

As  soon  as  the  rod  spelt  "  Look  in  my  long  drawer  and  find  Willie,"  I  was
perfectly  electrified  with  the  knowledge  that  Willie  H.'s  note  was  in  that
drawer,  although  I  never  would  have  thought  of  looking  in  such  a  place  for  a
valuable  paper.

Major  B.  and  myself  always  spoke  to  and  of  Judge  H.  as  "  Willie,"  he
being  a  relation  of  mine  and  a  favourite  of  Major  B.  from  Willie's  childhood.

I  have  just  read  the  above  to  my  daughter,  and  she  says  she  will  endorse
the  statement  as  being  correct.— I  am,  very  respectfully,

Mrs.  E.  F.  B.  B.,  widow  of  the

late  Major  Lucius  C.  B.
N.  H.  B.

SAVANNAH,  GA.,  September  i6M,  1888.

The  two  signatures  have  been  made  in  my  presence,  and  I  corroborate
many  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  mentioned  in  the  above  report.  I  am
now  requested  by  the  ladies  to  say  that  they  do  not  wish  their  names  to  appear
in  public.  Louis  KNORR,  M.D.

SAVANNAH,  October  27 th,  1888.
Judge  W.  D.  HARDEN,

MY  DEAR  FRIEND, — The  delay  in  answering  yours  of  the  9th  inst.  was
caused  by  Mrs.  B.,  who  sent  me  her  answer  only  an  hour  ago,  notwithstanding
my  having  reminded  her  a  dozen  times.

VOL.    II.  2    I


498  APPENDICES  [876  B

As  you  see  from  her  statement,  the  exact  date  of  the  memorable  seance
cannot  be  given  by  her.  But  some  coincidental  occurrences  [mentioned  in
detail,  show  that  it  was  most  likely]  the  I3th  or  the  2oth  of  May  last.  It  is
certain  that  it  was  a  Sunday,  as  Mrs.  B.  states,  for  I  remember  that,  when  I
returned  from  Wilmington  Island  that  Sunday,  Mrs.  K.  told  me  that  Miss
Nina  B.  had  been  here  and  had  told  her  to  inform  me  that  something  impor-
tant had  happened  that  afternoon,  and  she  had  pleasant  news  to  communi-
cate to  me.  I  guessed  at  once  what  it  referred  to  ;  for  they  had  all  along
been  so  anxious  to  get  some  information  about  that  note,  and  I  was  present
at  the  several  previous  stances,  when  ineffectual  attempts  had  been  made  to
get  that  information.  .  .  .

I  see  Mrs.  B.  does  not  answer  No.  2  of  Dr.  H.'s  questions  (date  of  sitting
where  question  about  the  note  was  first  asked)  at  all ;  so  I  will  do  so  as  far  as
I  can.  It  was  about  a  week  after  Major  B.'s  demise  that  the  question  was  put
in  my  presence,  and  further  at  several  subsequent  stances  at  which  I  was  pre-
sent ;  but  no  exact  dates  could  be  given,  further  than  that  it  occurred,  say,
between  the  6th  of  April  and  the  I3th  of  May,  on  several  occasions  in  my
presence,  and  in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  B.,  Miss  Nina  B.,  and  sometimes  of  the
youngest  child  (Lettie,  eight  or  nine  years).

In  answer  to  No.  5  of  Dr.  H.'s  questions  ("  Is  Mrs.  B.  certain  that  neither
she  nor  her  daughter  put  the  vest  away?")  I  have  to  state  that  I  have  the
repeated  assurance  of  both  the  ladies  that  they  feel  sure  that  they  did  not  put
the  vest  away,  nor  that  they  had  the  least  suspicion  that  there  could  have  been
so  valuable  a  paper  in  that  vest-pocket,  or  else  they  would  have  hunted  for  the
vest  in  that  drawer,  among  others  where  clothing  might  have  been  stowed
away,  and  thus  should  have  discovered  what  they  hunted  for.

And  as  to  question  No.  4  ("  Can  any  more  definite  statement  be  obtained
concerning  the  putting  away  of  the  vest  ?  ")  I  have  to  state  that  Mrs.  B.  and
Miss  B.  always  thought  that  their  cousin  (Miss  Mel  Thomas),  who  had  with
the  most  self-sacrificing  devotion  nursed  the  major  during  his  sickness  and
had  the  entire  management  of  the  sick  room,  had  put  it  away.  But  on  ques-
tioning her  she  said  she  had  no  recollection  of  so  trifling  an  occurrence.

In  answer  to  question  No.  6  ("  Who  were  present  ?  ")  Mrs.  B.  says,  "  Pos-
sibly one  of  the  children."  I  have  to  explain  this  answer.  She  ought  to  have
answered,  "  Possibly  my  youngest  child,  Lettie."  For  of  her  children,  besides
Miss  Nina,  it  is  only  Lettie  who  has  something  to  do  with  these  stances — she
being  a  far  stronger  medium  than  Mrs.  B.  or  Miss  B. — but  at  the  same  time
does  not  feel  the  least  interest  in  the  matter  ;  on  the  contrary,  hates  to  be  called
away  from  her  dolls,  puts  her  hands  on  the  sliding-rod  with  a  great  deal  of
grumbling,  and  is  always  very  glad  to  get  off,  the  sooner  the  better.

Miss  Nina  reported  to  me  that  that  Sunday  she  and  her  sister  Lettie  were
first  holding  communication  with  their  father  and  received  some  pleasant  and
convincing  messages  from  their  father ;  then  Lettie  would  not  continue  any
longer.  It  was  then  that  Miss  N.  called  her  mother  to  take  Lettie's  place,
and  the  result  was  the  getting  of  that  message  in  regard  to  the  note.  So,  you
see,  it  may  have  been  possible  that  Lettie  had  not  left  the  room  yet  at
the  time.  "  Louis  KNORR.

October  27^,  1888.

MR.  RICHARD  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — In  answer  to  your  questions  I  w
say:  i.  Major  B.  died  just  at  sunrise  (Easter  morning),  first  day  of  April,  188


877A]  TO    CHAPTER    VIII  499

2.  I  told  all  I  know  about  putting  away  the  vest.  3.  About  three  o'clock,
Sunday,  the  first  or  second  week  in  May.  Myself  and  daughter  were  the  only
ones  present  that  I  remember — possibly  one  of  the  children.  It  happened  just
as  I  stated.  To  me  there  is  but  one  solution. — In  great  haste,  very  respectfully,

[Signed]  E.  F.  B.

877  A.  Note. — I  think  it  very  desirable  that  as  many  persons  as
possible  should  provide  a  decisive  test  of  their  own  identity,  in  case  they
should  find  themselves  able  to  communicate  through  any  sensitive  after
their  bodily  death.  The  simplest  plan  is  to  write  down  some  sentence
embodying  an  idea  or  a  name  which  you  feel  it  probable  that  you  will
,  remember,  if  you  remember  anything,  and  then  to  seal  this  sentence  up
in  an  envelope,  without  communicating  it  to  any  person  whatever.  Then
label  the  envelope  "  Posthumous  letter,"  and  send  it,  accompanied  by  a
letter  giving  name  and  address,  to  the  Secretary,  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  20,  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  The  Secretary  will  acknow-
ledge receipt,  and  store  the  letter  safely,  with  others  of  the  kind.  If,
then,  the  writer  (it  may  be  many  years  afterwards)  finds  himself  capable
of  sending  a  message  from  the  other  world,  let  him  mention  this  test
sentence,  and  try  to  reproduce  it.  The  sealed  envelope  can  then  be
opened ;  and  if  the  spirit's  message  should  be  found  to  coincide  with  the
words  therein  written,  there  will  be  as  good  a  proof  as  we  can  get  that  that
message  has  at  any  rate  not  emanated  from  any  living  mind ;  and  has
emanated,  therefore,  from  some  unlimited  source  of  knowledge,  or — which
will  seem  to  most  persons  more  probable — from  the  surviving  mind  of  the
original  writer.


[912  A


APPENDICES

TO

CHAPTER   IX

912  A.  The  following  account  of  Dr.  John  L.  Nevius's  book  on
Demon  Possession  and  Allied  Themes  (and  Edition.  Fleming  H.  Revell
Co.,  Chicago,  New  York,  Toronto,  1896)  is  taken  from  a  review  by
Professor  W.  Romaine  Newbold  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  p.  602.

Dr.  Nevius  was  for  forty  years  a  missionary  in  China.  Early  in  his
ministry  he  found  that  demon  possession  is  a  common  occurrence  among  the
Chinese,  and  although  he  was  able  to  observe  in  person  one  case  only,  he  suc-
ceeded in  collecting  a  large  amount  of  information  about  the  phenomena  and
the  construction  put  upon  them  by  the  natives.  This  material  forms  the  basis
of  his  book.

A  few  illustrations  will  serve  to  give  a  conception  of  its  general  character.
The  second  case  is  that  of  a  mountaineer,  Kwo  by  name,  who  gives  an  account
of  his  own  experiences.  He  had  been  arranging  for  the  household  worship  of
the  Goddess  Wang-Muni ang,  when  one  night  he  dreamed  that  the  goddess
appeared  to  him  and  announced  that  she  had  taken  up  her  abode  in  his  house.
This  was  followed  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  days  by  a  feeling  of  restlessness
coupled  with  an  irrational  impulse  to  gamble ;  his  mind  became  confused,
memory  was  impaired.  He  was  then  seized  by  an  epileptiform  attack,  to  which
succeeded  mania  with  homicidal  impulses.  The  "demon"  proclaimed  its
presence,  demanded  worship.  Upon  compliance  with  its  demands  it  departed.
For  some  months  the  "demon"  reappeared  at  intervals,  promised  to  heal
disease.  Kwo  notes  that  "many  diseases  were  not  under  its  control,  and  it
seemed  as  if  it  could  perfectly  cure  only  such  as  were  inflicted  by  spirits  " — a
significant  remark.  When  the  sufferer  became  a  Christian,  the  "  demon  "  dis-
appeared, saying  "  This  is  no  place  for  me."

Case  3  is  narrated  by  a  native  Christian.  He  described  the  patient  as
"  sitting  up,  her  eyes  closed,  with  a  fluttering  motion  of  the  eyelids,  her
countenance  like  one  weeping  and  the  fingers  of  both  hands  tightly  clenched.
She  would  allow  no  one  to  straighten  her  closed  fingers.  I  then,  hardly  expect-
ing an  answer,  as  the  woman  had  hitherto  been  speechless,  said  to  the  demon :
1  Have  you  no  fear  of  God?  Why  do  you  come  here  to  afflict  this  woman?'
To  this  I  received  instantly  the  following  reply:  'God  and  Christ  will  not
interfere.  I  have  been  here  seven  or  eight  years ;  and  I  claim  this  as  my
resting-place.  You  cannot  get  rid  of  me.'"  This  patient  was  relieved  by
prayer.

In  several  instances  the  u  demon  "  claims  identity  with  the  spirit  of  some

500


923A]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  501

deceased  human  being.  Thus  in  case  24  a  bride  on  her  wedding  night  was
seized  by  what  purported  to  be  the  spirit  of  a  girl  to  whom  her  husband  had
been  engaged,  and  who  had  drowned  herself  on  account  of  the  ill-treatment  of
her  future  mother-in-law.  In  other  cases  the  "  demon  "  claims  to  be  one  of  the
lower  animals — e.g.  in  one  which  occurred  in  Japan  (page  105)  it  professed
itself  a  fox.

The  entire  collection  gives  a  most  interesting  glimpse  of  Chinese  spiritism.
We  find  the  cult  of  spirits  a  recognised  institution.  "  Physical  phenomena  "
are  alleged  to  be  matters  of  daily  occurrence.  Every  village  has  its  "  medium."
The  "  developing  seance  "  has  its  counterpart  (page  67).  The  medium  some-
times goes  into  "  quiet  trance,"  and  sometimes  communication  with  the  unseen
world  is  effected  by  means  of  an  instrument  essentially  identical  with  plan-
chette  (pages  48,  69).

Evidence  of  this  sort  is  not  without  its  value  as  going  to  show  that  spiritism
is  a  growth  indigenous  to  many  countries,  that  it  is  a  plausible  interpretation  of
phenomena  which  occur  spontaneously  among  all  races,  and  is  not  merely  a
mass  of  imposture  based  upon  the  "  Rochester  knockings  "  and  peculiar  to  the
last  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  But  if  one  asks  what  Dr.  Nevius  has  done
towards  vindicating  the  popular  interpretation  of  these  phenomena,  the  reply
cannot  but  be  unfavourable.

Every  page  bears  witness  to  the  author's  desire  to  be  exact  in  description,
unbiassed  in  interpretation,  and  just  in  criticism;  it  is  rather  his  misfortune
than  his  fault  that  he  has  fallen  so  far  short  of  the  mark  in  all  three  respects.
Practically  all  his  material  rests  upon  the  evidence  of  native — Chinese  or  Mon-
golian— witnesses.  All  are  fully  convinced  of  the  diabolical  origin  of  the  pheno-
mena, and  Dr.  Nevius  himself  takes  the  same  view,  so  that  we  can  scarcely
accept  the  accounts  as  literally  true  and  uncoloured  by  preconceptions.  Such
evidence  can  scarcely  do  more  than  supply  illustrations  of  facts  already  inde-
pendently established.

Of  alleged  supernormal  phenomena  the  book  is  almost  barren.  One  case
of  a  "  Poltergeist "  rests  solely  upon  the  evidence  of  Mongolians,  whom  the
missionary  transmitting  the  account  stigmatises  as  "  so  imbued,  one  and  all,
with  the  spirit  of  lying  that  I  have  found  it  useless  to  repeat  what  the  most
respectable  say."  In  a  few  other  cases  it  is  claimed  that  the  demoniac  was
possessed  of  supernormal  knowledge  and  of  the  gift  of  healing,  but  no  definite
facts  are  given.

923  A.  For  accounts  of  the  impostures  of  Madame  Blavatsky  and
other  members  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  see  : —

( i )  "  Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  to  Investigate  Phenomena
connected  with  the  Theosophical  Society,"  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.  (vol.  iii.
pp.  201-400).  This  Committee  was  appointed  in  1884  by  the  Council
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  It  consisted  of  the  following
members  :  Messrs.  E.  Gurney,  R.  Hodgson,  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  F.  Podmore,
Professor  and  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick,  and  Mr.  J.  H.  Stack.  The  report  is
prefaced  by  the  "  Statement  and  Conclusions  of  the  Committee  " ;  next
comes  Dr.  Hodgson's  "  Account  of  Personal  Investigations  in  India,  and
discussion  of  the  authorship  of  the  '  Koot  Hoomi '  letters  "  ;  numerous
facsimiles  of  the  letters  are  given,  together  with  a  report  by  the  expert,


502  APPENDICES  [923  B

Mr.  F.  G.  Netherclift,  on  the  character  of  the  handwritings.  An  account
of  some  other  phenomena — four  cases  of  letters  received  in  a  mysterious
manner,  and  four  cases  of  supposed  "  astral  "  apparitions — was  contributed
by  Mrs.  Sidgwick.

(2)  "The   Defence   of  the  Theosophists,"   by  Dr.    R.   Hodgson,  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.  (vol.  ix.  pp.    129—159).     This  consists  of  replies  to
attacks  on  the  above  Report.

(3)  A  Modern  Priestess  of  Isis :  abridged  and  translated  on  behalf  of
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  from  the  Russian  of  V.  S.  Solovyoff,
by  Walter  Leaf,  Litt.  D.  (Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,  London,  1895).     To
Mr.  Solovyoffs  narrative  are  added  in  appendices  a  defence  of  Madame
Blavatsky  by  her  sister,  Madame  Jelihovsky,  and  Mr.  Solovyoffs  reply  to
the  latter.

(4)  Isis  very  much  Unveiled:  being  the  Story  of  the  great  Mahatma
Hoax,    by  Edmund  Garrett;  reprinted  from  the    Westminster    Gazette,
1895.

(5)  The  chapter  on  "  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Theosophy,"   in  Mr.
F.    Podmore's   Studies    in   Psychical   Research    (Kegan   Paul,  Trench,
Triibner  &  Co.,  London,  1897).

See  also,  for  reviews  of  (3)  and  (4),  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.
155-162.

923  B.  The  following  articles  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.  relate  to
work  done  by  members  of  the  Society  in  exposing  fraud  in  connection
with  some  alleged  "physical  phenomena"  of  spiritualism,  and  in  showing
what  conditions  are  necessary  in  order  to  guard  against  it.

"  Results  of  a  Personal  Investigation  into  the  Physical  Phenomena  of
Spiritualism,  with  some  critical  remarks  on  the  evidence  for  the  genuine-
ness of  such  Phenomena,"  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  *  (vol.  iv.  p.  45).

"  Accounts  of  some  so-called  « Spiritualistic  '  Seances,"  by  Professor
H.  Carvill  Lewis  and  others  (vol.  iv.  p.  338).

"  The  Possibilities  of  Mai-observation  and  Lapse  of  Memory  from  a
practical  point  of  view,"  by  R.  Hodgson  and  S.  J.  Davey  (vol.  iv.  p.  381).

The  two  last-named  articles  relate  chiefly  to  the  "  slate-writing  "  per-
formances of  the  medium  Eglinton,  and  Mr.  Davey's  successful  imitation
of  them  by  conjuring.  Numerous  discussions  on  the  same  subject
appeared  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.  during  1886  and  1887  (vols.  ii.  and  iii.)-

"On  Spirit  Photographs,"  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  (vol.  vii.  p.  268).

"Mr.  Davey's  Imitations  by  Conjuring  of  Phenomena  sometimes
attributed  to  Spirit  Agency,"  by  R.  Hodgson  (vol.  viii.  p.  253).

"  Indian  Magic  and  the  Testimony  of  Conjurers,"  by  R.  Hodgson
(vol.  ix.  p.  354).

"Resolute  Credulity,"  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  (vol.  xi.  p.  213).

"  Eusapia  Paladino,"  an  account  by  Professor  Sidgwick  of  sittings  held
with  her  at  Cambridge  in  1895,  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.  (vol.  vii.  p.

1  See  also  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  article  on  "  Spiritualism  "  in  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica.


148).

'.tannica.


925A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  503

I  may  further  refer  ray  readers  to  the  following  books : —

Studies  in  Psychical  Research,  by  Frank  Podmore  (Kegan  Paul,  Trench,
Triibner  &  Co.,  London,  1897).

Modern  Spiritualism :  a  History  and  a  Criticism,  by  Frank  Podmore
(Methuen  &  Co.,  London,  1902).

Preliminary  Report  of  the  Commission  appointed  by  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  to  investigate  Modern  Spiritualism,  in  accordance  with  the
request  of  the  late  Henry  Seybert  (J.  B.  Lippincott  Company,  Philadelphia,
1887).

The  Death-Blow  to  Spiritualism  :  being  the  true  story  of  the  Fox
Sisters,  as  revealed  by  authority  of  Margaret  Fox  Kane  and  Catherine
Fox  Jencken,  by  Reuben  Briggs  Davenport  (New  York  :  J.  W.  Dillingham
Co.,  1888;  also  1897).

Revelations  of  a  Spirit  Medium  ;  or  Spiritualistic  Mysteries  Exposed:
a  detailed  explanation  of  the  methods  used  by  fraudulent  mediums.  By
a  Medium  (St.  Paul,  Minn. :  Farrington  &  Co.,  1891).

The  Bottom  Facts  concerning  the  Science  of  Spiritualism  derived  from
careful  investigations  covering  a  period  of  twenty-five  years,  by  John  W.
Truesdell.  With  many  descriptive  illustrations  (New  York  :  G.  W.  Carle-
ton  &  Co. ;  London  :  S.  Low  &  Co.,  1884).

Confessions  of  a  Medium  (Griffith  &  Farran,  London,  1882).

Spirit  Slate-writing  and  Kindred  Phenomena,  by  William  E.  Robinson
(New  York  :  Munn  &  Co.,  1898 ;  London  :  Sampson  Low,  Marston  &  Co.) .
This  contains  a  good  account  by  a  professional  conjurer  of  various  methods
of  producing  slate-writing  by  trickery.

Some  Account  of  the  Vampires  of  Onset,  Past  and  Present  (S.  Wood-
berry  &  Co.,  Boston,  1892).

Modern  Spiritualism,  by  J.  N.  Maskelyne  (London :  F.  Warne  &  Co.).

925  A.  An  instance  of  a  supposed  telekinetic  phenomenon  which
was  probably  to  be  attributed  to  motor  automatism  is  that  mentioned  in
the  case  of  Mme.  X.  (see  833)  when,  as  she  was  standing  on  a  chair,
"  the  chair  was  violently  snatched  from  under  her  feet  and  pushed  to  a
distance  "  by — as  she  believed — some  "  invisible  force."  Some  incidents
of  a  similar  kind  are  described  in  Professor  Flournoy's  history  of  Mdlle.
Smith  (but  not  referred  to  in  my  account  of  this  sensitive  in  834-842).

Raps  are  mentioned  in  the  case  of  Professor  Rossi-Pagnoni  (864  A)  ;
in  the  Pereliguine  case  (868  A)  raps  and  the  movement  of  a  heavy  un-
touched table  are  described ;  and  in  the  case  of  Mr.  F.  Hodgson  (868  B)
there  seem  to  have  been  various  telekinetic  movements  besides  raps.  In
these  last  two  cases  the  telekinetic  phenomena  were  apparently  connected
with  a  recent  death,  and  it  will  be  remembered  that  many  of  the  better
evidenced  groups  of  supernormal  phenomena  seemed  to  cluster  about  the
point  of  death,  some  occurring  shortly  before  and  some  shortly  after  it,
while  others  more  closely  coincide  with  the  death  itself.  I  quote  here  a
simple  case  of  an  isolated  movement,  occurring  shortly  before  a  death


504  APPENDICES  [825  A

under  circumstances  which  seem  to  give  it  a  kind  of  coincidental  or  pur-
posive character.  The  reader  should  compare  with  this  the  account  of  the
"  Woodd  knockings  "  to  which  I  have  briefly  referred  in  868  C.

From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  154.  The  account  is  given  by  the
Rev.  Edward  T.  Vaughan,  of  Langleybury  Vicarage,  King's  Langley,  who
writes : —

August  2$t/i,  1884.

Some  three  or  four  years  back,  I  had  occasion  to  visit  a  parishioner  who
was  seriously  ill,  one  afternoon  in  the  winter  time  as  it  was  growing  dark.  I
had  seen  him  several  times  before  since  his  illness  commenced,  and  had  always
found  him  in  the  same  bedroom.  On  this  occasion  I  had  been  praying  with
him,  and  his  wife  was  kneeling  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  bed  to  myself.  As  I
was  saying  the  last  words  of  the  prayer,  we  (the  woman  and  myself)  distinctly
saw  a  small  table,  which  stood  about  a  yard  from  the  foot  of  the  bed,  rise  two
or  three  inches  from  the  ground  and  come  down  with  a  violent  thump  upon  the
floor,  so  loudly  that  the  man,  who  was  lying  with  his  eyes  closed,  started  up  and
asked,  with  some  terror,  what  had  occasioned  it.  On  examining  the  table,  I
found  that  a  glass  with  medicine  in  it,  which  stood  upon  the  table  with  several
other  articles,  had  been  so  shaken  that  some  of  the  contents  were  spilt.  My
first  idea  was  that  something  had  been  thrown  down  in  the  room  below,  where
my  wife,  a  sister  of  the  woman's,  and  an  aged  uncle  were  sitting.  On  going
downstairs  and  inquiring,  I  found  that  this  was  not  so  ;  that  they  had  been  all
sitting  perfectly  quiet  in  the  room,  and  thought  we  had  thrown  down  something
in  the  bedroom.  There  was  no  one  else  in  the  house.  The  man  died  about  a
week  after  this  took  place.

E.  T.  VAUGHAN,  Vicar  of  Langleybury.

Mr.  Vaughan  writes  later  : —

June  21th,  1888.

I  enclose  according  to  your  wish  a  statement  from  Mrs.  Vaughan  of  what
she  remembers  of  the  curious  incident.  I  am  sorry  to  say  the  widow,  though
she  still  lives  in  this  village,  is  not  capable  of  writing  down  a  statement  of  what
she  saw  and  heard  that  evening,  though  she  can  give  a  very  clear  account  of
the  circumstances  to  any  one  who  examines  her  orally.  The  man's  name  was
John  Wilson,  a  bricklayer  in  the  employ  of  the  Earl  of  Clarendon.  He  died
on  December  7th,  1881,  about  a  week  after  the  strange  occurrence.  I  have
never  since  experienced  any  similar  phenomenon.

EDWARD  T.  VAUGHAN.

Mrs.  Vaughan  writes  under  the  same  date  as  follows  : —

In  confirmation  of  the  story  of  Wilson's  deathbed,  I  can  say  I  was  sitting  in
the  room  below  the  sick  man's  with  two  other  people  (his  sister-in-law  and
uncle),  in  perfect  silence,  as  every  word  read  in  the  room  above  could  be  dis-
tinctly heard  by  us.  Just  as  the  last  words  of  the  prayer  were  being  said,  we
were  startled  by  a  loud  and  sudden  noise,  as  if  some  heavy  piece  of  furniture
had  fallen  in  the  room  above.  My  first  impression  was  that  the  man  was  taken
worse,  and  that  his  wife,  moving  hastily  to  him,  had  knocked  over  a  table.
None  of  us  spoke,  though  we  started  and  looked  at  each  other,  and  expected
to  hear  some  one  called ;  but  almost  the  next  minute  I  heard  Mr.  Vaughan
address  the  man  on  leaving,  and  come  downstairs  with  the  wife.  I  went  to


926  A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  505

meet  them  with  her  sister,  and  though  nothing  more  was  said  by  any  of  us  than
"  good-bye,"  I  saw  by  all  the  faces  that  something  unusual  had  happened.  As
soon  as  we  were  out  of  the  house  I  said  to  Mr.  Vaughan,  "  What  was  that
noise  just  as  you  were  reading  the  prayers  ?  "  and  he  told  me  the  story  you
have  heard,  and  it  formed  the  principal  topic  of  our  long  walk  home,  won-
dering what  it  was,  and  trying  to  explain  it,  without  in  the  least  coming  to
any  conclusion  but  greater  wonder.  E.  L.  VAUGHAN.

This  is  a  brief  and  simple  incident;  but  it  is  particularly  hard  to
explain  by  ordinary  causes — such  as  an  earthquake  or  a  mistaken
memory.

926  A.   SCHEME  OF  VITAL  FACULTY.

The  following  scheme  is  not  put  forth  as  expressing  deliberate  con-
victions, supported  by  adequate  evidence.  Its  speculative  character  has,
in  fact,  excluded  it  from  my  text,  yet  I  hope  that  it  may  not  be  without
its  use.  For  many  men  the  difficulty  of  belief  is  not  so  much  in  defect  of
trustworthy  evidence  as  in  the  unintelligibility,  the  incoherence  of  the
phenomena  described,  which  prevents  them  from  being  retained  in  the
mind  or  assimilated  with  previous  knowledge.

I  have  myself  felt  the  full  force  of  this  objection,  and  I  believe  that
some  effort  to  meet  it  has  become  absolutely  needful.  Undoubtedly  a
record  of  facts  without  theories  is  the  first  essential.  But  the  facts  in-
dividually are  like  "  stones  that  fall  down  from  Jupiter," — isolated  marvels,
each  of  which  seems  incredible  until  we  have  made  shift  to  colligate
them  all.

"  Truth,"  as  we  have  in  this  research  constant  need  to  remember,
"  emerges  more  readily  from  error  than  from  confusion;"  and  it  is  in  the
place  of  absolute  confusion — wandering  as  we  are  per  incertam  lunam,  sub
luce  malignd — that  I  point  to  pathways  which  may  lead  somewhither,
though  it  be  with  much  of  error  by  the  way.

With  this  apology,  made  once  for  all,  I  enter  upon  a  task  whose  pro-
visional and  hazardous  character  no  one  can  feel  more  strongly  than
myself.

Let  us  begin,  then,  by  taking  the  most  generalised  view  possible  of  all
these  phenomena.  They  appear,  at  any  rate,  to  depend  upon  the  presence
of  living  human  beings ;  and  they  are  therefore  in  some  sense  phenomena
of  life.  If,  then,  they  are  phenomena  of  life,  they  must  be  in  some  way
derived  from,  or  must  bear  some  analogy  to,  the  vital  phenomena,  the
faculties  and  functions  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  the  experience  of
every  day.  Yet  to  say  this  brings  us  little  nearer  to  our  aim.  Spirits
may  have  ruled  Mr.  Moses'  mind  and  body  just  as  truly  as  our  own
conscious  will  rules  our  mind  and  body.1  But  the  results  which  they  pro-
duced were  so  different  from  any  results  which  we  can  produce  that  it  is
hard  to  know  where  to  begin  the  comparison.  Is  there  not  some  middle

1  This  Appendix  was  written  originally  with  a  special  view  to  the  phenomena  alleged
to  occur  in  the  case  of  Mr.  W.  Stainton  Moses. — EDITORS.


506  APPENDICES  [926  A

term,  some  intermediate  series,  with  which  both  these  extreme  series  may
have  points  of  resemblance  ?

It  is  here  that  we  ought  to  feel  the  advantage  of  previous  discussions
on  man's  own  supernormal  faculties, — on  the  powers  of  the  Self  below
the  threshold  of  ordinary  consciousness.  We  have  traced  these  powers  in
detail ;  we  have  noted  the  extension  of  the  normal  spectrum  of  con-
sciousness beyond  both  red  and  violet  ends,  in  response  to  subliminal
control.  Perhaps  the  profounder  conception  of  the  Self  thus  gained  may
help  us  to  bridge  over  that  gulf  between  the  performances  of  the  ordinary
man  and  those  of  the  so-called  medium  which  heretofore  has  involved  so
difficult  a  leap.  We  may  find  that  the  spirit's  power  over  the  organism
which  it  controls  or  "possesses," — while  possibly  going  much  further  than
any  subliminal  power  in  the  organism  itself,  as  known  to  us, — may  yet
advance  along  similar  lines,  and  receive  explanation  from  hypnotic  or
telepathic  phenomena.  I  will  endeavour,  then,  to  set  side  by  side,  in
tabular  form,  the  main  heads  of  vital  process  or  faculty  as  exercised  (i)
under  normal  or  supraliminal  control ;  (  2  )  under  subliminal  and  telepathic
control;  (3)  under  what  is  claimed  as  disembodied  or  spiritual  control.

In  arranging  this  scheme  my  first  object  is  to  bring  all  such  phenomena
as  we  actually  have  before  us  into  intelligible  connection ;  introducing  by
the  way  a  few  of  the  explanations  given  to  Mr.  Moses  by  his  guides.
Those  explanations,  however,  are  for  the  most  part  slight  and  vague,
and  our  experimental  knowledge  of  the  phenomena  is,  of  course,  merely
nascent  and  fragmentary.  My  scheme,  therefore,  cannot  aim  at  complete
logical  arrangement.  It  must  involve  both  repetitions  and  lacunae;
nor  can  it  be  such  as  the  physiologist  would  care  to  sanction.  But  it
will,  at  least,  be  a  first  attempt  at  a  connected  schedule  or  rational  index
of  phenomena  apparently  so  disparate  that  the  very  possibility  of  their
interdependence  is  even  now  constantly  denied.

SYNOPSIS   OF  VITAL   FACULTY.
I.

FIRST  SERIES  : — PHENOMENA  SUPRALIMINALLY  CONTROLLED,  OR
OCCURRING  IN  ORDINARY  LIFE.

1.  Supraliminal    or    empirical    consciousness;    aware    only    of    the

material  world  through  sensory  impressions.

2.  Physical  nutrition,  including  respiration.

(a)  Physiological  and  pathological  processes  and  products.

3.  Physical  expenditure ;  action  on  material  and  etherial  environment.

(a)  Mechanical  work  done  at  the  expense  of  food  assimilated.
(£)  Production  of  heat,  odour,  sound,  chemical  changes,  as  the

result  of  protoplasmic  metabolism.
(c)  Production  of  etherial  disturbances ;    as  emission  of  light

and  generation  of  electrical  energy.


926  A]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  507

4.  Action  on  the  incarnation  of  life  on  the  planet.

(a)   Reproduction,  as  physiological  division.

5.  Mental  nutrition ;  sensory  receptivity.

(a)  Ordinary  sense-perception.

(b)  Memory.

6.  Mental  expenditure  ;  response  to  stimuli.

(a)   Intra-cerebral  response  ;  ideation.
(6)   Emotion ;  will ;  voluntary  innervation.

7.  Modifications  of  supraliminal  personality.

(a)   Birth ;  as  physiological  individuation.

(t>)  Sleep  ;  with  dreams,  as  oscillations  of  the  conscious  threshold.

(c)  Metamorphoses ;  as  of  insects  and  amphibians ;  and  poly-

morphism, as  of  hydrozoa ;  multiplex  personality.

(d)  Death ;  as  physiological  dissolution.

II.

SECOND  SERIES  : — PHENOMENA  SUBLIMINALLY  CONTROLLED.

1.  Subliminal  consciousness;    obscurely  aware  of  the  transcendental

world,  through  telepathic  and  telaesthetic  impressions.

2.  Physical  nutrition  modified  by  subliminal  control.

(a}   Suggestion,  self-suggestion,  psycho-therapeutics.
(£)   Stigmatisation.

3.  Physical  expenditure  modified  by  subliminal  control.

(a)  Mechanical  work  modified  by  psychical  integration  or  dis-

integration ;  hysteria.

(b)  Production  of  heat,  and  other  specific  effects  upon  matter,

subliminally  modified.

(c)  Emission   of    light,    and  generation    of    electrical    energy

modified.

4.  Action  on  the  incarnation  of  life  on  the  planet.

(a)   Prenatal    suggestion    through    intermediate    organism    of
parent.

5.  Mental  nutrition  (sensory  and  supersensory  receptivity)  subliminally

controlled.

(a)  Hyperaesthesia ;  anaesthesia;  analgesia.

(b)  Hypermnesia ;  manifested  in  dreams  or  automatisms.

(c)  Telepathy ;  veridical  hallucinations ;  sensory  automatism.

(d)  Telaesthesia  or  clairvoyance  ;  perception  of  distant  scenes  ;

retrocognition ;  precognition.

6.  Mental  expenditure;    response  to  stimuli   modified  by  subliminal

control.

(a)  Subliminal  ideation  ;  the  inspirations  of  genius.

(b)  Motor  automatism  ;  concurrent  consciousness  ;  hyperboulia.

(c)  Extradition  of  will-power   beyond  the  organism;   telergy;

self-projection.


508  APPENDICES  [926  A

7.  Modifications  of  subliminal  personality.

(a)  Birth ;  as  spiritual  individuation.

(b)  Sleep  and  trance ;  self-suggested  or  telepathically  suggested;

with  clairvoyant  visions.
(<;)   Ecstasy.

(d)  Death ;  as  irrevocable  self-projection  of  the  spirit.

•

III.

THIRD  SERIES: — PHENOMENA  CLAIMED  AS  SPIRITUALLY  CONTROLLED.

1.  Subliminal    consciousness,     discerning    and    influenced    by     dis-

embodied  spirits  in  a   spiritual  world,  who  co-operate   in  pro-
ducing objective  phenomena.

2.  Physical  nutrition  modified  by  spirit-control.

(a)  Spirit-suggestion;  psycho-therapeutics.

(b)  Stigmatisation.

(c)  Novel  and  purposive  metastasis  of  secretion.

3.  Physical  expenditure  modified  by  spirit-control.

(a)  Mechanical  efficiency  increased  and  fulcrum  displaced.

(b)  Control   over   individual   material   molecules;    resulting  in

abrogation  of  ordinary  thermal  laws,  and  in  aggregation
and  disaggregation  of  matter.

(c)  Control  over  etherial  manifestations ;  with  possible  effects  in

the  domains  of  light,  electricity,  gravitation,  and  cohesion.

4.  Action  on  the  incarnation  of  life  on  the  planet.

(a)  Pre-conceptual  suggestion  or  self-suggestion.
(£)   Ectoplasy  or  Materialisation ;  temporary  extradition  or  coi
centration  of  vital  energy.

5.  Mental  nutrition  modified  by  spirit-control.

(a)  Ordinary  sensory  perception  spiritually  controlled.
(£)  Memory  controlled  ;  retrocognition  spiritually  given.

(c)  Sensory  automatism  spiritually  controlled  ;  phantasms  of  the

dead,  &c.

(d)  Telsesthesia  developed  into  perception  of  spiritual  environ-

ment; precognition.

6.  Response  to  stimuli  spiritually  controlled.

(a)  Ideation  inspired  by  spirits.

(£)  Motor  automatism  spiritually  controlled ;  possession.

(^)  Extension  of  will-power  into  the  spiritual  world ;  prayer.

7.  Modifications  of  personality  from  spiritual  standpoint.

(a)  Birth  ;  as  descent  into  generation.

(b)  Sleep  and  trance  induced,  and  visions  inspired,  by  spirits.

(c)  Precursory  emergence  into  completer  personality;  ecstasy

with  perception  of  spiritual  world.

(d)  Death ;  as  birth  into  completer  personality.

(e)  Vital  faculty  fully  exercised  in  spiritual  world.


926  A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  509

I.   FIRST  SERIES  : — PHENOMENA  SUPRALIMINALLY  CONTROLLED,  OR
OCCURRING  IN  ORDINARY  LIFE.

( i )  Supraliminal or  Empirical  Consciousness;  aware  only  of  the  Mate-
rial World  through  Sensory  Impressions. — Beginning  with  the  series  of
manifestations  of  supraliminal  or  "  normal "  faculty — normal  merely  in
the  sense  that  it  is  more  habitually  observed  than  the  subliminal — I  must
needs  make  my  first  heading  simply  Consciousness.  We  must  assume
this  starting-point  from  which  to  work,  and  we  must  briefly  point  out  the
limits  within  which  this  supraliminal  consciousness  is  circumscribed.  It
is,  as  I  hold,  largely  an  outcome  of  the  struggle  for  existence ;  a  fraction
of  the  potential  consciousness  of  each  individual  life,  selected  and  developed
by  planetary  evolution  and  earthly  needs.  I  am  conscious  of  some  of
my  points  of  relation  to  this  material  world,  because  without  such  aware-
ness my  ancestors  could  never  have  subsisted  here.  I  am  unconscious
of  my  profounder,  my  cosmic  relations,  if  such  there  be,  because  while  my
ancestors  were  struggling  upwards  from  the  brute  such  knowledge  would
have  been  to  them  a  bewilderment  rather  than  a  help.  Nay,  even  the
spectrum  of  ordinary  consciousness,  as  I  have  termed  it,  extending  from
where  it  fades  at  the  red  end  into  unconscious  organic  processes  to  where
it  fades  at  the  violet  end  among  psychical  hints  and  indications  which
we  can  no  longer  follow, — even  that  habitual  range  of  perception  is  in-
terspersed with  many  dark  belts  and  lines.  For  that  range  of  perception
has  been  contrived  by  Nature,  so  to  say,  on  no  scientific  principle,  but
merely  so  as  to  give,  at  the  least  physiological  expense,  a  rough  notion  of
some  superficial  features  of  a  molar  world.  We  gradually  learn,  indeed,
by  reason  and  calculation,  that  this  apparently  molar  world  consists  (for
our  intelligence)  of  at  least  two  interpenetrating  environments,  molecular
and  etherial ;  but  to  the  supraliminal  consciousness  all  that  lies  beyond
the  range  of  eye  and  ear  is  matter  of  inference  and  artifice,  not  of  direct
apprehension.

(2)  PHYSICAL  NUTRITION,  INCLUDING  RESPIRATION.

(a)  Physiological  and  Pathological  Processes  and  Products. — In  an  en-
vironment thus  conceived  we  have  to  build  up  and  to  expand  the  energies
of  body  and  mind,  apparently  inseparably  united  to  form  a  personality
which  we  have  as  yet  no  reason  to  suppose  to  be  of  more  than  earthly
scope.  The  nutrition  of  the  body  is  the  first  necessity,  but  most  of  the
mechanism  of  this  nutrition  lies  now  beneath  the  conscious  threshold —
beyond  the  red  end  of  our  imaginary  spectrum.  Even  upon  the  body
with  which  it  popularly  identifies  itself  the  supraliminal  consciousness
gazes  as  a  mere  outsider.  We  can  do  no  more  than  register  our  own
idiosyncrasies,  and  employ  observed  tendencies  of  our  inward  mechanism
to  repair  its  own  aberrations.  We  become  familiar  with  certain  processes
and  reactions,  physiological  and  pathological ;  but  why  the  elements  of


5io  APPENDICES  [926  A

our  body  are  thus  associated  and  dissociated  we  know  not ;  nor  can  we
(speaking  broadly)  produce  any  reaction  by  means  other  than  those
which  the  organism  itself  habitually  employs.

(3)  PHYSICAL  EXPENDITURE;  ACTION  ON  MATERIAL  AND
ETHERIAL  ENVIRONMENT.

(0)  Mechanical  Work  Done  at  the  Expense  of  Food  Assimilated. — Our
body,  thus  built  up  by  nutrition  (including  respiration)  from  its  original
germ,  has  acquired  energy  which  it  can  expend  on  its  environment,  both
molecular  and  etherial ;  as  well  as  exerting  an  obscurer  form  of  action,  of
which  we  shall  speak  later,  on  the  world  of  life  to  which  the  germ  belongs.
The  most  fully  conscious  and  purposive  form  which  the  body's  energy
takes  is  that  of  mechanical  work  upon  molar  masses.  Here  we  can,  to  a
great  extent,  compute  its  work  like  an  artificial  engine's  ;  noting  that  the
relation  between  food  absorbed  and  work  done  is  never  such  as  to  threaten
disturbance  of  the  general  law  of  Conservation  of  Energy.

(b)  Production  of  Heat,  Odour,  Sound,  Chemical  Changes,  as  the  Result
of  Protoplasmic  Metabolism. — The  animal  body  exerts  various  effects,  other
than  mechanical,  upon  different  kinds  of  living  and  lifeless  matter.     It
generates  and  imparts  heat  both  by   conduction  and  by  radiation;    it
propagates   sound-waves    and    odours    which    specifically   affect    certain
prepared  surfaces ;  it  may  generate  electric  charges  and  electric  currents ;
both  in  its  higher  and  lower  forms  it  effects,  without  as  well  as  within  its
own  periphery,  certain  chemical  associations  and  dissociations  whose  range
is  unknown.

(c)  Production  of  Etherial  Disturbances  ;  as  Emission  of  Light  and
Generation  of  Electrical  Energy. — One  of  these  specific  effects,  exerted
not  on  the  molecular  but  on  the  etherial  world — the  production  of  light —
is  important  enough,  in  view  of  what  is  to  follow,  to  be  placed  under  a
heading  by  itself.     It  will  be  convenient,  however,  to  defer  dealing  with
this  topic  until  a    later  stage  in  our  discussion.     The  development  of
electro-motive  force  of  considerable  magnitude,  as  for  instance,  in  some
species  of  fishes,  is  a  rare  phenomenon ;  but  electrical  manifestations  of
a  feeble  kind  occur  in  the  muscles  and  nerves  of  all  animals,  and  even  in
the  tissues  of  some  plants.


(4)  ACTION  ON  THE  INCARNATION  OF  LIFE  ON  THE  PLANET.


(0)  Reproduction  as  Physiological  Division. — The  living  organism  has
one  further  power ; — of  all  its  powers  at  once  the  most  complex  and  the
most  subliminal.  It  can  influence  by  reproduction  the  incarnation  of  life
upon  this  planet.  From  the  supraliminal  standpoint  we  can  speak  of  re-
production only  as  of  an  elaborate  process  of  physiological  division.  But
the  distinction  between  supraliminal  and  subliminal  knowledge  and  pur-
pose,— where  the  subliminal  purpose  has  sometimes  been  held  to  be  no


.


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  511

merely  individual  aim, — has  here  been  guessed  by  philosophers  in  the
illusion  which  Nature,  for  her  own  ends,  throws  around  her  children  ;—
leading  them  by  roads  which  they  blindly  follow  towards  an  end  which,
for  aught  she  cares,  they  may  even  desire  to  shun.

(5)   MENTAL  NUTRITION;  SENSORY  RECEPTIVITY.

(#)  Ordinary  Sense  Perception. — From  the  nutrition  and  expenditure
of  the  bodily  organism  let  us  turn  to  the  nutrition  and  expenditure  of  the
mind,  which,  however  inseparable  its  connection  with  the  body  may  be
deemed, — even  if  we  regard  it  merely  as  a  concatenation  of  "  highest-level
brain-centres  " — must  yet,  for  clearness'  sake,  be  treated  separately  in  any
scheme  of  vital  function.  The  nourishment  of  the  mind  (or  highest-level
centres)  is  through  sensory  impressions,  which  reach  it  from  without  through
definite  channels  so  soon  as  they  attain  a  definite  intensity.

(b)  Memory. — The  residual  changes  which  these  impressions  leave
constitute  the  physical  basis  of  memory ;  and  supraliminal  memory
normally  contains  the  residue  only  of  supraliminal  impressions.

(6)   MENTAL  EXPENDITURE  ;  RESPONSE  TO  STIMULI.

(a)  Infra-cerebral  Response;  Ideation. — To  these  stimuli,  freshly
impinging,  or  become  in  a  sense  fixed  and  inherent,  we  find  the  mind
or  highest  centres  reacting,  first  in  ideation,  or  intra-cerebral  re-
adjustments.

(<£)  Emotion ;  Will ;  Voluntary  Innervation. — Next  we  find  them
reacting  in  emotion  and  in  will, — or  motor  innervation,  which  energises
beyond  the  brain,  and  gives  orders  to  voluntary  muscles, — to  eyes  and
tongue  and  hands  and  limbs, — which  express  the  intelligent  personality
within.  These  orders  are  supraliminany  conceived  in  molar  terms,  but
they  receive  a  molecular  obedience.  We  say  to  the  hand,  Write  !  But
the  answer  is  not  a  mere  puppet-like  movement  of  such  molar  mechanism
as  we  could  ourselves  conceive,  but — like  the  inward  ideation  itself —
depends  upon  a  rearrangement  of  molecules  such  as  no  science  can  at
present  trace  or  explain.

(7)   MODIFICATIONS  OF  SUPRALIMINAL  PERSONALITY.

(a)  Birth  ;  as  Physiological  Individuation. — And,  finally,  both   body
and  mind  may  pass  through  we  know  not  how  many  phases  without  losing
what  we  regard  as  the  identity  of  either.     Birth  in  this  scheme  we  must
regard   as    physiological  individuation,  obliging  the  new  animal  to  seek
food  for  itself,   and   thus  compelling,  in  higher  animals,  a  rhythmically
recurring  increase  of  alertness  which  we  term  the  waking  state.

(b)  Sleep;  with  Dreams,  as  Oscillations  of  the  Conscious  Threshold. —
But  an  abeyance  in  sleep  of  the  supraliminal  control  perpetually  recurs,


512  APPENDICES  [926  A

and  is  needful  to  the  organism's  preservation.  And  in  the  temporary
obliteration  of  the  conscious  threshold  thus  induced,  the  fragmentary
ideation  immediately  below  the  waking  level  makes  itself  manifest  in
dream  (and  the  subliminal  control  becomes  dominant  in  various  ways  and
in  varying  degrees).

(c)  Metamorphoses,  as  of  Insects  and  Amphibia,  and  Polymorphism,  as
of  Hydrozoa  :  Multiplex  Personality. — Even  profounder  changes  occur  in
animal   metamorphoses,  where  the  struggle  for  existence   brings  to  the
surface  at  different  stages  of  life  different  selections  from  the  potential
syntheses  of  faculty  included  in  the  original  germ, — those,  namely,  which
are  adapted  to  the  environment  in  which  the  particular  stage  is  passed.
In  the  higher  animals  the  variations  that  occur  as  the  infant  progresses
through  youth  to  maturity  are  much  less  marked  and  more  gradual.      In
some  few  abnormal  men,  however,  cerebral  rearrangements  may  some-
times  bring   about   sudden   and   complete    changes    in    the    superficial
character   and   memory.     These  differ  from  the   metamorphoses   of  the
lower  animals  in  having,  as  a  rule,  no  relation  to  different  stages  of  life,
and  remind  us  rather  of  the  polymorphism  of  a  colonial  Hydrozoon,  in
which   the   different  attributes   and   characteristics  of  a  single   complete
organism  are  distributed   among  the  various  individuals   of  the  colony.
The  man  with  a  multiplex  personality  is  like  a  single  individual  of  such
a  colony,  in  that  only  certain  elements  of  his  ordinary  self  are  manifest
at  once,  the  rest  being  for  the  time  submerged.

(d)  Death;  as  Physiological  Dissolution. — And  ultimately  the   indi-
vidual organism  loses  the  power  of  self-adaptation  to  its  environment ;
physiological  dissolution  ensues;  and  from  the  supraliminal  standpoint
we  discern  no  energy  which  is  not  dispersed  in  lower  forms  at  death.

Of  thus  much,  then,  and  of  thus  much  only  of  ourselves,  the  struggle
for  earthly  existence  has  compelled  us  to  be  aware.  It  is  an  empirical
or  superficial  cognisance ;  and  here,  as  truly  as  anywhere  in  nature,  "  all
that  we  know  is  phenomenal  of  the  unknown."

II.   SECOND  SERIES:— PHENOMENA  SUBLIMINALLY  CONTROLLED.

( i )  Subliminal  Consciousness;  obscurely  aware  of  the  Transcendental
World,  through  Telepathic  and  Telcesthetic  Impressions. — Let  us  turn  now
to  our  second  scheme ;  that  which  is  to  represent  for  us  vital  function
under  the  nascent  control  of  a  subliminal  consciousness,  and  amid  the
dimly-guessed  operations  of  a  transcendental  world.  The  subliminal
faculties  whose  existence  I  infer  from  our  evidence  will  be  traced  in  detail
as  we  proceed.  Here  at  the  beginning  I  must  merely  explain  on  what
principle  I  have  assigned  to  some  of  these  faculties  and  not  to  others
a  source  in  the  subliminal  self,  or  in  telepathic  action  from  other  embodied
minds,  rather  than  in  any  extra-terrene  or  spiritual  intervention.  This
distinction  is  often  obscure ;  but  I  have  here  drawn  the  line  so  as  to  avoid


926A]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  513

unduly  favouring  my  own  argument.  I  am  endeavouring  to  show  that
certain  subliminal  processes  which  I  hold  to  be  going  on  in  each  of  us  do
form  a  real  intermediate  class  between  the  processes  of  normal  life  and
those  attributed  to  spirit-control.  I  have,  therefore,  here  left  to  the
account  of  spirit-control  all  that  can  be  at  all  plausibly  claimed  for  it  ;*
believing  that  the  remaining  phenomena,  those  which  seem  almost  indis-
putably referable  to  a  source  within  ourselves,  will  be  enough  to  carry  us
half-way  across  the  apparently  impassable  gulf  which  separates  Mr.  Moses'
and  similar  experiences  from  the  experiences  of  the  mass  of  mankind.

For  these  phenomena  will  not  only  in  themselves  show  great  accessions
of  power,  but  also  will  give  plain  indication  of  still  more  marked  develop-
ment to  come.  We  shall  not  only  see  the  spectrum  of  supraliminal
consciousness  largely  extended  in  both  directions,  but  shall  also  realise
that  this  extension  implies  a  new  environment — an  environment  whose
laws  we  have  yet  to  learn,  and  whose  denizens  to  encounter.

Let  us  discuss,  then,  the  subliminally  guided  faculties  in  the  same
order  in  which  we  have  just  discussed  the  faculties  of  common  life.

(2)   PHYSICAL  NUTRITION  MODIFIED  BY  SUBLIMINAL  CONTROL.

(a)  Suggestion,  Self-suggestion,  Psycho-therapeutics. — And  first  as  to  the
influence  of  subliminal  control  on  bodily  nutrition.  We  have  here,  as  it
happens,  the  most  conspicuous  and  popular  group  in  our  whole  range  of
unfamiliar  phenomena.  The  experimental  study  of  the  subliminal  self
was  virtually  originated  by  the  empirical  discovery  that  "  mesmeric  passes,"
and  afterwards  that  hypnotic  suggestion  in  general,  had  power  to  alter  the
condition  of  the  nervous  system ; — to  induce  sleep,  to  relieve  pain,  to  re-
establish arrested  secretion,  and  to  restore  morbid  secretion  to  healthy
normality.  I  have  already  discussed  (in  Sections  568-570)  the  part  which
an  actual  effluence,  or  a  telepathic  impact,  may  play  in  such  operations
as  these,  and  will  take  here  the  only  remaining  logical  view,  which  assumes
that  suggestion  from  a  hypnotiser  is  virtually  self-suggestion ;  the  hypno-
tiser's  order  having  merely  the  power  of  reaching  in  some  unexplained
way  the  subject's  subliminal  self,  and  setting  in  action  that  hyperboulia,
so  to  term  it, — that  extension  of  will-power  over  parts  of  the  organism
unreachable  by  supraliminal  will, — which  enables  the  hidden  self  to
achieve  the  marvellous  restorations  of  "  psycho-therapeutics."  For  this
submerged  and  intimate  will  can  wield,  as  it  were,  the  very  vis  medicatrix
naturcz,  and  chase  back  the  runaway  molecules  into  a  road  made  familiar
to  them  by  long  memories  of  healthy  action.

(b}  Stigmatisation. — Yet  this,  though  the  easiest,  is  not  the  only  road
down  which  the  dominated  molecules  can  be  driven.  The  various  pheno-

1  The  reader  must  observe  that  the  standpoint  adopted  for  the  purpose  of  this  special
argument  differs  from  that  of  the  book  as  a  whole,  in  which  the  onus probandi  is  laid  on
the  spiritistic  theory. — EDITORS.

VOL.   II.  2  K


514  APPENDICES  [926  A

mena  of  modified  secretion  to  which  the  conventional  name  of  stigmatisa-
tion  has  been  given  consist  in  a  selective  direction  of  cells  or  of  even
minuter  bodily  elements  away  from  their  settled  customary  performance,
through  changes  which  the  predecessors  of  these  cells  have  indeed
traversed  before, — but  never  without  specific  objective  cause — never  on
so  impalpable  an  invitation.  The  serum  which  rises  in  the  "  suggested  "
blisters  is  in  itself  no  novel  product ;  but  its  evocation  without  mechanical
irritation  shows  (as  I  have  urged  elsewhere,  see  543)  a  quite  novel  power
to  play  upon  the  organism  as  with  purposive  manipulation  from  within.

(3)  PHYSICAL  EXPENDITURE  MODIFIED  BY  SUBLIMINAL  CONTROL.

(#)  Mechanical  Work  Modified  by  Psychical  Integration  or  Disin-
tegration ;  Hysteria. — And  next  as  to  the  effect  of  subliminal  control  upon
the  organism's  expenditure  ;  in  the  first  place  upon  its  expenditure  in
muscular  energy.  The  amount  of  muscular  energy  which  the  supra-
liminal  self  can  control  may  at  first  sight  be  regarded  as  a  compromise,
achieved  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  between  present  and  future  con-
venience. It  can  put  forth,  that  is  to  say,  just  so  much  energy  as
is  generally  compatible  with  avoiding  any  serious  risk  of  injury  to  the
organism.  But  this  explanation  will  not  take  into  account  all  the  elements
of  the  problem.  The  human  organism  is  an  imperfectly  unified  colony
of  cells;  and  there  is  nothing  to  show  us  that  the  precise  degree  of
integration  to  which  we  attain  in  ordinary  life  is  such  as  to  enable  our
organism  to  exert  its  maximum  of  energy  without  risk  of  injury.

We  find,  in  fact,  that  a  capacity  of  greater  effort  may  be  the  result  or
the  concomitant  either  of  disintegration  or  of  further  integration.  The
great  increase  of  muscular  power  which  sometimes  accompanies  mania
is  an  instance  of  the  first,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  increased  energy
in  such  cases  becomes  apparent  throws  some  light  on  subliminal  operation
generally.  This  subject  has  been  fully  discussed  in  Chapters  II.  and  III.
I  have  shown  that  the  same  increase  of  energy  may  follow  on  increased
integration,  of  which  I  regard  Genius  as  the  palmary  instance.  In  short,
and  as  might  have  been  expected,  the  katabolic  as  well  as  the  anabolic
forces,  the  output  as  well  as  the  intake  of  the  bodily  frame,  are  amenable,
in  more  ways  than  we  can  suppose  ourselves  to  have  yet  discovered,  to
subliminal  control.

(£)  Production  of  Heat,  and  other  Specific  Effects  upon  Matter,  Sub-
liminally  Modified. — Turning  now  to  effects  other  than  mechanical
produced  upon  the  material  world,  we  find  rather  suggestions  for  experi-
mentation than  records  of  experiment  adequately  performed.  The
subjective  sensation  of  heat  can,  of  course,  readily  be  produced  by
hypnotic  suggestion,  and  in  a  sensitive  subject  perspiration  may  follow,—
si  dixeriSy  Aestuo,  sudat : — but  I  know  of  no  experiment  which  has  com-
pared the  total  heat  emitted  by  the  organism  in  a  normal  state  and  under


926A]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  515

suggestion.  Suggestions  involving  bodily  odour  and  chemical  conditions
have  thus  far  been  confined  to  psycho-therapeutics,  although  here  also
there  might  well  be  experiments  with  a  purely  scientific  aim.  But  the
most  important  effect  of  a  supernormal  kind  alleged  to  have  been  pro-
duced upon  matter  in  the  course  of  experiment  on  subliminal  faculty  is
the  old-fashioned  mesmeric  effluence,  which,  in  the  opinion  of  Elliotson,
Esdaile,  &c.,  was  proved  to  affect  not  only  the  human  organism,  but
water  and  other  inanimate  matter  (see  541  E  and  K).  This  view  is
entirely  out  of  fashion  now,  and  we  ourselves  have  wholly  failed  to  con-
firm it  by  experiment;  but  the  history  of  hypnotism  has  consisted  so
largely  in  the  confident  disavowal,  followed  by  the  gradual  re-discovery, —
though  often  with  a  new  interpretation, — of  phenomena  alleged  by  the
earlier  mesmerists,  that  it  would,  I  think,  hardly  be  safe  to  set  aside  this
"  mesmerisation  of  objects  "  as  due  merely  to  suggestion,  until  it  shall
have  been  tested  by  many  more  experiments,  performed  with  modern
exactitude  and  care.

(<:)  Emission  of  Light,  and  Generation  of  Electrical  Energy  Modified. —
A  like  need  for  experiment  exists  with  regard  to  phenomena  of  luminosity,
alleged  from  time  to  time  to  accompany  abnormal  conditions  of  the
human  frame.  "  Some  startling  but  apparently  well -authenticated  cases,"
says  the  writer  of  the  article  on  "  Phosphorescence  "  in  the  Encyclopedia
Britannica,  "  are  on  record  of  human  beings  having  been  luminous  owing
•  to  certain  states  of  disease."  Of  such  cases  I  shall  have  more  to  say
presently.  This  phenomenon  has  been  frequently  noted  both  in  and  by
persons  in  a  trance  condition ;  but  usually  under  circumstances  where  one
cannot  be  sure  that  the  effect  was  not  a  merely  subjective  one.  With  Mr.
Moses,  however,  it  was  repeatedly  observed  during  stances,  being  generally
visible  to  Mrs.  Speer,  and  sometimes  to  all  the  sitters.  Mrs.  Speer  writes  :
"  I  have  often  seen  Mr.  Moses  enveloped  in  a  luminous  cloud  or  white
mist,  and  when  he  rubbed  his  hands  phosphorescent  light  seemed  to  be
emitted  from  his  fingers.  This  light  enabled  him  to  see  his  own  hands  in
the  dark."  I  find  an  entry  in  Mr.  Moses'  notebooks  to  the  effect  that  on
one  occasion  at  least  he  saw  his  hands  luminous  when  he  had  returned  to
his  own  rooms  after  a  stance.  I  shall  return  to  this  subject  hereafter
when  dealing  with  "  Spirit-Lights " ;  but  this  phosphorescence  of  the
sensitive  himself  seems  to  belong  rather  to  the  category  of  subliminal
control.  It  seems  not  improbable  that  such  manifestations  may  be  made
more  intelligible  by  further  discoveries  on  the  lines  of  those  recently  made
by  physicists  as  to  the  luminescent  effects  produced  by  obscure  radia-
tions whose  existence  was  previously  unsuspected.

(4)  ACTION  ON  THE  INCARNATION  OF  LIFE  ON  THE  PLANET.

(a)  Prenatal  Suggestion  through  Intermediate  Organism  of  Parent. —
We  come  next  to  the  problem  of  the  influence  of  subliminal  control  on
the  realm  of  life, — on  the  manner  in  which  the  sum  of  life  on  earth  is


5i6  APPENDICES  [926  A

supplied  by  fresh  incarnations  from  the  unknown  environing  energy.
The  first  question  will  be  as  to  the  power  of  suggestion,  by  influencing  the
mother,  to  influence  the  unborn  child.  And  so  large  a  collection  has
now  been  made  of  cases  where  an  impression,  produced  (more  often,  of
course,  by  accident  than  by  design)  upon  the  mother  has  been  reflected
by  the  offspring  (see  526)  that  I  feel  entitled  to  assume  such  influence  as
highly  probable,  if  not  established.1  This  fact,«if  fact  it  be,  is  of  an  im-
portance greater  than  has  yet  been  realised.  We  cannot  fix  a  terminus  a
quo  before  which  such  influence  is  impossible;  and  the  much-needed
science  of  "  eugenics  "  seems  likely  to  depend  largely  upon  a  psychical
factor.

(5)  MENTAL  NUTRITION  (SENSORY  AND  SUPERSENSORY  RECEPTIVITY)
SUBLIMINALLY  CONTROLLED.

(a)  Hyper ces the sia  ;  Anaesthesia  /  Analgesia. — We  have  now  dealt  with
the  influence  of  the  subliminal  self  in  upbuilding  the  organism,  and  in
modifying  the  organism's   effect  upon  its  environment.      With  the  dis-
cussion of  its  effect  upon  the  world  of  life  we  have  reached  as  it  were  the
watershed  of  physical  and  psychical  determination ;  and  we  proceed  now
to  the  region  of  intellectual  effects ; — of  influence  subliminally  exercised,
first  upon  sensory  receptivity,  and  then  upon  motor  response.

Subliminal  modifications  of  sensory  receptivity,  important  as  they  are.
have  been  already  so  fully  discussed  in  Chapter  V.  that  we  need  here  do
no  more  than  recapitulate  them,  thus  preparing  the  reader  for  the  still
more  potent  sway  which  we  shall  find  ascribed  to  spirits  over  the  per-
ception of  men.  Briefly,  then,  the  senses  can  be  either  stimulated  or
suspended  to  an  extent  hardly  yet  fathomed.  Cases  of  hyperasthesia  are
recorded  which  seem  scarcely  compatible  with  that  we  know  of  the
structure  of  the  sensory  end-organs  themselves.

So  profound  an  ancesthesia,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  produced  that
prolonged  and  painful  operations  can  be  undergone  without  evoking  a
murmur.  Nay,  what  is  even  more  remarkable,  the  sense  of  pain  may  be
abrogated  while  other  sensations  remain  intact,  and  an  analgesia  produced
which  is  no  result  of  disease  or  disintegration,  but  apparently  the  highest
— the  most  serviceable — condition  to  which  the  organism  has  yet  been
raised.

(b)  Hypermnesia,  Manifested  in  Dreams  or  Automatisms. — The  sub-
liminal control  of  memory — of  the  stored-up  knowledge  derived  from  past
sensation — shows  a  similar  advance  upon  the  supraliminal.     To  retain  in
supraliminal  memory — or  sufficiently  near  the  threshold  to  be  summoned
at  will — even  facts  or  scenes  upon  which  we  have  deliberately  fixed  atten-

1  The  best  list  of  references  is  to  be  found  in  a  book  otherwise  of  little  value,
"  yEdoeology,"  by  S.  B.  Elliott,  M.D.,  Boston,  U.S.A.,  1893.  See  also  Professor
Macalister  on  Stigmatisation  (ad  fin.}  in  Encyclopedia  Britannica.  The  list  of  cases
has  been  much  extended  since  Professor  Macalister  wrote.


926  A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  517

tion  is  a  task  which  often  exceeds  our  powers.  But  some  reason  has  been
shown  for  believing  that  in  the  subliminal  memory  we  possess  at  least  a
much  fuller,  if  not  a  complete,  record  of  all  that  has  passed,  even,  as  we
say,  "  unnoticed,"  across  our  visual  or  auditory  field  ;  and  in  hypermnesic
dreams  and  crystal  vision  we  seem  to  peep  for  the  moment  into  a  treasure-
house  whose  existence  was  not  suspected  till  now.

There  seem,  moreover,  to  be  various  influences,  as  yet  hardly  realised
or  defined,  which  should  rather  rank  as  sensory  than  under  any  other
heading,  namely,  the  heterasthesicz  discussed  in  541.

(t)  Telepathy  ;  Veridical  Hallucinations  /  Sensory  Automatism. — And
here  we  reach  a  critical  point  in  our  series;  the  introduction,  namely,
among  phenomena  which  may  be  regarded  as  merely  extending  powers
already  known,  of  those  newly  recognised  and  manifestly  supernormal
faculties  of  telepathy  and  telaesthesia  (or  clairvoyance)  with  which  so  much
of  our  work  in  psychical  research  has  been  concerned.  Can  we  still
regard  ourselves  as  passing  only  from  one  to  another  degree  of  faculty
exercised  in  the  already  known  environment?  or  are  we  beginning  to
observe  human  faculty  operating  in  an  environment  new  to  science  ?  At
first  sight,  the  least  inconceivable  explanation  of  telepathy  might  seem  to
lie  in  assuming  a  fresh  form  of  ether-waves  which  should  carry  the  vibra-
tions of  one  brain  and  imprint  them  on  another.

I  have  already  shown  (632-634)  the  inadequacy  of  this  theory  to  ex-
plain even  many  simple  experimental  cases — still  more  cases  of  collective
percipience,  of  telepathy  from  the  dead,  and  of  the  faculties  analogous  to
telepathy  to  be  discussed  immediately, — telaesthesia  and  clairvoyance,  pre-
cognition  and  retrocognition.  We  may  still,  however,  find  some  points  of
transition  between  at  least  the  supraliminal  manifestations  of  telepathy  and
phenomena  already  known.  And  telepathy  is  thus  linked  with  the  sense-
perception  and  the  memory  which  we  have  just  been  discussing  ; — even  as
we  shall  presently  find  it  linked  with  emotion  and  will.  In  the  first  place,
the  hypercesthesia  which  I  have  claimed  for  the  subliminal  self  seems  some-
times to  pass  gradually  beyond  the  point  which  any  sensory  influence  can
be  stretched  to  cover.  We  must  then  assume  at  least  a  mingling  of
some  form  of  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge ; — telepathy  if  we
have  an  agent's  mind  already  possessed  of  that  knowledge,  telaesthesia
if  no  such  agent  can  be  suggested.

The  hypermnesia,  again,  of  which  we  were  but  now  speaking  seems  often
to  act  as  a  kind  of  nidus  for  germs  of  knowledge  borne  home  from  some
other  quarter.  In  itself  this  extension  of  subliminal  memory  is  most
significant  of  hidden  faculty.  For  the  extended  memory  itself  implies
intellectual  operation ;  it  is  not  a  mere  indiscriminating  photograph,  but
an  impressionist  or  sometimes  even  a  symbolical  picture,  where  facts  sub-
jectively important  are  brought  into  intentional  prominence.  And  that
picture — let  us  take  for  example  an  actual  picture  seen  in  a  crystal — is
selected  from  amongst  a  presumable  multitude  of  its  congeners,  and  pre-


APPENDICES  [926  A

sented  to  supraliminal  view  at  the  useful  moment.  And  often,  as  I  have
said,  among  the  contents  of  this  subliminal  memory  unexpected  items
float  up  into  cognisance ;  crystal-vision  or  hallucination  turns  out  to  be
veridical— -to  tell  truly  of  a  fact  which  no  actual  observation,  however
acute,  can  ever  have  stored  up  in  the  subliminal  memory.  We  find,  in
short,  that  the  subliminal  consciousness  does  not  only  acquire  and  retain
a  fuller  picture  of  its  material  surroundings  than  the  every  day  waking  man
can  boast,  but  also  acquires  knowledge  by  means  of  its  own,  and  especially1
by  telepathic  impression  from  other  minds.

(</)  Telasthesia  or  Clairvoyance  •  Perception  of  Distant  Scenes  ;  Retro-
cognition,  Precognition.—^te  knowledge  which  is  received  by  telepathy
is  knowledge  which  has  been  already  worked  up,  so  to  say,  into  manage-
able form  in  another  mind.  Is  it  possible  that  this  power  of  spiritual
perception  can  be  still  further  extended?  that  the  human  spirit  can
absorb  knowledge  without  the  aid  either  of  its  own  bodily  senses  or  of
other  minds?

I  believe  that  our  answer  must  be  affirmative,  and  indeed  that  this
power  of  telcesthesia  is  a  faculty  perhaps  of  wider  range  than  telepathy
itself.  Naturally,  we  cannot  always  distinguish  such  a  phenomenon  from
telepathy ;  and  in  many  cases  of  "  telepathic  clairvoyance  "  both  powers
seem  to  have  been  at  work ; — the  agent's  crisis  summoning  the  percipient's
subliminal  attention,  and  the  percipient  then  discerning  details  of  which
the  agent  was  not  himself  directly  conscious.  Such  scenes  seem  to  come
midway  between  telepathy  proper  and  the  telaesthetic  perception  of  quite
indifferent  scenes,  presented  to  the  percipient  in  waking  vision  or  crystal-
picture  or  dream,  as  it  were  at  random ; — as  though  the  casual  slipping
of  a  shutter  in  some  vast  camera  obscura  had  thrown  upon  the  mind's
receptive  surface  a  remote  and  irrelevant  segment  of  the  reflected  totality
of  things.

Nor  is  this  all.  For  it  is,  perhaps,  under  this  wide  heading  of
telsesthesia  that  mention  should  be  made  of  a  still  more  surprising  ex-
tension of  view,  from  things  distant  in  space  to  things  distant  in  time  also.
I  need  not  here  repeat  the  arguments  which  indicate  that  these  percep-
tions, although  partly  due  to  spiritual  communications,  seem  also  partly
due  to  faculties  of  the  subliminal  self.

(6)   MENTAL   EXPENDITURE;    RESPONSE  TO  STIMULI  MODIFIED   BY
SUBLIMINAL  CONTROL.

(a)  Subliminal  Ideation ;  the  Inspirations  of  Genius. — From  this  brie
review  of  the  influence  of  the  subliminal  self  on  mental  nutrition,  let
turn  to  consider  its  influence  on  mental  expenditure.     There  is,  of  c<
no  hard  and  fast  line  between  the  two,  'Eoyxev  cVepycia,  and  all  our  coi
sciousness  is  Will  in  the  making.     All   cerebration,  in   other  words,
probably  at   once  sensory   and   motor;   and  at   any  rate  when   we
dealing  with  "  subliminal  messages  "  it  must  seem  a    matter  almost


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  519

chance  whether  the  message  shall  take  the  sensory  form  of  hallucination,
visual  or  auditory,  or  the  motor  form  of  an  impulse  to  write  or  speak.
But  first  we  have  to  deal,  under  this  heading,  with  something  which  is  not
for  us  in  common  parlance  either  sensory  or  motor ; — namely,  ideation;
or  such  intra-cerebral  readjustments  as  involve  only  images  which  fall
short  of  hallucination  and  impulses  which  have  not  yet  set  the  muscles  in
action.

I  have  urged  elsewhere  (in  Chapter  III.)  that  even  our  habitual
current  of  thought  bears  abundant  testimony  to  cerebration  beneath
the  ordinary  threshold  of  consciousness.1  With  all  of  us  there  are
subliminal  uprushes — incursions  of  ideas  and  images  ready-made  and
vivid  into  the  superficial  stratum  of  more  continuous,  but  less  ardent,  less
flashing  thought.  Such  uprushes,  although  alike  in  mechanism,  leave
products  of  very  different  worth.  For  most  men  nothing  better  than  dust
and  scoriae  is  flung  up  from  the  subterranean  chambers ;  for  few  only  do
the  rock- fragments  bear  in  their  cavities  the  precious  crystals  which  have
gathered  in  hidden  laboratories  into  the  emerald's  or  the  ruby's  glow.

(b)  Motor  Automatism  ;  Concurrent  Consciousness  ;  Hyperboulia. — So
long  as  we  confine  ourselves  to  these  intra-cerebral  responses  to  external
stimuli,  we  have  no  obvious  line  to  draw  between  the  ideas  which  we
manufacture  piecemeal  above  the  threshold  and  those  which  come  to  us
ready-made  from  below.  Even  here,  no  doubt,  there  are  physiological
effects  already  indicating  an  extension  of  mental  influence  over  the  bodily
frame.  When,  in  the  poet's  words,  "  a  great  thought  strikes  along  the
brain,  and  flushes  all  the  cheek,"  the  sudden  uprush  of  ideation  has  affected
the  vaso-motor  system  in  a  way  which  we  cannot  deliberately  rival.  But
yet  this  glowing  thought  has  come  mixed  with  cooler  thoughts ;  it  runs,
so  to  say,  into  the  amalgam  of  common  life.  We  have  now  to  note  that
a  point  may  be  reached,  in  some  men  if  not  in  all,  where  the  two  streams
of  faculty  are  not  conjoint  but  concurrent;  the  subliminal  faculty  using  the
organism  in  a  separate  and  definite  manner,  in  writing,  namely,  or  speech,
which  in  reference  to  the  man's  habitual  processes  seems  automatic  or
even  quasi-external,  and  which  suggests  to  him  that  some  intelligence
other  than  his  own  must  be  moving  his  hand  or  speaking  through  his
mouth.  Sometimes,  as  I  believe,  such  an  external  intelligence  is  indeed
at  work  ;  oftener  the  man's  own  deeper  self  is  thus  acting  on  his  empirical
self,  and  writing  its  own  messages  with  the  hand  to  which  it  has,  after  all,
an  equal  claim.

1  It  may  be  worth  while  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  first  important  statement  in
English  of  the  Leibnitzian  view  of  "latent  modifications"  of  minds  occurs  in  Sir  W.
Hamilton's  "Lectures  on  Metaphysics"  (Lect.  XVIII.).  Dr.  Carpenter,  to  whom  the
theory  is  sometimes  popularly  ascribed,  added  little  except  the  term  "unconscious
cerebration."  But  in  reality  Leibnitz,  with  his  "  insensible  perceptions,"  was  nearer  the
truth  (as  I  conceive  it)  than  either  Hamilton  or  Carpenter;  for  he  did  not  explicitly
deny  accompanying  consciousness;  and  that  there  is  a  subliminal  consciousness  I  regard
(as  my  readers  know)  as  certain.


520  APPENDICES  [926  A

From  many  points  of  view  these  automatic  motor  messages  form  for
us  a  central  and  instructive  phenomenon.  In  the  first  place  it  is  obvious
that  they  are  closely  allied  with — sometimes  interchangeable  with — sensory
hallucinations.  They  thus  materially  support  the  view  that  these  phantoms
also  are  in  the  same  sense  automatic ;  that  is,  that  they  are  for  the  most
part  at  least  shaped  by  the  percipient's  own  subliminal  self,  and  presented
to  his  supraliminal  perception  as  a  method  of  informing  or  influencing
him  from  the  depths  of  his  own  being.  In  the  second  place,  they  enable
us  to  set  out  a  continuous  series  from  the  transitory  phenomena  of  hyp-
notic suggestion  at  the  one  end  to  changes  of  personality  and  "  spirit-pos-
session" at  the  other  end.  We  start,  say,  from  Edmund  Gurney's  post-
hypnotic  experiment,  where  you  tell  a  man  a  fact  in  the  trance  which  on
waking  he  forgets, — but  which  he  can  nevertheless  write  out  automatically
with  no  recognition  of  its  source.  Here  we  know  perfectly  whence  the
fact  originally  came  :  we  can  feel  sure  that  no  telepathic,  no  disembodied
influence  has  been  brought  to  bear.  Then  come  the  ordinary  mass  of
spontaneous  automatic  messages,  presumably  self-originated,  since  they
contain  no  fact  which  the  automatist  may  not  have  learnt  by  ordinary
sensory  means.  And  from  this  point  the  automatisms  may  diverge  in
several  directions.  They  may,  as  I  have  already  said,  begin  to  show
knowledge  which,  cannot  have  been  acquired  by  normal  means ; — which
seems  as  if  it  must  have  come  telepathically  from  living  men ; — or  even
knowledge  which,  alike  in  its  substance  and  in  its  lacunae,  seems  coin-
cident with  the  presumable  knowledge  and  ignorance  of  some  departed
spirit.

This  is  of  course  the  most  interesting  form  of  development.  But  the
automatisms  may  also  become  markedly  impressive  in  a  different  way.
While  still  showing  no  actual  knowledge  beyond  the  automatist's  normal
reach,  they  may  nevertheless  assume  a  character  so  distinct, — a  mode  of
self-expression  so  deeply  involving  the  entire  organism, — that  they  come
to  rank  as  new  phases  of  personality,  representing  fresh  positions  of  rela-
tive stability  into  which  the  man's  psychical  being  may  be  thrown.

And  here  again,  while  thus  led  forward  to  our  impending  notice  of
Modifications  of  Personality,  we  are  also  led  backward  to  our  previous
account  of  psycho-therapeutics  and  self-suggestion,  of  the  modification  of
physical  nutrition  by  subliminal  control.  What  we  there  described,  so  to
say,  from  the  outside,  we  are  now  regarding  from  the  inward  or  subjective
point  of  view.  For  these  motor  automatisms  pass  insensibly  into  hyper-
boulia;  that  is  to  say,  the  same  subliminal  motor  response  to  stimuli
which  guides  the  automatist's  hand  in  this  strange  fashion  is  not  limited
in  power  to  mere  writing  or  vocal  utterance ;  it  can  work  upon  stomach  or
liver  as  well  as  upon  hand  or  tongue.  It  has  overpassed  the  traditional
bounds  in  one  direction;  it  shows  next  that  it  can  overpass  them  in
another ;  it  leaves  us  asking  what  bounds  it  may  not  overpass.  Much
in  the  same  way  did  Frenchmen  once  speculate  as  to  what  causes  in  a


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  521

paper  constitution  the  First  Consul  was  likely  to  respect.  The  nerve-
system  is  a  kind  of  traditional  Constitution ;  the  Will  is  a  force  whose
strength,  whose  very  nature,  is  all  unknown.  The  Will,  we  say,  acts
directly  on  striped  muscle  and  not  on  unstriped.  What  is  this  but  a
convention  which  wills  obey  because  they  have  always  obeyed  it  ?  What
boundary  line  can  the  physiologist  draw  through  the  phenomena  of
man's  bodily  life,  assuring  us  that  here  the  purposive  must  necessarily  end,
and  the  unpurposed,  the  inevitable  begin  ?  If  Will  does  anything,  why
should  it  not  do  all?

(c)  Extradition  of  Will-power  beyond  the  Organism  ;  Telergy ;  Self-
projection. — And  if  the  despot  chooses  to  ignore  his  own  country's  Con-
stitution, what  guarantee  have  we  that  he  will  respect  treaty-obligations
abroad  ?  The  access  of  one  man  to  another,  the  power  of  one  man  over
another  is  limited,  so  to  say,  by  international  laws  so  ancient  that  no  one
dreams  of  infringing  them.  Then  suddenly — to  take  the  best-known  case
of  hypnotisation  at  a  distance — Dr.  Gibert  throws  the  absent  Leonie  into
a  trance,  and  impels  her  to  hasten  through  Havre  to  his  house.  This  is
an  invasion  of  an  independent  kingdom,  against  all  rules  of  war.  And  yet
it  finds,  as  Napoleon's  invasions  often  found,  a  party  in  the  invaded  realm
itself  which  supports  the  invader;  the  impulse  given  from  a  distance  to
Leonie's  subliminal  self  finds  something  in  that  self  not  only  competent
to  discern  it  but  willing  to  obey.

Mere  metaphor,  however,  cannot  satisfy  us  here.     We  have  reached

!  a  point  where  it  is  indispensable  that  we  should  form  at  least  some
provisional  working  conception  not  only  of  what  telepathy  is  not — but
of  what  it  possibly  may  be.  Its  laws,  we  have  concluded,  are  not  cognate
to  the  known  laws  of  the  material  world.  It  is  a  transference,  not  of  a

'  pattern  of  vibrations,  but  of  a  knowledge,  an  impulse,  which  seems  to
implant  itself  in  the  percipient's  mind  like  a  living  thing.  The  "  telepathic
impact,"  as  we  have  sometimes  called  it,  is  no  blunt  shock.  It  may  be
sudden ;  but  it  may  also  be  persistent ;  it  may  sometimes  be  overwhelming,
but  it  can  be  insinuating  too.  It  is  not  a  bolt  discharged  and  done  with  ;
it  is  a  vital  influence  at  work  on  the  percipient's  subliminal  self.

No  argument  has  been  as  yet  urged  in  this  discussion  to  show  that
man  possesses  a  spirit  which  preceded  birth  or  which  survives  death.
The  question  of  individual  pre-existence,  individual  survival,  belongs  to
a  later  stage  of  our  review  of  vital  faculty.  But,  nevertheless,  I  think
that  those  who  have  been  willing  to  go  even  thus  far  with  the  general

:  scheme  here  set  forth  will  feel  that   the  subliminal  self  whose   influence

:  over  the  organism  seems  to  be  at  once  so  latent  and  so  profound  must  be
regarded  as  something  other  than  a  mere  coenesthetic  focus.  It  must  (so
to  express  it)  be  at  least  an  earthly  soul,  a  provisional  spirit.

We  have,  then,  to  imagine  this  spirit  or  quasi-spirit  as  acting  first
normally  upon  its  own  organism  and  then  telepathically  upon  the
organisms  of  others.  How  are  we  to  conceive  it  at  work  ?  In  its  own


522  APPENDICES  [926  A

organism,  to  begin  with,  it  acts,  I  suppose,  especially  upon  the  nervous
system ; — primarily  on  the  brain.  To  act  on  the  brain — to  direct  its
thought  and  volition — the  spirit  must,  I  again  suppose,  be  able  to  modify
in  countless  ways  each  individual  cell.  And  must  not  such  a  selective  or-
directive  influence  be  intimate  enough  to  affect  severally  each  molecule
of  which  each  cell  is  composed  ?  Something  must  so  affect  them  ;  and  to
stop  short  of  this  power  for  the  spirit  would  simply  be  to  postulate  some
other  intelligence  engaged  in  preparing  the  spirit's  work.  Assuredly
neither  the  molecule  nor  the  atom  is  the  last  word  of  analysis,  as  even  the
ordinary  physicist  would  now  agree.  The  whole  process  may  be  some-
thing far  subtler  than  an  action  on  molecules ;  but  thus  much  of  subtlety
there  needs  must  be.  Selective  guidance  of  each  individual  molecule  ; —
let  us  at  least,  then,  use  this  formula  as  a  compendious  expression  for  the
entirely  interpenetrating  control  which  we  must  assume  that  a  man's  own
spirit  exercises  over  his  brain.

And  next,  in  a  case  of  telepathy,  the  agent  is  somehow  the  cause  that
the  percipient's  brain  shall  be  influenced  in  this  same  delicate,  penetrating
way.  How  shall  we  imagine  the  mechanism  of  such  influence?  Shall
we  say  that  the  spirit  of  the  agent  affects  the  spirit  of  the  percipient,  and
thus  the  spirit  of  the  percipient  influences  his  own  brain  ?  Or  shall  we
say  that  the  agent's  spirit  directly  influences  the  percipient's  brain  in  like
manner  as  it  influences  his  own  ?  There  may  seem  little  to  choose  between
two  such  unprovable  conceptions.  Yet,  looking  forward  to  evidence
which  we  shall  presently  have  to  meet,  I  think  that  the  second  alternative
should  provisionally  not  be  excluded.  For  we  shall  have  cases  where
inanimate  matter  outside  an  organism  is,  as  I  believe,  directly  affected  by
some  spirit ;  and  the  question  will  arise  whether  the  spirit  so  acting  must
necessarily  be  a  spirit  discarnate,  and  outside  the  medium,  or  may  also
possibly  be  the  medium's  own.  I  do  not  wish  to  prejudge  this  question,
as  against  the  possibility  that  the  medium's  own  spirit  may  be  the  agency
which,  in  such  a  case,  directly  affects  the  external  world ;  but  if  such  is
ever  to  be  our  explanation,  it  is  certainly  simpler  to  suppose  that  here  also
the  agent's  spirit  is  directly  affecting  the  percipient's  brain, — not  needing,
so  to  say,  to  invite  the  percipient's  own  spirit  to  accomplish  that  task.

On  this  view  we  shall  have  an  intelligible  series — though  a  series
advancing  by  leaps  and  bounds — to  represent  the  achievements  of  Will,
as  it  shakes  itself  free  from  the  limitations  which  are  but  shadows  as
contrasted  with  its  own  reality.  In  the  first  place  we  have  hyperboulia  ;—
the  extension  of  the  Will's  power  over  tissues  in  the  organism  which  its
mandates  have  ordinarily  failed  to  reach.  In  the  second  place,  we  have
telergy ; — the  extension  of  its  power  over  the  brain  molecules  of  an
organism  other  than  that  with  which  it  is  primarily  in  connection.  And
in  the  third  place  we  shall  have  "telekinesis"  and  the  like  ; — a  group  of
phenomena  involving  control  over  inorganic  matter,  and  over  organic
matter  both  within  and  without  its  own  organism.


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  523

This  last  extension,  however,  will  lead  to  our  third  category, — the
category  of  phenomena  claimed  as  controlled  by  spirits  external  to  the
agent  or  medium  himself.  Before  passing  on  to  such  matters  we  must
briefly  review  the  phases  of  personality  which  subliminal  influence  creates
or  reveals  in  the  living  or  dying  man.  We  must  thus  lead  up  to  some
comprehension  of  the  nature  of  Death,  before  we  deal  with  spirits  whom
we  assume  to  have  passed  through  that  crisis  undestroyed.

(7)    MODIFICATIONS  OF  SUBLIMINAL  PERSONALITY.

(a)  Birth;  as  Spiritual  Individuation. — With  the  profounder  con-
ception of  the  Self  which  our  inclusion  of  its  subliminal  elements  implies,
we  find  associated  profounder  severances  and  re-arrangements  in  its
constituent  elements ; — more  significant  changes,  so  to  say,  in  its  internal
configuration.  I  desire  to  compare  these  with  the  modifications  of  per-
sonality which  occur  in  ordinary  life ;  to  compare  them,  of  course,  with
the  purpose  of  ultimately  showing  that  here  also  we  are  making  a  forward
step  in  precisely  that  path  of  which  spirit-control  is  in  some  sense  the
goal.  The  first  modification  of  personality  of  which  we  have  cognisance,
the  first  on  our  former  list  of  supraliminal  changes,  was  the  crisis  of
birth.  From  our  former  point  of  view  that  crisis  was  one  of  physiological
individuation  only.  Regarding  the  organism  now  as  in  truth  an  organon
— as  an  instrument  through  which  a  spirit  essentially  distinct  therefrom
exercises  the  faculties  which  subserve  its  self-expression — we  shall  ask
ourselves  what  else  has  occurred  at  birth,  besides  the  separation  of  a  new
bud  from  the  genealogical  tree  which  is  rooted  in  earth's  prehistoric  past.
At  present  we  have  seen  reason  for  conjecturing  that  this  at  least  has
occurred  ; — the  individuation,  in  connection  with  the  organism,  of  some
form  of  spiritual  faculty , — of  faculty,  that  is  to  say,  which  must  have  been
called  into  being  in  some  other  environment,  since  the  struggle  for
existence  in  this  material  world  could  not  have  originated  or  developed
it.  Such,  as  I  have  elsewhere  urged,  are  the  faculties  concerned  in  tele-
pathy and  clairvoyance;  they  are  modes  of  perception  which  the  cor-
poreal organism  may  restrict  but  can  hardly  in  any  conceivable  way  have
evolved.  Yet  although  we  may  trace  this  one  side  of  our  lineage  to
?  spiritual  or  metetherial  world,  it  does  not  follow  that  we  can  therefore
^lairn  that  our  personalities  now  incarnated  in  these  bodies  are  the
continued  manifestation  of  personalities  which  have  already  lived  as
distinctive  entities  elsewhere,  or  which  can  survive  as  personalities  that
Dther  crisis  of  bodily  death  to  which  the  fact  of  incarnation  necessarily
exposes  them.  Let  us  see  whether  other  phases  of  terrene  personality
•;hrow  any  light  upon  this  problem.

.(<£)  Sleep  and  Trance  ;  Self-suggested  or  Telepathically-suggested  ;  with
Clairvoyant  Visions. — Parallel  with  our  heading  of  "  sleep  "  in  the  column
rf  supraliminal  faculties  we  have  the  heading  of  "  trance  "  in  the  sub-


524  APPENDICES  [926  A

liminal.  And  in  its  first  and  simplest  aspect  trance  is  suggested  sleep,—
sleep  imitated  by  the  subliminal  self  from  the  familiar  spontaneous
pattern,  but  often  improved  in  the  imitation,  both  in  restorative  efficacy
and  in  fitness  for  ends  other  than  physical  recuperation.  From  the
thought-transference  experiment  with  lightly  hypnotised  subjects  to  the
sommeil  a  distance  inspired  by  Dr.  Gibert  or  Dr.  Janet  in  "  Leonie  "  ;— -
from  the  hypersesthesia  of  some  of  M.  Binet's  subjects  to  the  "  travelling
clairvoyance"  of  "Jane"  (573  B)  we  find  each  supernormal  faculty  in
turn  facilitated  by  the  abeyance  of  man's  habitual  attention  to  the  stimuli
of  the  material  world.  The  degree  to  which  this  protection  from  intrusive
thought,  or  intrusive  pain,  may  be  carried  is  hardly  yet  explored  ;  but  the
same  abstraction  which  is  enough  to  induce  in  many  subjects  a  complete
indifference  to  severe  surgical  operations,  may  perhaps  hereafter  be
utilised  to  assist  in  securing  undisturbed  intensity  of  thought.

And  in  the  meantime  most  of  these  states  of  sleep  or  trance  present
an  unsolicited  crop  of  ideas  and  pictures  of  their  own.  All  dreams,
indeed,  according  to  my  definition,  are  properly  subliminal ;  they  do  not
belong  to  the  superficial  memory,  although  they  lie  so  close  to  it  that
they  may  get  included  in  it  by  a  sort  of  accident.  They  are  bubbles
breaking  upon  that  surface  from  the  deep  below.  It  is  natural,  therefore,
that  this  easiest  method  of  communication  should  be  taken  advantage  of
by  the  subliminal  self  to  send  upward  messages  of  deeper  import.  All
the  newly-noted  forms  of  faculty  which  we  have  already  touched  upon
find  expression  either  in  dreams  or  in  the  sleep- waking  intervals  which  are
a  kind  of  transitory  emergences  into  a  condition  on  the  other  side  of
sleep.  Hypermnesia  is  oftenest  shown  in  dreams,  and  clairvoyance  in
the  sleep-waking  or  somnambulic  stage  of  hypnotic  trance.  In  dreams
also  retrocognition  and  precognition  are  manifested ;  faculties  which,
since  their  origin  is  obscure,  I  am  now  claiming  solely  for  the  unaided
subliminal  self.

(c~)  Ecstasy. — Under  this  heading  I  include  experiences  where  the
subliminal  self  in  trance  changes  its  environment  and  passes  for  a  time
into  the  spiritual  world,  retaining  such  relations  to  the  organism  as  enable
it  to  return  to  its  ordinary  condition.

(d)  Death  ;  as  Irrevocable  Self-projection  of  the  Spirit. — Then  when  the
last  change  comes,  and  we  ask  ourselves  with  what  added  ground  for
speculation  we  now  strain  our  gaze  beyond  that  obscurest  crisis,  we  find,
I  think,  two  considerations  which  the  study  of  subliminal  powers  has
suggested ;  one  of  them  in  harmony  with  the  highest  thought  of  philo-
sopher and  poet ;  the  other,  not  indeed  positively  inconsistent  there-
with, but  still  recalling  us  to  the  psychology  of  the  Stone  Age,  and  the
crude  animism  of  hardly  human  men.

For  first  we  shall  say  that  in  estimating  what  there  is  in  our  being
which  may  conceivably  survive  the  tomb,  we  can  now  claim  to  have  dis-
cerned something  within  us  which  belongs  to  an  environment  which  is


)26A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  525

exempt  from  earthly  conditions,  and  which  may  antecede  at  once  and
nterpenetrate  our  material  scheme  of  things.  Those  ancient  views,  there-
fore, which  represent  the  soul's  immortality  as  determined  by  its  very
nature  and  origin  find  themselves  now  as  never  before  supported  and  rein-
rorced.

I  refer  especially  to  such  cases  as  those  described  in  Chapter  VI.  of
'projection  of  thought,"  or — as  I  there  called  it — "psychical  invasion,"
#hich  show  some  kind  of  energy  or  perception  exercised  by  the  spirit  at
ji  distance  from  its  physical  base  of  operation, — telepathically  upon  other
rninds,  telaesthetically  in  other  parts  of  space.  In  "  telepathic  clairvoyance,' '
;he  percipient  seems  to  himself  to  be  present  in  the  scene  where  the  so-
:alled  agent  actually  is  at  the  time.  And  in  reciprocal  cases,  not  only  is
:he  percipient  conscious  of  invading  the  agent's  presence,  but  the  latter  is
.n  some  way  aware  of  the  invasion.  Further,  the  descriptions  of  several
^ases  of  experimental  self- projection  concur  in  the  impression  felt  of
spiritual  transportation,  of  tethering  connection  with  the  body,  of  return
;hereinto  with  a  shock.1  And  two  narratives  of  animation  suspended  to
he  verge  of  death  (Dr.  Wiltse  and  M.  Bertrand,  see  713  A) ,  have  dwelt
n  that  crisis  as  an  apparent  escape  of  the  spirit  from  the  body,  to  which
t  is  ultimately  retracted  by  a  remaining  psychical  link  of  attachment.
These  cases  begin  like  some  of  the  cases  which  we  class  as  "  hallucinations
experimentally  produced  "  ;  they  remind  us,  as  they  proceed,  of  narratives
,}f  "  travelling  clairvoyance  "  ;  and  they  reach  a  point  where  the  new
:entre  of  perception  seems  within  an  ace  of  altogether  superseding  the
rid.

These  singular  and  possibly  purely  subjective  cases  are  no  actual  proof
,:>f  anything  whatever.  But  they  deserve  notice  here,  where  we  are  taking
stock  of  any  such  indications  of  the  true  nature  of  death  as  can  be
gathered  from  evidence  which  does  not  even  pretend  to  come  from
departed  spirits,  or  to  rest  on  anything  beyond  the  personal  experience
}f  living  men.

"EO-O-VT  €7retyo/x evrj — "  with  a  rush  it  hurried  forth  " — says  Homer  of  the
.ssuing  spirit, — whose  significance  for  him  still  hung  between  breath  and
wul.  Homer  may  be  too  old  a  witness,  and  Dr.  Wiltse  too  new;  but,
.ndeed,  what  other  intelligible  conception  can  we  find  in  the  ages  between
:hem  ?  What,  save  the  ghastly  monkish  dream — ghastly  though  enshrined,
,u.his  also,  in  world-shaking  verse — of  the  sleep  in  the  charnel-house,  and
;the  trump  that  echoes  per  sepulcra  regionum  and  summons  into  a  new
concretion  the  dust  of  the  dead  ?

At  least  we  have  done  with  that ;  and,  pausing  here  before  we  review
,such  evidence  as  may  seem  to  have  come  to  us  from  behind  the  veil,  we
may  at  least  feel  that  it  is  a  spiritual  entity  and  not  a  re-integrated
skeleton,  which  we  now  follow  with  dim  anticipation  upon  its  unknown
solitary  way.

1  See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  29,  and  pp.  270  sqq.


526  APPENDICES  [926A


III.    THIRD  SERIES: — PHENOMENA  CLAIMED  AS  SPIRITUALLY  CONTROLLED.

(i)  Subliminal  Consciousness,  Discerning  and  Influenced  by  Disem-
bodied Spirits  in  a  Spiritual  World  ;  who  Co-operate  in  Producing  Objective
Phenomena. — And  here  at  last  we  have  reached  the  point  where  we  should
begin  to  reap  the  benefit  of  this  long  introduction.  In  entering  on  the
third  of  our  parallel  series — that  to  which  the  other  two  have  been  intended
to  lead  up, — our  scheme,  that  is  to  say,  of  vital  faculty  as  observed  under
the  control  of  some  spiritual  agency,  we  are  not  now  plunging  into  a  chaos
of  entirely  new  problems.  Most  of  those  problems,  although  of  course  not
solved,  have  at  least  been  already  stated,  in  some  similar  form ;  and  at ;
each  point  we  shall  be  taking  up  a  line  of  thought  on  which  we  have  made
some  beginning.

We  have,  then,  to  deal  with  the  human  spirit  under  new  conditions ;
as  brought  into  immediate  relations  with  the  spiritual  world.  We  shall  be
concerned  primarily  with  the  subliminal  consciousness ;  for  it  is  in  that
region  that  the  link  of  union  lies ;  and  many  of  the  phenomena  are  dis-
cernible to  the  "purged  eye"  of  so-called  clairvoyance  alone.  But
nevertheless  this  commerce  with  disembodied  spirits,  like  commerce
with  embodied  spirits,  affects  man's  whole  being ;  and  we  shall  have  to
discuss  many  phenomena  of  an  absolutely  objective  kind.

In  one  way,  indeed,  to  get  on  to  direct  spirit-intercourse  from  the
obscure  subliminal  phenomena  which  we  have  till  now  been  discussing  is
a  sort  of  emergence  into  a  clearer  air.  What  we  have  dimly  inferred
now  plainly  asserted ;  what  we  have  conjectured  among  contending  possi-
bilities is  now  set  plainly  before  us.  We  are  in  the  position  in  which  a
tadpole  would  be  who  had  learned  theoretically  that  what  he  was  breath-
ing in  his  pond  was  not  the  water  but  the  oxygen  dissolved  therein ;  anc
who  then  should  have  it  granted  to  him  to  raise  his  head  above  water,  anc
to  perceive  frogs  and  other  animals  respiring  the  translucid  air.  So,  foi
us  too,  the  metetherial  element  has  thus  far  been  dissolved  amid  materia
things ;  we  are  now  to  come  in  contact  with  beings  for  whom  that  hypo-
thetical environment  is  the  natural  and  predestined  home.

Before  we  go  into  detail,  let  us  reflect  for  a  moment  on  the  fact  that
such  intercourse  should  be  possible.  Given  the  fact  of  telepathy,  neec
this  be  a  surprise?  We  have  seen  that  the  existence  of  such  a  form  o:
metetherial  energy  involved  in  human  life,  though  it  cannot  actually  prove
the  spirit's  survival,  yet  suggests  it  so  strongly  that  evidence  to  surviva
from  other  quarters  need  no  longer  seem  hard  to  reconcile  with  the  known
scheme  of  things.  And  if  survival  there  be,  then  the  fact  that  spirits
should  influence  men  will  certainly  not  in  itself  be  surprising.  It  will
seem  now  no  isolated  or  unique  phenomenon,  but  the  inevitable  deduction
from  a  universal  law.  That  law  is  the  direct  transmission  of  thought  and
emotion  from  mind  to  mind,  and  the  telergy — to  use  here  a  word  more
active  in  its  connotation  than  telepathy — the  telergy  by  which  this  trans-


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  527

mission  is  effected  may  be  as  universally  diffused  in  the  metetherial  world
as  heat  in  the  material.

(2)  PHYSICAL  NUTRITION  MODIFIED  BY  SPIRIT- CONTROL.

(a)  Spirit- suggestion  ;  Psycho- therapeutics. — To  the  limiting  conditions
under  which  this  energy  reaches  the  chosen  sensitive  among  the  mass  of
men,  we  shall  have  to  return  hereafter.     It  will  be  well  to  proceed  first  to
trace  some  of  the  effects  of  that  "  control,"  or  intercourse,  under  the  same
series  of  headings  which  we  have  now  twice  already  pursued.

First,  then,  as  to  the  effects  of  spirit-control  on  bodily  nutrition.
Obviously  if  we  are  agreed  in  thinking  that  the  suggestion  of  a  living
hypnotiser  is  virtually  nothing  more  than  a  hint  somehow  conveyed  to  the
self- suggestive  powers  of  the  patient,  it  will  not  be  easy  to  be  sure  that  a
spirit's  alleged  command  or  benediction,  or  promise  of  cure,  is  really
operating  otherwise  than  as  a  similar  stimulus  to  something  which  is  really
done  by  the  patient  himself.  In  Mr.  Moses'  case  there  were  assurances
given  that  his  physical  condition  was  often  benefited  by  spirit- power ;  but
in  the  few  definite  instances  which  he  records  of  a  healing  effect,  it  is  to
actual  touches  and  strokings — like  mesmeric  passes — that  the  benefit  is
ascribed.  Similar  experiences  are  attributed  to  D.  D.  Home.  We  shall
have  something  more  to  say  of  this  mesmerisation  later  on ;  and  also  of
that  form  of  psycho-therapeutic  which  consists  in  a  clairvoyant  diagnosis
alleged  to  be  given  by  a  spirit,  and  followed  perhaps  by  advice  avowedly
based  upon  a  recollection  of  earthly  learning.

(b)  Stigmatisation. — The  agency  of  spirits  in  the  production  of  stigma-
tisation  is  open  to  the  same  kind  of  doubt.     Religious  stigmata,  indeed,  as
following  upon  more  intense  feeling  than  mere  experimental  stigmata  (such
as  suggested  blisters  resembling  some  letter  of  the  alphabet)  seem  even
more  manifestly  connected  with   the   workings  of  the  addolorata? s  own
spirit.     Mr.  Moses  has  three  curious  cases.     In  one  of  them  the  mere
written  suggestion  of  a  spirit  is  followed  by  the  appearance  of  letters  on
his  arm, — resembling,  apparently,  the  linear  wheals  which  follow  a  line
drawn  with  the  finger-nail  in  some  cases  of  nettlerash,  and  which  depend
on  a  slight  diffusion  of  serum  beneath  the  skin.     In   another   case  an
erythematous  patch  on  the  forehead  follows  on  a  perhaps  imaginary  touch
during  a  dream  or  vision.     In  a  third  case  what  seems  to  have  been  a
real  touch  at  a  stance  breaks  the  skin,  and  leaves  an  inflamed  wound.

It  is  noticeable,  with  regard  to  what  will  follow  later,  that  something
like  actual  material  contact  should  sometimes  be  insisted  upon,  as  appears
from  Mr.  Moses'  records,  in  the  production  by  spirits  of  a  phenomenon
which  we  have  seen  the  subliminal  self  produce  with  no  material  inter-
vention.

(c)  Novel  and  Purposive  Metastasis  of  Secretion. — Except,  however,
for  this  insistence  on  actual   touch,  the   stigmatic  phenomena  have  thus
far  followed  the  now  well-known  type.     Yet  it  may  occur  to  us    to  ask


528  APPENDICES  [926  A

whether  spirits  acting  thus  on  the  organism,  and  endowed  with  the  more
intimate  insight  into 'the  molecular  constitution  of  things  with  which
I  have  credited  them,  could  not  go  further  still,  and  split  up  the  proteids
of  the  body  in  some  unfamiliar  way.  These  are,  of  course,  complex
enough  to  be  split  up,  not  only  into  the  various  proximate  elements,
normal  or  pathological,  which  have  already  been  detected  in  the  body,
but  into  an  indefinite  number  of  other  compounds  as  well.  It  may  be
said,  indeed,  that  novel  products  of  proteid  decomposition,  even  if  they
could  be  produced,  would  escape  recognition  save  by  the  accomplished
chemist.  There  is,  however,  one  of  our  senses  which  in  certain  directions
can  even  outmatch  in  delicacy  the  chemist's  skill.  And  there  is  in
animal  bodies  an  unexhausted  reservoir  of  potential  odours  capable
of  stimulating  this  sense  to  the  full.  Where  the  skunk  is  possible,  all
is  possible ;  and  it  need  not  be  a  hopeless  task  to  draw  from  the  human
organism  fragrances  which  may  bear  to  skunk  or  musk-rat  the  relation
which  the  most  delicate  tint  of  mauve  bears  to  the  original  tar.  On  one
secretion  in  particular  Professor  Ramsay,  F.R.S.,  has  favoured  me  with
the  following  remarks  :  "  Perspiration  consists  of  caproate  of  glyceryl,
mixed  with  the  free  acid,  I  believe.  It  does  not  smell  nice ;  but  pure
caproates  are  very  fragrant  if  the  right  alcoholic  base  is  combined.  I  fancy
that  woodruffe  and  verbena  are  of  the  nature  of  turpentine,  and  have
probably  the  same  percentage  composition.  However,  so  far  as  I  know,
they  have  not  been  investigated."

Bearing  all  this  in  mind,  let  us  return  to  certain  passages  which  have
perhaps  hitherto  seemed  among  the  most  grotesque  and  incredible  which
the  records  of  Mr.  Moses*  stances  contain.  I  refer  to  the  frequently
attested  welling  or  stillation  of  various  "  liquid  scents,"  mainly  verbena
and  woodruffe,  and  on  one  occasion  at  least  altering  on  request,  from
a  circumscribed  patch  on  the  top  of  Mr.  Moses'  head.  The  guides
affirm  that  this  secretion  is  restorative ;  and  on  one  occasion  especially,
when  Mr.  Moses  is  tried  and  depressed  by  sitting  long  amidst  a  rough
crowd,  it  is  stated  that  the  scent  is  produced  and  evaporated  in  un-
usual quantities  in  order  to  protect  him  from  the  exhausting  influence  of
his  surroundings.1

i  I  may  give  here  another  instance  of  this  phenomenon,  contributed  by  Mr.  J.  F.
Collingwood  to  Light  of  November  2nd,  1892.  "  I  was  one  evening  sitting  with  him,"
says  Mr.  Collingwood,  "  when  he  complained  of  not  feeling  well.  I  perceived  a  very
sweet  perfume,  and  remarked,  as  it  increased,  '  What  a  delicious  scent !  Where  does
it  come  from  ? '  '  From  me,  the  top  of  my  head,'  he  replied.  I  felt  the  crown,  which
was  wet  with  a  pleasant  odorous  substance.  I  dipped  the  corner  of  my  handkerchief
in  it,  and  kept  it  for  months  hardly  diminished  in  potency.  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  told
me  that  the  development  of  these  perfumes  was  intended  as  a  healing  process,  and  he
was  often  relieved  in  that  way."  It  may  be  observed  that  circumscribed  patches  of
hyperidrosis  occasionally  occur  on  the  scalp ;  so  that  we  have  here,  in  my  view,  an
evolutive  phenomenon  taking  the  same  form  as  a  morbid  or  dissolutive  one.  It  should
be  added  that  in  bromidrosis  the  odour  has  been  in  various  cases  compared  to  that  of
various  flowers  and  fruits.  —  (Hyde's  Diseases  of  the  Skin,  p.  102.)


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  529

The  reader  will  readily  see  the  interpretation  which,  in  my  view,
these  facts  must  receive.  I  regard  the  disembodied  spirit's  influence
on  the  organism  as  more  instructed,  so  to  say,  than  the  influence  of
the  subliminal  self; — just  as  the  influence  of  the  subliminal  self  is
more  instructed  than  that  of  the  supraliminal.  Where  the  one  can
adapt,  the  other  can  originate ;  where  the  subliminal  self  can  reproduce
by  a  novel  method  the  secretion  which  the  organism  has  already  learnt
to  form,  the  other  can  compose  a  fresh  secretion,  with  a  definite  aim.

A  definite  aim,  I  say,  speaking  at  present  of  the  odoriferous  and
recognisable  character  alone.  But  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  secre-
tion may  have  had  a  therapeutic  value  as  well.  It  may  conceivably  have
carried  off  waste  products  more  effectively  than  the  ordinary  perspiration
of  which  it  seems  to  have  been  a  modified  form.

However  this  may  be,  the  above  brief  discussion  may  have  suggested
to  us  that  it  is  by  the  comparative  method  here  adopted  that  we  have  the
best  chance  of  bringing  these  grotesque  marvels  into  some  true  analogy
with  experiments  already  known  to  science.

(3)   PHYSICAL  EXPENDITURE  MODIFIED  BY  SPIRIT-CONTROL.

(a)  Mechanical  Efficiency  Increased  and  Fulcrum  Displaced. — Having
thus  dealt  briefly  with  spirit-influence  as  exercised  upon  the  processes  of
nutrition,  let  us  go  on  to  consider  in  what  way  this  influence  seems  to
affect  the  output  of  energy, — streaming  from  the  organism  into  the
molecular  or  the  etherial  world.  And,  first,  let  us  consider  mechanical
work  done  in  simple,  molar  form — the  movements  of  heavy  untouched
objects  which  recur  so  habitually  in  records  such  as  these.  When  we
hear  of  such  a  movement  we  ask  ourselves  whether  it  can  be  shown  to  be
consistent  with  the  ordinary  mechanical  law  of  action  and  reaction,  and
with  the  wider  generalisation  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  Where  is  the
fulcrum?  How  great,  and  whence  derived,  is  the  energy  employed?
The  question  of  the  fulcrum  might  conceivably  be  settled  by  actual
experiment.  In  its  present  condition  it  forms  part  of  the  more  general
problem  of  so-called  "  ectoplasy,"  or  extrusion  from  the  organism  of  vital
energy,  which  will  be  considered  under  a  later  heading.  As  to  the  source
of  the  energy,  we  must  needs  suppose  that  to  be  in  the  organism  of  the
medium,  unless  it  should  be  shown  to  exceed  any  amount  of  which  we
can  suppose  his  organism  capable.  At  first  sight  it  has  sometimes  seemed
(as  with  D.  D.  Home)  to  exceed  this  amount.  But  in  our  estimation  we
must  bear  in  mind  that  (as  was  said  above)  an  increase  of  at  least
momentary  muscular  power  may  come  from  one  of  two  causes — may  be
either  the  result  of  integration  or  the  concomitant  of  disintegration.  As
the  concomitant  of  disintegration,  in  hysteria  or  mania,  the  symptom  is
a  familiar  one,  and  indicates  the  unequal  conservation  of  efferent  and
inhibitory  stimuli.  A  reckless  order—as  for  a  Balaclava  charge — is  given  to
the  muscles,  and  there  is  no  wise  superior  officer  to  countermand  or  restrain.
VOL.  ii.  2  L


530  APPENDICES  [926  A

But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  weakness  of  the  general,  while  it  permits
of  rashness  in  the  army  which  has  got  out  of  hand,  may  also  fail  to  utilise
the  healthy  ardour  of  an  obedient  host.  The  strong-willed,  educated
savant  can  sometimes  compress  the  dynamometer  more  forcibly  than  the
robust  ploughman ; — not  because  his  hands  are  stronger,  but  because  he
can  at  a  given  moment  throw  a  greater  proportion  of  his  total  energy  into
them.  How  far  such  increase  of  power  might  go  we  know  not.  The
limit  of  the  force  which  human  muscles  could  theoretically  exert  is  far
from  being  reached  in  common  life.

If,  then,  it  is  asked  whether  these  phenomena  appear  to  transgress  the
law  of  Conservation  of  Energy,  we  can  affirm  that  they  do  not, — in  the
sense  that  the  work  done,  so  far  as  measurable  in  foot-pounds,  does  not
manifestly  exceed  the  work  which  the  sensitive's  organism,  could  we
suppose  it  handled  as  a  familiar  instrument  by  a  mind  completely  under-
standing it,  could  probably  accomplish  without  permanent  injury.  And
we  may  add  that,  according  to  statements  made  by  the  controls  in  Mr.
Moses'  and  other  cases,  some  of  the  force  thus  used  is  taken  from  other
persons  present ;  in  which  case  there  would  probably  be  an  ample  surplus,
after  all  the  recorded  feats  had  been  performed.

But  the  possible  satisfaction — in  some  obscure  manner — of  the  law  of
Conservation  of  Energy  brings  us  but  little  nearer  to  a  justification  of  the
alleged  phenomena.  We  do  not  know,  in  fact,  how  much  energy  such
phenomena  would  need,  for  no  amount  of  energy,  applied  in  any  way
known  to  ourselves,  could  possibly  produce  them.

(b)  Control over  Individual Material Molecules  ;  Resulting  in  Abroga-
tion of  Ordinary  Thermal  Laws,  and  in  Aggregation  and  Disaggregation
of  Matter. — These  novel  dealings  with  matter,  while  very  various  in  char-
acter, are  all  of  them  such  as  to  suggest  that  here  also  the  agent  (though
perhaps  not  consciously)  is  acting  upon  molecules  and  not  upon  masses;
here,  also,  in  the  inanimate  and  inorganic  world,  just  as  it  seemed  to  me
might  be  the  case  in  spirit-action  upon  a  living  brain.

Let  us  consider  for  a  moment  the  advance  in  power  over  nature  which
such  a  mode  of  action  would  imply.

Habitually  we  deal  with  matter  in  a  molar  manner ;  taking  little  or  no
account  of  the  molecular  changes  involved  in  the  execution  of  our  molar
designs.  Since  the  rise  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases — say  for  this  last
half-century — we  have  also  been  able  to  deal  with  matter  molecularly,  but
merely  (as  Maxwell  expresses  it)  in  statistical  fashion ; — dealing  with
molecules  in  immense  numbers,  and  achieving  results  which,  though  far
more  delicate  and  penetrating  than  any  molar  results  could  be,  must
nevertheless  seem  rude  and  wholesale  to  any  intelligence  which  can
actually  discern  the  molecules  which  we  merely  infer.  "  Our  actual
knowledge  of  concrete  things,"  says  Maxwell,1  "is  of  an  essentially
statistical  nature,  because  no  one  has  yet  discovered  any  practical

1  Theory  of  Heat,  chap.  xxii.


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  531

method  of  tracing  the  path  of  a  molecule,  or  of  identifying  it  at  different
times."

The  mathematical  physicist  and  the  chemist,  in  fact,  have  somewhat
the  same  sort  of  knowledge  of  their  molecules  that  the  Registrar-General
has  of  the  population.  So  much  hydrogen  combining  with  so  much
oxygen  will  make  water ;  explode  them  together  and  you  get  your  drop ;
but  who  can  say  which  hydrogen-atom  will  combine  with  a  given  atom  of
oxygen?  "  There  will  be  about  so  many  marriages  next  year,"  says  the
Registrar-General ;  but  he  perforce  leaves  the  individual  brides  and  bride-
grooms to  sort  themselves.  To  foresee  or  to  guide  the  affinities  of  each
several  molecule  would  be  for  the  physicist  as  great  a  step  in  advance  as
it  would  be  for  the  Registrar-General  could  he  foresee  or  guide  every
impulse  to  wedlock  in  the  United  Kingdom.

Assume,  then,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  a  power  like  this.  Assume
that  we  can  distinctly  see  and  easily  deal  with  each  of  the  countless
millions  of  molecules  contained  in  a  single  room.  We  see  them  dis-
tinguished one  from  another  by  speed,  by  direction  of  movement,  by  size,
by  complexity,  by  intrinsic  vibration ; — this  last  difference  corresponding
to  what  we  deem  difference  of  elemental  constitution.  We  can  therefore
direct  or  combine  all  these  as  we  will.  We  can,  for  instance,  to  take  one
of  the  phenomena  here  recorded,  disequalise  the  temperature  of  two  parts
of  a  closed  chamber  by  directing  the  swiftly- moving  molecules  to  one  side
of  an  imaginary  partition,  the  more  slowly-moving  to  the  other,  and  thus
making  the  belts  of  cooler  and  warmer  air  of  which  Mr.  Moses  tells  us.
But  here  I  pause ;  for  the  argument  has  reached  a  point  where  it  is  liable
to  attack  on  two  opposite  sides.  On  the  one  side  it  will  be  regarded  as
intolerably  novel  and  extravagant ;  while  on  the  other  side  it  will  be  set
down  as  the  mere  plagiarism  of  a  familiar  physical  speculation.  It  was,
in  fact,  at  about  this  point  of  an  argument  which,  as  the  reader  has  seen,
had  led  me  by  a  vital  or  psychological  rather  than  by  a  physical  road  to
this  conception  of  selective  molecular  action,  that  it  became  plain  to  me
that  Professor  Clerk  Maxwell's  Sorting  Demons  had  been  already  trained
— if  I  may  so  say — to  the  very  performances  which  I  was  now  ascribing  to
spirit-power.  The  reader  has  probably  already  recollected  these  imaginary
creatures ;  invented  by  the  great  physicist  to  illustrate  a  process  by  which
it  would  be  theoretically  possible  to  arrest  the  dissipation  of  energy  and
to  disequalise  anew  the  temperature  of  the  Universe.  I  turned  to  Lord
Kelvin's  Popular  Lectures  and  Addresses,  vol.  i.  p.  144,  for  the  fullest
description  of  the  natural  history  of  this  minutest  species  of  Chimsera, —
bombitans  in  vacuo  to  some  purpose  now  !  I  found  what  virtually  amounts
to  an  explanation,  on  this  hypothesis,  of  most  of  the  phenomena  of  Mr.
Moses'  stances,  so  far  as  concerned  with  inanimate  matter.

He  is  a  being  (says  Lord  Kelvin,  of  Maxwell's  Demon)  with  no  preter-
natural qualities,  and  differs  from  real  living  animals  only  in  extreme  smallness
and  agility.  He  can  at  pleasure  stop,  or  strike,  or  push,  or  pull  any  single


532  APPENDICES  [926  A

atom  of  matter,  and  so  moderate  its  natural  course  of  motion.  Endowed
ideally  with  arms  and  hands  and  fingers — two  hands  and  ten  fingers
suffice — he  can  do  as  much  for  atoms  as  a  pianoforte  player  can  do  for
the  keys  of  tht  piano — just  a  little  more,  he  can  push  and  pull  each  atom  in
any  direction.

He  cannot  create  or  annul  energy;  but  just  as  a  living  animal  does,  he  can
store  up  limited  quantities  of  energy,  and  reproduce  them  at  will.  By  operating
selectively  on  individual  atoms  he  can  reverse  the  natural  dissipation  of  energy,
can  cause  one  half  of  a  closed  jar  of  air,  or  of  a  bar  of  iron,  to  become  glowing
hot,  and  the  other  ice-cold;  can  direct  the  energy  of  the  moving  molecules  of
a  basin  of  water  to  throw  the  water  up  to  a  height,  and  leave  it  there  pro-
portionately cooled  (i  deg.  Fahrenheit  for  772  ft.  of  ascent);  can  "sort"  the
molecules  in  a  solution  of  salt  or  in  a  mixture  of  two  gases,  so  as  to  reverse  the
natural  process  of  diffusion,  and  produce  concentration  of  the  solution  in  one
portion  of  the  water,  leaving  pure  water  in  the  remainder  of  the  space  occupied ;
or  in  the  other  case  separate  the  gases  into  different  parts  of  the  containing
vessel.  The  classification,  according  to  which  the  ideal  demon  is  to  sort  them,
may  be  according  to  the  essential  character  of  the  atom  ;  for  instance,  all
atoms  of  hydrogen  to  be  let  go  to  the  left,  or  stopped  from  crossing  to  the  right,
across  an  ideal  boundary ;  or  it  may  be  according  to  the  velocity  each  atom
chances  to  have  when  it  approaches  the  boundary— if  greater  than  a  certain
stated  amount  it  is  to  go  to  the  right ;  if  less,  to  the  left.  This  latter  rule  of
assortment,  carried  into  execution  by  the  demon,  disequalises  temperature  and
undoes  the  natural  diffusion  of  heat — the  former  undoes  the  natural  diffusion
of  matter.  By  a  combination  of  the  two  processes  the  demon  can  decompose
water  or  carbonic  acid,  first  raising  a  portion  of  the  compound  to  dissociational
temperature  (that  is,  temperature  so  high  that  the  collisions  shatter  the  com-
pound molecules  to  atoms),  and  then  sending  the  oxygen  atoms  this  way,  and
the  hydrogen  or  carbon  that  way ;  or  he  may  affect  decomposition  against
chemical  affinity  otherwise  thus  :  Let  him  take  in  a  small  store  of  energy  by
resisting  the  mutual  approach  of  two  compound*  molecules,  letting  them  press
as  it  were  on  his  two  hands,  and  store  up  energy  as  in  a  bent  spring  ;  then  let
him  apply  the  two  hands  between  the  oxygen  and  the  double  hydrogen
constituents  of  a  compound  molecule  of  vapour  of  water,  and  tear  them
asunder.  He  may  repeat  this  process  until  a  considerable  proportion  of  the
whole  number  of  compound  molecules  in  a  given  quantity  of  vapour  of  water,
given  in  a  fixed  closed  vessel,  are  separated  into  oxygen  and  hydrogen  at  the
expense  of  energy  taken  from  translational  motions.1

Let  us  then  consider  with  what  degree  of  success  a  well-trained  demon

1  Having  appealed  to  Lord  Kelvin's  authority  in  the  above  discussion,  I  feel  bound
at  once  to  add  that  no  one  would  probably  be  less  willing  than  the  illustrious  author
himself  to  sanction  the  use  which  I  proceed  to  make  of  his  brilliant  conceptions.  In  a
lecture,  delivered  1883,  and  republished  1891,  in  the  second  edition  of  Popular  Lectures
and  Addresses  (Nature  Series),  vol.  i.  p.  265,  Lord  Kelvin  gives  his  view  on  our  whole
range  of  subjects  with  perfect  clearness.

"  Now  I  have  hinted  at  a  possible  seventh  sense — a  magnetic  sense — and  though
out  of  the  line  I  propose  to  follow,  and  although  time  is  precious,  and  does  not  permit
much  of  digression,  I  wish  just  to  remove  the  idea  that  I  am  in  any  way  suggesting  any-
thing towards  that  wretched  superstition  of  animal  magnetism,  and  table-turning,  and
spiritualism,  and  mesmerism,  and  clairvoyance,  and  spirit-rapping,  of  which  we  have


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  533

from  Lord  Kelvin's  laboratory  could  have  acquitted  himself  at  a  seance
of  Mr.  Moses'  or  of  D.  D.  Home's.

He  can  cause  one  half  of  a  closed  jar  of  air  or  of  a  bar  of  iron  to
become  glowing  hot,  and  the  other  ice-cold.

Here  at  once  he  scores  a  success  which  will  make  him  an  almost
unique  "  mediumistic  "  reputation.  Among  modern  civilised  mediums  at
any  rate — whatever  may  be  the  case  in  savage  countries — Home  is  the
only  one  who  has  obtained  the  fire-test  under  good  observation.  When
he  put  his  own  head  in  the  glowing  fire,  or  handed  blazing  coals  to  the
company  in  a  lady's  pocket  handkerchief,  as  described  by  Sir  William
Crookes,  Lord  Crawford,  and  others,  all  he  needed  was  the  familiar
demon  who  took  care  that  between  the  glow  and  the  handkerchief  there
should  always  be  a  layer  of  slowly- moving,  cool,  fresh,  carbon-molecules,
while  the  frenzied  spinning  carbon-molecules  at  a  red  heat  were  kept
easily  and  completely  within  their  imaginary  wall.  Having  accomplished
this,  it  would  be  mere  child's  play  for  our  demon  to  disequalise  the
temperature  of  Dr.  Speer's  study,  and  to  produce  the  alternate  belts  of
cold  and  warm  air  of  which  Mr.  Moses  has  told  us  above.  The  recorded
fall  of  six  degrees  in  the  minimum  thermometer,  and  the  cold  winds  over
heads  and  hands,  would  be  trifling  examples  of  the  same  power.

He  can  direct  the  energy  of  the  moving  molecules  of  a  basin  of  water  to
throw  the  water  up  to  a  height  and  leave  it  there  proportionately  cooled.

Grant  him  liquid  scent,  then,  of  which  more  presently,  and  he  can
make  it  fall  in  cool  dew  from  the  ceiling  as  easily  as  not.  Or  he  may
have  been  at  work  when  the  following  incident,  testified  to  by  Lord
Dunraven,  occurred  with  Home.  (Experiences  in  Spiritualism,  p.  77.)
"  He  then  again  raised  the  glass  [of  brandy]  over  his  head,  and  the  liquid
was  withdrawn.  He  then  told  me  to  come  and  hold  my  hand  above  the
glass ;  I  did  so,  and  the  liquid  fell  over  and  through  my  fingers  into  the
glass,  dropping  from  the  air  above  me."

He  can  sort  the  molecules  in  a  solution  of  salt,  so  as  to  reverse  the  natural
process  of  diffusion,  and  produce  concentration  of  the  solution  in  one  portion
of  the  water,  leaving  pure  water  in  the  remainder  of  the  space  occupied.

He  could,  then,  have  continued  the  little  experiment  described  above.

heard  so  much.  There  is  no  seventh  sense  of  the  mystic  kind.  Clairvoyance,  and  the
like,  are  the  result  of  bad  observation  chiefly,  somewhat  mixed  up,  however,  with  the
effects  of  wilful  imposture,  acting  on  an  innocent,  trusting  mind."

If,  as  to  my  innocent,  trusting  mind  seems  not  impossible,  the  time  should  some  day
come  when  critics  shall  say  of  these  Proceedings  that  they  have  merely  brought  out  as
novelties  things  which  every  one  already  knew,  it  may  be  of  interest  to  refer  to  this

.  utterance  of  the  President  of  the  Royal  Society,  and  foremost  savant  of  Great  Britain.
And  if,  as  I  also  conjecture,  Lord  Kelvin's  own  speculations  on  matter  and  energy
should  find  both  confirmation  and  development  in  a  better  understanding  of  these
telekinetic  phenomena — we  shall  have  a  palmary  example  of  the  historic  truth  that  a
leader  of  thought  in  one  age  often  prepares,  while  he  protests  against,  the  thought  of  the

,  next ; — may  be  at  once  its  most  contemptuous  opponent  and  its  most  illuminating
precursor.


534  APPENDICES  [926  A

"  [Home]  then  said,  '  I  am  going  to  take  the  strength  from  the  brandy/
and  he  began  making  passes  over  the  glass  and  nipping  his  fingers,  send-
ing a  strong  smell  of  spirit  through  the  room.  In  about  five  minutes  he
had  made  the  brandy  as  weak  as  very  weak  brandy  and  water ;  it  scarcely
tasted  at  all  of  spirit.  Both  Lindsay  [now  Lord  Crawford]  and  I  tasted
it  at  the  moment,  and  also  some  after  the  stance  was  over."

A  little  practice  would  have  enabled  our  demon  to  carry  this  trick  a
step  further,  as  follows  : —

"  Home  then  made  some  very  curious  experiments  with  flowers ;  he
separated  the  scent  into  two  portions,  one  odour  smelling  exactly  like
earth,  the  other  being  very  sweet."  And  so  a  fresh  lemon  with  its  acid
removed,  "  the  flavour  being  a  sort  of  mawkish  alkali ;  some  describing
it  as  like  magnesia,  others  as  like  washing  soda."

Visiting,  we  will  suppose,  Mr.  Moses'  stances  after  these  exploits,  our
demon  would  very  easily  have  drawn  the  scent  from  the  flowers,  as  de-
scribed below.

The  classification  according  to  which  the  ideal  demon  is  to  sort  them  [the
atoms~\  may  be  according  to  the  essential  character  of  the  atom  ;for  instance,
all  atoms  of  hydrogen  to  be  let  go  to  the  left,  <5rv.

This  looks  promising  for  that  manufacture  of  liquid  scents,  pearls,  and
imitation  gems  which  went  on  briskly  at  Dr.  Speer's.  Only  our  demon
may  be  puzzled  to  get  at  his  hydrogen,  for  instance,  which  he  may  not  find
lying  about  loose  in  a  gentleman's  study.  Water  and  coal  gas,  however,
he  will  probably  find  there ;  will  these  do  ?

The  demon  can  decompose  water  or  carbonic  acid,  first  raising  a  portion
of  the  compound  to  dissociational  temperature,  and  then  sending  the  oxygen
atoms  this  way  and  the  hydrogen  or  carbon  that  way.

He  has  really  now,  I  think,  gone  through  all  that  is  necessary,  and  we
need  hardly  trouble  him  to  keep  his  little  hands  uncomfortably  strained,
in  order  to  store  up  energy ;  unless,  indeed,  this  be  needed  for  a  feat  which
he  cannot  well  have  practised  in  outlying  space ;  namely,  that  triumph  over
the  force  of  cohesion  which  is  necessary  to  get  a  handbell  through  a  party
wall,  or  an  orange  through  the  keyhole.

In  some  such  half-ironical  fashion,  as  it  seems  to  me,  can  we  best  deal
at  present  with  these  mysteries  of  the  constitution  of  matter,  which  are  in
reality  as-  yet  almost  equally  beyond  the  grasp  of  sage  or  of  simpleton.  I
have  shown  that  the  things  which  Mr.  Moses'  guides  are  said  to  do  are
things  of  which  great  minds  have  loved  to  fancy  the  doing.  I  have  shown
that  since  in  their  view  there  was  not  a  spirit  to  do  them,  they  have  found
it  necessary  to  invent  one.  "  Whom  therefore  they  ignorantly  worship  "
— the  being  whom  they  conceive  as  moving  at  ease  and  naturally  in  a
clearly  seen  molecular  world — him  do  these  records  declare  to  them  as
the  operative  agency  amid  marvels  which  once  again  "  contempt  prior  to
examination  "  has  led  most  of  our  best  minds  to  neglect  and  ignore.

I  shall  not  venture  further  in  proprid  persona  upon  this  dangerous


926  A]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  535

ground.  But  I  will  quote  here  one  of  the  answers  of  Mr.  Moses'  guides
when  appealed  to  on  these  points,  that  the  reader  may,  at  any  rate,  judge
how  far  what  they  say  is  in  accordance  with  speculations  of  which  it  is
not  likely  that  either  they  or  their  medium  had  ever  heard.  In  fairness
to  them  and  to  him  I  quote  first  (from  Mr.  Moses'  note-books,  see
943  A),  one  of  their  emphatic  declarations  that  in  his  case  all  physical
phenomena  were  absolutely  subsidiary  to  the  spiritual  development  which
was  their  central  aim  : —

April  i6tb,  1876. — No  good  end  was  to  be  got  by  lingering  on  the  plane
where  everything  is  more  or  less  vague  and  shifting  ;  and  where  whatever  truth
may  be  gained  is  only  an  elementary  enlightenment  of  material  ignorance.  It
is  not  for  you  to  deal  with  the  plane  of  Physics ;  come  upward  to  the  realm
of  Spirit.  For  others  it  may  be  well  to  investigate  the  lines  of  contact  between
Matter  and  Spirit.  It  is  not  your  work.  Leave  it.  For  others  it  may  be  well
to  develop  the  tentative  attempts  of  spirit  to  project  itself  on  the  plane  of  matter.
Leave  it.  It  is  not  your  work.  Your  organism  is  unfitted  for  it,  and  you  could
not  attempt  it  without  risk.

I  will  now  quote  a  few  words  on  the  removal  of  scent  from  a  flower : —

I  want  to  ask  how  my  flower  came  to  be  so  dead  ?

"The  odour  was  all  drawn  from  it.  Hence  the  perfumes  that  you  had
during  the  se'ance.  The  vital  principle  of  the  flower  was  gone.  Hence  it  was
dead ;  and  the  decay  was  owing  to  that  fact.  The  principle  was  abstracted,
even  as  the  vital  force  is  drawn  from  you."

Then  was  the  strain  on  it  mere  decay  ?

"  Yes,  it  withered  and  died  because  its  spirit  was  gone ;  even  as  your  earth
body  will  wither  and  die  when  the  spirit  leaves  it.  You  saw  much  of  this  before,
when  Odorifer  scented  flowers  for  you,  and  drew  the  perfume  from  them.  It
is  not  new.  +  RECTOR."

We  have  now  considered  both  some  apparently  molar  displacements
of  matter,  and  some  that  must  needs  have  involved  molecular  rearrange-
ment. And  it  will  probably  be  admitted  that  even  the  coarser  phenomena
— movements  of  tables  and  the  like — must  have  involved  some  molecular
process  to  get  the  requisite  power  from  the  medium's  organism  to  operate
at  the  new  fulcrum.  We  have,  therefore,  a  mixture  of  processes  resem-
bling the  way  in  which  we  ourselves  work  with  processes  quite  strange  to
us.  It  seems  as  though  these  might  often  be  interchanged  at  pleasure ;
and  there  are  passages  which  describe  two  cameos — one  of  them  as  having
been  actually  cut  and  chipped  in  the  stance-room  by  invisible  hands,  and
the  other  as  having  been  shaped  directly  by  "will-power,"  with  no  carving
process.  A  third  way  of  effecting  the  same  end  is  also  mentioned  ; — that
of  suggesting  the  work  to  a  mortal  artist.

One  of  the  most  interesting  of  all  modifications  of  matter  presumably
contained  in  the  room  consists  in  "  direct  writing," — the  disposition  of
coloured  matter  in  a  form  simulating  the  handwriting  of  some  identified


536  APPENDICES  [926  A

spirit.  This  phenomenon  occurred  at  an  early  date  in  the  experiences
of  Mr.  Moses.

In  such  cases  the  content  as  well  as  the  method  of  the  writing  is
naturally  important,  in  so  far  as  it  may  throw  light  upon  the  identities
concerned.  There  are  here  two  separate  questions.  Firstly :  Are  the
spirits  who  thus  write  directly  the  same  as  those  who  write  through  the
medium's  hand  ?  Secondly :  Are  they  the  spirits  who  they  profess  to
be?  The  first  of  these  questions  must,  I  think,  be  answered  in  the  affir-
mative. The  direct  signatures  closely  resemble  the  automatic  signatures,
and  the  two  forms  of  writing  are  intimately  intermixed.  Sometimes,  for
instance,  letters  were  formed  under  the  shadow  of  Mr.  Moses'  hand,  while
he  himself  wrote  as  usual ;  or  the  letters  were  even  formed  under  his  gaze
(when  he  was  alone)  in  the  light.  The  authors  of  the  automatic  script
always  claimed  authorship  of  the  direct  script  also.

But  on  the  other  hand,  I  do  not  see  that  the  direct  writing  adds  to
the  evidence  for  identity  supplied  by  the  automatic  writing,  except  in  so
far  as  it  shows  that  the  claim  to  identity  pervades  every  manifestation.
Beings  who  can  make  pearls  and  carve  cameos  can  presumably  deposit
chalk  and  arrange  patterns  thereof  just  as  they  choose,  imitating  any
signature  known  to  them  with  none  of  that  special  difficulty  in  the  imi-
tation of  characteristics  of  handwriting  which  is  felt  on  earth.  Direct
writing,  in  short,  seems  to  be  conditioned  in  much  the  same  way  as  other
phenomena  by  the  mind  of  the  medium.

The  colouring  matter  used  might  either  be  apparently  derived  from
some  chalk  pencil  already  in  the  room,  or  might  have  no  obvious  source.

And  it  may  here  be  observed  that,  just  as  in  the  phenomena  which
looked  the  most  crude  and  massive  we  seemed  to  discern  on  closer
scrutiny  an  element  of  molecular  guidance,  so  also  even  in  phenomena
on  a  physically  small  scale,  like  these  directly-written  signatures,  we  have
constantly  to  face  the  question — Has  matter  been  rearranged  in  the  room
itself? — e.g.  disaggregated  and  reaggregated  into  what  seems  like  green
chalk  when  there  was  no  green  chalk  in  the  room  before  ?  Or  has  it,  on
the  other  hand,  been  brought  from  outside  the  room  by  "passage  of
matter  through  matter,"  as  the  phrase  goes?  In  reality  I  think  that  we
have  not  knowledge  enough  to  make  a  broad  distinction  between  seem-
ingly different  operations  of  this  transcendental  kind.  D.  D.  Home's
guides  denied  the  possibility  of  the  passage  of  matter  through  matter ;
but  Sir  William  Crookes  has  narrated  how  in  Home's  presence  a  thick
stalk  passed  uninjured  through  a  chink  in  the  table,  through  which
no  human  power  could  thus  have  pushed  it.  Again,  when,  as  quoted
a  few  pages  above,  Home's  guides  withdrew  the  brandy  from  the  brandy-
and-water,  was  not  that  a  passage  of  the  material  alcohol  through  the
material  water?  To  suppose  that  the  special  form  of  cohesion  which
we  call  solidity  is  alone  insuperable  by  such  powers  as  these  does  not
seem  to  me  a  specially  plausible  view.  Even  in  our  own  world  we  could


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  537

hardly  have  guessed,  a  priori,  that  a  bullet  would  sink,  or  a  floating  cork
rise  through  apparently  solid  cold  pitch  by  the  slow  force  of  gravity  forcing
asunder  the  tenacious  mass,  or  that  a  copper  wire  could  be  passed  in-
sensibly through  a  block  of  ice  by  melting  and  regelation.  Or  let  me,
on  the  other  hand,  suppose  a  man  who  had  never  seen  anything  but
explosions  of  dynamite.  To  him  it  would  seem  easy  to  shatter  rocks
with  gases,  but  almost  impossible  to  lift  or  pierce  the  vast  superincumbent
weight  of  air.  We  should  have  to  explain  to  him  that  it  was  really  easier
to  shoot  through  air  than  through  rock,  if  you  only  propelled  your  rifle
bullet  slowly  enough  to  allow  the  air  to  get  out  of  the  way.  Or  to  get
matter  through  matter  may  be  like  the  puzzles  which  consist  in  getting
linked  rings  through  linked  rings;  there  is  plenty  of  space  if  you  can
only  circumvent  the  attachments.  I  do  not  think  then  that  we  need
either  postulate  a  fourth  dimension  to  explain  Mr.  Moses'  apports,  or
even  adopt  the  more  anthropomorphic  conception  that  they  were  taken
up  one  chimney  and  down  another.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  few  of
the  incidents  recorded  which  this  last  supposition  might  not  be  pressed
to  cover.

(c)  Control  over  Etherial  Manifestations :  with  Possible  Effects  in  the
Domains  of  Light,  Electricity,  Gravitation,  and  Cohesion. — Our  next  topic,
could  we  deal  with  it  with  fuller  knowledge,  must  needs  be  one  of
far-reaching  significance.  The  influence  of  spiritual  control  upon  etherial
phenomena,  if  once  understood,  might  bring  us  nearer  than  any  other
line  of  inquiry  to  a  comprehension  of  the  mode  of  interpenetration  of
the  metetherial  world  with  our  own.  Unfortunately,  while  our  observed
facts  are  rare  and  difficult,  the  explanations  professing  to  come  from  the
other  side  are  far  from  clear.  It  is  sometimes  said,  for  example,  that  raps
—the  percussive  sounds  which  occur  so  frequently  in  all  series  of  these
psycho-physical  phenomena — are  of  electrical  origin.  But  no  attempt
is  made  to  work  this  out,  and  in  themselves  the  raps  suggest  rather  a
suspension  and  re-establishment  of  the  force  of  cohesion  than  any  form
of  electric  discharge.  Again,  the  alteration  of  the  weights  of  objects,
frequently  recorded  both  with  D.  D.  Home  and  with  Mr.  Moses,  may
conceivably  be  the  manifestation  of  some  control  over  gravitation,
otherwise  than  by  the  opposition  of  another  force,  such  as  living  men
can  apply;  but  no  information,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  been  offered  on
this  point.

The  only  etherial  phenomenon  of  which,  as  spiritually  controlled,
we  have  clear  and  frequent  instances  is  light.  And  this  indeed  is  offered
to  us  in  many  forms,  and  needs  our  careful  study.  We  must  needs  begin
by  an  enumeration  of  the  known  sources  of  terrestrial  light,  to  some
of  the  less  familiar,  among  which  we  shall,  if  I  mistake  not,  trace  a  certain
affinity  in  some  of  the  luminous  phenomena  recorded.

Light,  as  we  know,  is  a  term  somewhat  vaguely  given  to  two  pheno-


538  APPENDICES  [926  A

mena  habitually  concurrent,  but  essentially  distinct ;  namely,  to  a  certain
type  of  etherial  undulation,  and  to  a  certain  sensation  experienced  by
such  animated  beings  as  possess  visual  organs,  and  evoked  as  a  rule  by
the  aforesaid  type  of  undulation.

Let  us  take  first  objective  light,  as  it  is  called,  or  the  light- waves
themselves,  and  consider  the  various  sources  from  which  they  are  derived.
They  may  be  generated  by  special  forms  of  etherial  disturbance,  or  they
may  be  originated  by  molecular  or  by  vital  activity.  Without  aiming
at  a  precision  of  phraseology  not  here  essential,  let  us  take  light  in
relation  to  the  worlds  of  matter,  ether,  and  life,  in  the  order  in  which  we
have  touched  upon  those  worlds  in  previous  discussions.

(L.  i.)  LIGHT  ACCOMPANYING  INANIMATE  MOLECULAR  MOTION.

(a.) — Incandescence.  When  matter  is  raised  to  a  certain  temperature,
as  by  arrest  of  motion,  chemical  action,  combustion  following  minute  sub-
division, &c.,  light-waves  are  generated,  among  waves  of  many  other
amplitudes.

(/?.) — Phosphorescence.  Phosphorus  and  some  of  its  compounds
during  the  process  of  slow  oxidation  emit  light-waves  either  solely,  or  at
least  in  far  greater  proportion  to  heat-waves  than  is  the  case  in  ordinary
oxidation,  which  is  generally  non-luminous  until  it  gives  rise  to  incan-
descence. To  this  head  belongs  the  phosphorescence  of  decaying  matter,
when  not  due  to  luminous  microbes.

(y.) — Luminescence  and  Fluorescence.  Many  bodies  after  insolation,
or  after  exposure  to  dim  light,  or  sometimes  even  to  ultra-violet  rays,
(perhaps  all  bodies  if  their  temperature  is  sufficiently  reduced),  have  the
power  of  re-radiating  a  part  of  the  incident  energy  in  the  form  of  light.
Some  so-called  phosphorescences  due  to  heat  (short  of  incandescence) ,  to
cleavage,  to  crystallisation,  &c.,  probably  fall  under  this  category,  for
which  one  may  propose  the  name  of  luminescence,  since  there  is  a  practical
inconvenience  in  extending  the  term  phosphorescence  to  phenomena  in
whiqh  phosphorus  is  not  concerned.

(L.  2.) — LIGHT  ACCOMPANYING  SPECIAL  FORMS  OF
ETHERIAL  DISTURBANCE.

I  introduce  this  heading  rather  for  the  sake  of  completeness,  than  as
venturing  to  affirm  that  light  could  accompany  electric  or  magnetic
oscillations  in  a  hypothetical  absence  of  matter.  If  a  magnetic  field  has
really  been  seen  as  luminous,  it  is  perhaps  here  that  such  a  phenomenon
should  be  placed.

(L.  3.) — LIGHT  ACCOMPANYING  VITAL  ACTION.

(a.)  —  Vital  Secretory  Phosphorescence.  Under  secretory  phosphores-
cence I  include  all  cases  where  animal  luminosity  appears  due  to  the


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  539

secretion  by  the  animal  of  a  substance  capable  of  emitting  light,  pre-
sumably (though  not  certainly)  due  to  slow  oxidation.  The  glow-worm
(Lampyris  noctiluca)  and  the  firefly  (Elater  noctilucus)  are  the  stock
examples  of  this.  It  is  an  interesting  but  uncertain  question  how  far  the
light  of  these  and  other  luminous  animals  is  under  their  own  control.
Professor  Herdman,  F.R.S.,  kindly  writing  to  me  on  the  subject  of
animal  luminosity,  says  : — "  In  many  cases  there  is  probably  a  connection
with  the  nervous  system  {e.g.,  Nyctiphanes  and  other  Schizopoda),  and
the  luminosity  is  the  result  of  a  reflex,  if  not  of  a  voluntary  action ;  and
so  possibly  might  be  regarded  as  a  direct  transmutation  of  nerve  energy
into  an  ethereal  disturbance  visible  as  light."

In  many  species,  however,  the  luminous  substance  retains  luminosity
after  the  death  of  the  animal.

(/?.) — Excretory  Phosphorescence.  Under  this  term  I  include  the
various  forms  of  elimination  of  phosphorescent  matter,  as  a  waste  product
from  the  system.  This  last  phenomenon,  as  will  be  seen,  is  of  much
importance  for  our  present  purpose.  It  is  at  present  the  only  unquestioned
form  of  emission  of  light  from  the  human  subject.  It  is  well  known  that
in  phthisis,  cancer,  and  other  diseases  where  much  phosphorus  has  been
administered  by  the  mouth,  the  breath,  the  perspiration,  and  other  ex-
cretions and  secretions,  are  frequently  observed  to  be  slightly  luminous.
The  perspiration  in  subjects  of  miliaria  is  also  said  to  be  sometimes
luminous,  although  the  phosphorus  thus  excreted  must  come  from  the
ordinary  stock  contained  in  the  body.1

(y.) — Vital  Luminescence.  Some  experiments  cited  by  Dr.  T.  L.
Phipson,  whose  little  work  on  Phosphorescence  (1870)  is  still  the  best
collection  known  to  me  of  the  rarer  phenomena,  suggest  to  him  that  the
light  emitted  by  a  mushroom  (Agaricus  olearius),  and  perhaps  that  emitted
by  a  centipede  (Scolopendra  Electrica),  and  a  firefly  (Lampyris  italica),
may  be  a  luminescent  phenomenon,  and  depend  at  least  partially  on
previous  absorption  of  light.  There  seems  no  a  priori  reason  against
this  view,  which,  if  proved  true  for  these  organisms,  would  probably  apply
to  others  as  well.

(8.) — Vital  Fulguration.  Certain  phanerogamous  plants  have  occa-
sionally been  seen  to  emit  positive  flashes  of  light.  The  daughter  of
Linnaeus  had  the  good  fortune  to  make  the  first  and  classical  observation
on  the  garden  nasturtium  in  1762,  and  the  phenomenon  has  since  been
witnessed  in  sunflowers,  marigolds,  and  orange  lilies  by  other  observers.
This  light  appears  to  be  truly  electric,  and  not  to  be  merely  the  result  of
a  current  passing  through  the  organism  (as  when  a  man  lights  the  gas  with
his  fingers),  but  to  imply  a  generation  of  electricity  within  the  organism  itself.

The  diffused  electric  luminosity,  which  has  sometimes  been  seen  (as
by  Dr.  Kane,  the  explorer,  cited  by  Phipson,  p.  1 6 1 )  to  illuminate  the
human  skin,  may  be  in  some  sense  a  vital  phenomenon,  or  may  be  due
1  See  (for  instance)  Diseases  of  the  Skin,  by  Dr.  H.  Radcliffe  Crocker  (1888),  p.  i6o,&c.


540  APPENDICES  [926A

to  friction ;  but  in  any  case  belongs  rather  to  the  surface  of  the  skin  itself
than  to  the  vital  processes  going  on  underneath.

(e.) — Vital  Photogeny.  By  this  name  I  designate  the  direct  production
of  light  by  living  organisms,  as  a  result  or  bye-product  of  their  own  meta-
bolism. Such,  I  cannot  but  think,  is  the  explanation  of  the  widespread
luminosity  of  low  marine  forms,  especially  when  transparent : — a  source  of
light,  in  comparison  with  which  the  greasy  organs  of  glow-worm  and  firefly
sink  into  insignificance.  Noctiluca  miliaris,  to  take  one  species  alone,
"  offers,"  in  the  lofty  language  of  Humboldt,  "  the  magnificent  spectacle
of  a  starry  firmament  reflected  in  the  sea."  On  these  primitive  forms
Professor  Herdman  writes  :  "  It  is  in  these  cases  of  simple,  undifferentiated
protoplasm  that  I  fancy  the  luminosity  might  be  an  exaggeration  of  some
necessary  accompaniment  of  metabolism,  or  practically  of  life,  i.e.  of  the
functions  of  the  living  protoplasm.  It  would  then  be  a  katabolic  action
or  molecular  disturbance  which  might  be  supposed  to  affect  the  sur-
rounding ether  so  as  to  produce  light.  We  might  imagine  that  this  kata-
bolic action  goes  on  always  in  living  protoplasm,  but  so  slightly  as  not  to
produce  visible  light,  while  in  some  cases  (cells,  tissues,  or  organisms)  it
has  become  emphasised,  and  then  ;  seized  upon '  by  natural  selection  as
serving  some  useful  purpose  (which  may  be  a  very  different  purpose  in
different  cases),  and  so  perfected."  "  This,"  adds  Professor  Herdman,  "  is
speculation,"  and  it  is  only  as  such  that  I  venture  to  print  it  here.  As
will  be  presently  seen,  it  is  precisely  the  conclusion  to  which  observations
of  a  very  different  kind  had  already  pointed  me.

A  few  words  only  need  be  added  here  as  to  subjective  or  phantasmal
luminosity.  The  immediate  link  between  objective  and  subjective  light
may  be  said  to  be  the  intra-cerebral  flash,  seen  when  the  optic  nerve  is
pressed  or  cut,  or  the  brain  concussed.

Then  come  the  whole  series  of  illuminated  phantasms ;  either  simply
phantasmal  lights,  diffused  or  definite,  or  figures  seen  in  darkness,  or
otherwise  more  highly  illuminated  than  the  objects  around  them.  All
these  sensations  of  light,  like  other  phantasms,  are prima  facie  subjective;
but  as  with  other  phantasms,  we  have  the  difficulty  of  collective  halluci-
nations, and  the  gradual  merging  of  these  phantasms  into  the  physical
phenomena  with  which  I  am  here  dealing.

Turning  back  to  the  luminous  phenomena  recorded  in  Mr.  Moses*
stances,  have  we  now  any  clue  as  to  the  mechanism  of  their  production,,
or  as  to  the  headings  in  our  scheme  of  luminosities  under  which  they  most
fitly  fall  ?  I  will  at  once  say,  that  at  least  two  of  the  less  familiar  of  these
headings  do  appear  to  me  to  be  applicable  to  lights  produced  under  spirit
control.  I  mean  Excretory  Phosphorescence  and  Vital  Photogeny.

Excretory  Phosphorescence  undet  Spirit  Control. — I  have  already  noted,
under  subliminal  phenomena  (II.  3.  r.),  the  luminous  appearance  of
Mr.  Moses'  hands,  which  he  records  as  persisting  after  a  stance.  We


926A]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  541

have  also  seen  reason  to  suppose  that  the  emanation  of  scent  from  Mr.
Moses'  head  was  a  form  of  hyperidrosis  purposely  modified  by  spirit
control.  May  not  the  appearance  of  his  hands  also  have  been  due  to  the
phosphorescent  perspiration  of  which  we  have  just  heard  as  a  symptom
after  much  phosphorus  has  been  taken  into  the  system?  The  "guides"
themselves  alleged  that  many  of  the  lights  depended  upon  phosphorus
extracted  from  the  medium's  organism.  May  not  the  glow  on  the  hands
represent  an  after-effect  of  this  extraction?  The  sweat  glands  are,  as  we
know,  readily  responsive  in  common  life  to  psychical  stimuli,  and  Dr.
Milne  Bramwell  has  found  that  hyperidroses  which  have  obstinately
resisted  medication  will  sometimes  yield  at  once  to  hypnotic  suggestion.
We  have  often  observed  that  supernormal  agencies  are  wont  to  follow  as
closely  as  possible  processes  familiar  to  the  organisation,  whether  in  health
or  in  disease.

Nor  was  this  glow  confined  to  the  hands  alone.  A  kind  of  luminous
cloud,  which  might  be  due  either  to  breath  or  to  some  subtle  cutaneous
transpiration,  was  often  observed  round  Mr.  Moses'  head  and  shoulders  at
seances.  And  on  one  marked  occasion  the  phosphoric  smoke  was  dense
enough  seriously  to  alarm  Mr.  Moses  himself  and  Dr.  Speer.

The  luminosities  which  we  have  thus  far  been  discussing  have  been  of
the  apparent  nature  of  cloudy  emanations  from  the  medium  or  similar
collections  of  cloudy  light  in  his  near  vicinity.  Or  if  they  have  shown  a
tendency  to  concentration,  it  has  been  in  the  form  of  "  spirit-lights,"  or
apparently  solid  receptacles  of  quasi-phosphoric  brightness — brightness,
however,  so  steady  and  permanent  as,  by  Sir  William  Crookes'  own  ac-
count, to  have  baffled  his  skill  in  imitation.1  Their  general  appearance
has  been  not  inconsistent  with  the  proffered  explanation — that  they  are
made  from  phosphorus  extracted  from  the  medium,  and  perhaps  from  other
members  of  the  circle,  and  mingled  or  prepared  in  some  manner  beyond
our  earthly  skill.

Vital  Photogeny  under  Spiritual  Control. — But  we  have  next  to  deal
with  a  class  of  lights  whose  nature  and  behaviour  seem  markedly  different.
These  are  lights  which  are  not  widely  diffused  but  small  and  more  or  less
definite,  and  which  concentrate  not  into  solid  inert  masses,  but  into  hands.
Of  this  ectoplastic  formation  of  hands  we  must  speak  in  the  next  section.
For  the  moment  I  will  only  point  out  that  these  lights  seem  to  be  a  directly
vital  phenomenon.

It  is,  perhaps,  "  this  muddy  vesture  of  decay  "  which  hides  from  us  in
common  life  the  glow  which  is  an  inseparable  attribute  of  that  life  itself;
and  the  radiance  which  at  the  outset  of  evolution  the  ocean-organisms
attain  in  their  primitive  simplicity  is  achieved  once  more  when  intermediate
stages  have  been  passed  through,  and  life  and  matter  are  manipulated  with
the  freedom  and  mastery  of  the  spirit-world.

I  trust  that  as  our  knowledge  increases  there  may  prove  to  be  some

1  Crookes'  Researches  in  Spiritualism,  p.  91.


542  APPENDICES  [926  A

usefulness,  some  reality,  in  the  analogies  between  normal  and  supernormal
modes  of  light-production  on  which  I  have  here  dwelt — but  I  am  far
from  supposing  that  these  analogies  cover  the  whole  ground.  On  the
contrary,  we  see  throughout  these  luminous  phenomena  a  constant  ten-
dency towards  a  transition  from  objective  to  subjective  light — from  the
luminosity  of  excreted  phosphorus,  or  of  vital  metabolism,  to  light
"which  never  was  on  sea  or  land,"  and  whose  discernment  seems  no
longer  to  depend  on  earthly  vision,  nor  its  source  to  be  akin  to  any
earthly  glow.  We  are  introduced,  as  discussion  under  a  future  heading
will  show,  to  a  metetherial,  which  is  also  a  luminous  state  of  being — to
spirits  who  are  independent  of  our  earthly  sources  of  brightness,  solemquc
suum,  sua  sidera  norunt.  If  we  endeavour  to  class  their  fulgent  aspect
among  the  headings  which  our  scheme  has  offered,  we  should  have  to
speak,  I  suppose,  of  metetherial  luminescence,  and  to  assume  that  they  re-
radiate  the  incident  energy  of  some  supernal  world.

Here  it  is  plain  that  all  attempt  at  terrestrial  analogy  must  cease ;  and
in  passing  from  the  discussion  of  spirit-control  over  matter  and  ether  to
spirit-control  over  life  itself,  it  seems  fitting  to  remind  the  reader  in  clearest
terms  that  no  analogies  can  here  be  more  than  suggestive ;  that  no  exal-
tation or  sublimation  of  forces  already  familiar  will  really  explain  the
modus  operandi  of  these  intimate  dealings  with  seen  and  unseen  things.
Even  though  known  laws  be  at  work  they  must  be  working  in  subjection
to  laws  unknown.  For  the  very  assumption  of  a  metetherial  world,  as
natural  and  as  uniform  as  our  own,  implies  that  our  widest  material  gene-
ralisations can  be  no  more  than  formulae  for  special  cases — deducible  from
laws  still  more  fundamental,  which  must  hold  good  whether  matter  and
ether  exist  or  no.  Our  world  of  matter  is  but  a  flocculence  held  in  critical
suspension,  which  a  touch  may  dissolve  or  a  touch  precipitate.  We  can-
not distinguish  among  metetherial  energies  ;  we  can  but  say  that  "  psychic
force," — if  that  be  the  least  question-begging  title  that  we  can  find  for  those
energies  as  they  affect  mankind, — can  form  no  true  part  of  any  mechanical
synthesis  of  the  universe  which  our  science  knows,  and  thus  if  we  are
asked  if  psychic  force  implies  any  disturbance  of  our  law  of  the  conserva-
tion of  energy,  we  must  reply  that  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  it
does  so ;  but  that  even  this  question  can  scarcely  be  so  expressed  as  to  be
capable  of  definite  answer.  If  life  be  regarded,  as  for  example,  by  Prof.
Lodge *  as  merely  a  "  directive  and  guiding  force  exercised  upon  matter,"
and  "  not  affecting  the  amount  of  energy  in  the  slightest  degree  "  ;  then  a
like  predication  may  be  made  as  to  the  manifestations  of  psychic  force, —
all  of  them  ultimately  vital  in  character, — which  we  here  encounter.  But
at  the  same  time  it  is  conceivable  that  energy  might  be  so  defined  as  to
show  that  the  production  of  these  phenomena  requires  the  expenditure,  in
a  metetherial  world,  of  some  form  of  energy  akin  to  the  so-called  "  will-
power "  which  we  at  least  appear  to  ourselves  to  exercise  here  on  earth,

1  Nature,  vol.  xliv.  p.  292.


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  543

although  its  true  nature,  or  even  its  actual  existence,  is  matter  of  con-
troversy.

It  is  to  "  will-power  "  that  the  communicating  spirits  themselves  ascribe
their  achievements ;  to  some  mode  of  operation  quite  unexplained, — but
even  more  direct,  more  fundamental  than  those  imagined  molecular  powers
which  I  cited  to  show  how  men  who  believed  that  no  "  demon  "  existed
found  it  necessary  to  invent  one.

(4)  ACTION  ON  THE  INCARNATION  OF  LIFE  ON  THE  PLANET.

(a)  Pre- conceptual  Suggestion  or  Self -Suggestion. — And  if  this  has  been
already  perceived  in  tracing  spirit-influence  on  the  material  and  etherial
worlds,  much  more  will  it  be  manifest  when  we  come  to  our  next  heading,
—the  influence,  namely,  of  spirits  upon  the  incarnation  of  life;  upon  its
derivation  from  its  unknown  reservoir  and  its  distribution  into  organic
matter  upon  this  planet.  What  have  we  noted  thus  far  as  to  human  influ-
ence on  the  incarnation  of  life, — either  under  supraliminal  or  subliminal
guidance  ?

Under  supraliminal  control  we  find  life  incarnated  for  the  most  part
with  no  conscious  forethought,  and  when  incarnated  following  certain  laws
of  heredity  apparently  determined  by  terrene  conditions  in  the  remote
past.  And  when  we  do  set  ourselves  to  influence  the  processes  of  incar-
nation our  results  appear  slight  and  external.  We  can  perpetuate  some
spontaneous  variation ;  we  can  select  parents ;  we  can  surround  with
helpful  conditions  the  new-born  offspring.  But  in  our  attempts  at
"  eugenics  "  in  the  higher  races — in  the  human  race, — we  tinker  from
without,  we  cannot  mould  from  within.

And  yet,  if  we  stoop  low  enough,  we  can  mould  life  more  profoundly
than  we  have  yet  realised.  Let  us  go  down  to  the  very  dust  or  spray  of
animated  being,  to  that  myriad  life  which  even  on  this  planet  is  in  a  true
sense  interpenetrant  with  our  own,  and  we  find  the  multitude  of  species  as
flexible  beneath  our  rapid  hands  as  our  own  ancestors  have  been  beneath
the  slow  choice  of  Nature  and  from  the  dawn  of  planetary  time.  Let
us  get  beneath  the  line  of  definite  birth,  among  the  protean  forms  of
"  protoplasmic  rejuvenescence,"  and  we  can  alter  almost  every  apparent
character  of  the  micro-organism, — inward  to  the  very  mode  of  reproduction
itself.  The  smaller  the  parcels  in  which  life  descends  into  generation,  the
more  modifiable  is  it  in  the  terrene  laboratory;  the  cell  is  waiting  for
its  cue,  and  a  day  of  our  treatment  is  for  it  as  a  thousand  years.

Under  subliminal  control,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  with  the  highest
creature  that  we  must  begin.  If  we  wish  not  to  manipulate  from  without,
but  to  suggest  from  within,  we  must  approach  the  strongly  centralised
organism  through  "  the  ruling  part " — TO  ^ye/xovt/coV — its  legitimate  and
subliminal  king.

And  in  which  direction  then  do  we  find  that  the  disembodied  spirit
claims  to  extend  his  control  over  incarnate  being?  He  sometimes  claims


544  APPENDICES  [926  A

in  the  first  place, — and  it  is  a  claim  which  we  can  neither  confirm  nor
refute, — that  he  can  push  back  pre-natal  into  pre-conceptual  suggestion,  and
can  so  influence  men  and  women  already  on  earth,  that  they  will  give
opportunity  for  the  incarnation  of  some  waiting  spirit,  who  through  such
special  access  only  can  enter  on  the  material  world.  And  he  claims  too,
with  Plato,  interpreter  to  men  of  the  spiritual  world, — that,  as  by  a  pre-
conceptual  self-suggestion,  the  descending  spirit  may  choose  and  determine
its  earthly  lot,  somewhat  as  in  the  hypnotic  trance  a  man  may  choose  and
suggest  to  himself  the  sensations  and  actions  of  subsequent  waking  hours.
This  may  not  mean  more  than  that,  in  some  few  rare  cases,  a  pre-existing
spirit  may  have  left  the  spiritual  world  to  become  a  "  missionary  "  to  our
planet.

(b)  Ectoplasy  or  Materialisation;  Temporary  Extradition  or  Con-
centration of  Vital  Energy. — But,  leaving  such  speculations  to  derive  else-
where from  cases  of  precognition  what  support  they  may,  we  must  pass
on  to  a  spiritual  influence  on  incarnation  to  which  some  records  have
actually  testified,  an  influence  which  in  a  sense  combines  the  supralirninal
and  subliminal  types.  For  it  implies  a  command  of  the  central  authority
so  complete  as  to  admit  with  safety  of  extreme,  though  transitory,  de-
centralisations; — of  a  manipulation  of  component  parts  of  complex  or-
ganisms freer  than  any  with  which  we  ourselves  have  influenced  the
attractions,  the  division,  the  rejuvenescence,  of  a  simple  and  indepen-
dent cell.

But  first  let  us  consider  the  different  ways  in  which  the  material
organisms  of  our  planet  may  be  regarded  according  as  they  are  seen  from
a  material  or  from  a  metetherial  standpoint.

To  our  ordinary  view  each  of  the  higher  organisms  appears  a  definitely
coherent  mass  of  matter,  from  which  no  important  part  can  be  separated
or  withdrawn  without  injury.  There  is  nothing  to  prove  to  us  that  the
life  which  animates  each  organism  can  exist  separately  from  the  organism.
One  organism  can  communicate  with  another  only  through  certain  definite
channels ;  and  each  organism  must  run  its  separate  course  from  birth  to
decay.

When,  however,  some  glimpse  of  the  subliminal  working  of  these
organisms  has  been  attained,  our  relative  conception  of  organism  and
informing  spirit  rapidly  changes.  We  have  now  to  recognise  an  informing
life  which,  even  if  not  yet  proved  capable  of  permanent  existence  apart
from  the  body,  does  nevertheless  act  within  the  body  as  though  with  a
separate  initiative,  controlling  and  modifying  the  organism  in  other  than
purely  physiological  ways.  We  find,  moreover,  that  each  individual
organism  is  not  so  completely  a  closed  system  as  at  first  appeared.  Tele-
pathic influences  pass  from  one  to  another;  and  sometimes  the  spirit
seems  in  some  sense  to  leave  the  body,  on  some  clairvoyant  excursion,
or  when  death  is  imminent,  and  to  return  to  it  again  as  though  to  a
tabernacle  from  which  it  is  itself  detachable  and  distinct.


926A]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  545

And  now  imagine  the  disembodied  spirit  as  he  regards  this  solid  planet
and  the  organisms  which  inhabit  it.  To  him  the  metetherial  world  is  clear
and  real ;  the  material  world  is  unstable,  shadowy,  chaotic.  Definite  and
permanent  he  sees  the  spirits  that  are  lodged  therein  ;  arresting  each  some
transitory  group  out  of  the  hurricane  of  molecules  by  a  cogency  that  is  all
its  own.  The  organism  for  him  is  the  mere  cloud  of  matter  through  which
the  spirit  works ;  its  apparent  periphery  is  no  real  boundary-wall.  He
sees  one  incarnate  spirit  telergically  affecting  another  incarnate  spirit's
brain ;  and  to  him  that  extra-peripheral,  ultra-organic  influence  is  the
natural,  the  inevitable  mode  of  communion.

He  finds  himself  able  to  influence  some  of  these  organisms ;  to  rule
them  as  their  own  indwelling  spirit  rules  them,  only  with  more  knowledge
of  the  possibilities  of  such  control.  He  knows,  let  us  say,  the  very  way
in  which  unbegotten  life  descended  into  generation ;  he  can  see  beyond
the  narrow  portal  of  the  omne  vivum  ex  ovo  ;  behind  the  first  quiver  of  the
first  slime-speck — the  princeps  limus — which  entangled  in  carbon-com-
pounds the  Promethean  fire.  And  thus  he  can  push  the  vital  force
through  and  past  the  illusory  integument ;  he  can  act — with  more  or  less
of  apparent  likeness  to  fleshly,  to  organic  action — upon  external  matter
which  the  medium's  ignorantly-guided  body  could  not,  without  such
training,  have  contrived  to  reach.

This  is  the  phenomenon  which  (using  a  term  adapted  for  the  purpose
by  Professor  Ochorowicz)  I  shall  here  call  ectoplasy — the  power  of  forming,
outside  some  special  organism,  a  collection  or  reservoir  of  vital  force  or  of
vitalised  matter,  which  may  or  may  not  be  visible,  may  or  may  not  be
tangible,  but  which  operates  in  like  fashion  as  the  visible  and  tangible
body  from  whence  it  is  drawn.

Nay,  more.  To  the  disembodied  spirit  the  organisms  which  he  sees
accreted  about  his  incarnate  fellows  are  no  isolated,  encapsuled  things.
The  identity,  the  unbridgeable  separation  is  for  him — if  it  is  anywhere — in
the  spirit-world.  These  protoplasmic  clouds  can  mix,  in  his  view,  as
easily  as  the  tails  of  comets;  or  say  as  though  from  the  tidal  afflux
of  half-colliding  vaporous  suns  some  glowing  prominence  shot  forth,  to
fall  back  presently,  again  divided,  and  a  part  attracted  into  each  parent
mass.  Only  by  some  such  metaphor,  perhaps,  can  we  picture  the  spirit's
next  achievement,  and  the  fusion  of  portions  of  the  vital  force  of  several
persons  into  an  agency  which  he  wields  in  independence  of  them  all ;
"  drawing  power,"  as  the  phrase  goes,  from  the  circle  as  well  as  from  the
medium,  and  accomplishing  mechanical  work  by  the  aid  of  their  bodies,
but  at  a  distance  from  each.

All  the  energy  that  he  exerts,  then,  is  vital  energy  ;  it  is  drawn  from  the
organisms  of  the  persons  present,  even  when  the  effect  achieved  (as  the
production  of  a  cold  wind)  is  unlike  the  effects  to  which  living  organisms
commonly  give  rise.  But,  for  the  most  part,  the  effects  which  he  pro-
duces do  resemble  the  organism's  natural  action ;  and  hence,  indeed,  the
VOL.  n.  2  M


546  APPENDICES  [926  A

objections  of  triviality  and  uselessness  largely  arise.  The  "  telekinetic
movements  "  (to  use  Mr.  Aksakoff's  term)  which  it  is  easiest  to  produce
seem  to  differ  from  movements  which  the  medium  himself  could  have  made
only  by  starting  from  a  point  in  space  at  some  little  distance  outside  his
apparent  periphery.  The  movements  are  interesting,  not  as  spectacles  in
themselves,  but  as  indications  that  life  can  act  at  some  distance  from  a
living  organism ;  just  as  the  movement  of  a  half-drowned  man's  finger  is
interesting  to  the  friend  who  knows  not  whether  there  still  be  life  in  that
organism  at  all.  -

The  condition  of  the  medium  from  whom  this  vital  force  is  being  drawn
seems  to  vary  from  complete  tranquillity  to  extreme  agitation,  according  to
the  ease  or  difficulty  of  the  process.  With  Mr.  Moses  there  were  some-
times agitated  movements  during  some  difficult  manifestation  (as  the  giving
of  minute  direct  writing)  ;  but  generally  he  was  tranquilly  entranced,  with
his  arms  resting  on  the  table  in  front  of  him.

Let  us  now  survey  the  various  grades  of  these  ectoplastic  phenomena.

We  will  begin  with  the  phenomena  which  keep  closest  to  the  medium's
person,  and  in  that  sense  prepare  the  way  for  the  production  of  visible
hands,  &c.,  acting  at  a  distance  of  some  feet.

(a)  And  first  I  may  mention  a  mode  of  dealing  with  the  medium's  body
which  involves  no  actual  extradition  of  any  part  of  its  substance,  but  which,
nevertheless,  seems  to  imply  a  molecular  manipulation  (so  to  say)  of  its
soft  tissues.  I  refer  to  the  elongations  noticed  with  Mr.  D.  D.  Home.
In  these  cases — if,  provisionally,  they  can  be  contemplated  as  actual  ob-
jective occurrences — the  intercostal  regions  seemed  to  be  the  especial  seat
of  the  extension,  which  is  described  as  rapid  and  painless,  although  some-
times followed  by  vomiting.

(/3)  Another  and  apparently  more  developed  form  of  prolongation  has
been  observed  with  Mr.  Moses.  These  are  phantom  arms  and  hands,  re-
producing the  arms  of  the  medium,  coat-sleeves,  shirt-cuffs,  and  all ;  and
extended  generally  from  the  shoulder,  straight  out,  and  above  the  true
arms.  These  supplemetnary  or  "  counterpartal"  arms  (suspicious  objects
enough,  until  observed  under  good  conditions)  seem  never  to  have  been
actually  touched,  but  are  swiftly  retracted  into  the  medium,  or  simply
vanish,  if  an  attempt  is  made  to  grasp  them.  Nevertheless,  the  hands  in
which  they  terminate  do  appear  to  move  objects.

Odd  and  unexpected  as  these  phantasmal  arms  are,  they  are  instructive
in  more  than  one  respect.  In  the  first  place  they  supply  in  a  certain  way
a  missing  link  between  mere  phantasms  and  ectoplastic  phenomena.  We
know  that  as  a  rule  phantasmal  appearances  exert  no  objective  effect  upon
the  material  world ;— and  we  know  also  that  to  this  rule  there  seem  to  be
some  few  exceptions.  It  is  through  these  shadowy,  yet  materially  active,
prolongations, — collective  hallucinations  which  yet  can  affect  the  solid
world,— that  the  line  of  continuity,  if  such  there  be,  between  purely  sub-


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  547

jective  phantasm  and  firmly  materialised  hand  or  body  may  have  to  be
drawn.

In  the  second  place,  these  reproduced  coat-sleeves  stand  apparently
midway  between  two  phenomena  not  obviously  allied ; — viz.,  the  appear-
ance of  dying  persons  as  though  draped  in  their  habitual  clothing, — and
the  greater  facility  (attested  by  Mr.  Moses'  guides)  of  manufacturing  a
duplicate  of  some  object  already  existing  on  earth,  rather  than  a  new  and
original  object  of  their  own  devising.

Perhaps  we  may  link  the  two  by  saying  that  everything  which  is  not
a  purely  earthy  phenomenon  must  be  for  us  mortals  to  some  extent
symbolical;  and  that  the  simplest  form  of  symbolism  depends  on  mere
reminiscence;  that  thus  the  line  of  least  resistance  for  the  psychic  force
or  telergic  impulse  leads  to  the  upbuilding  of  the  ectoplastic  fabric  upon
the  basis  of  thoughts  and  images  which  are  already  fashioned  and  stored
in  the  human  spirit.

(y)  In  the  classes  of  ectoplasms  already  enumerated,  there  has  been  at
least  an  apparent  continuous  connection  with  the  body  of  the  sensitive ; —
although,  in  the  last-mentioned  case  especially,  that  connection  is  of  a  very
shadowy  kind.

We  now  come  to  ectoplasms  without  apparent  connection  with  the
organism  from  which  we  still  must  suppose  them  to  be  in  some  way
derived.  Two  incomplete  forms  of  such  isolated  ectoplasm  first  present
themselves ;  the  one  manifesting,  so  to  say,  definition  without  visibility ;
the  other,  visibility  without  definition.

As  examples  of  a  certain  amount  of  definition  without  visibility,  I  take
touches  and  imprints.  Slight  but  unmistakable  touches  are  often  observed
even  when  the  ectoplastic  process  never  gets  any  further,  nor  is  identified
with  any  one  spirit.  Imprints  are  more  rarely  recorded.

(8)  A  commoner  way  in  which  the  detached  ectoplasm  begins  its
development  is  with  an  appearance  of  cloud,  or  light,  or  luminous  mist,
surrounding  some  object  which  is  presently  moved, — the  stem  of  a  flower
broken,  or  a  bell  carried  about  the  room.  Such  appearances,  already
mentioned  under  the  heading  of  vital  photogeny,  are  frequently  recorded
both  with  D.  D.  Home  and  with  Mr.  Moses.  Their  connection  with
ectoplasms  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  sometimes  some  of  those  present
have  perceived  a  hand,  while  others  have  seen  only  a  cloud  or  a  light ;
and  sometimes  all  present  have  seen  the  cloud  or  light  change  into  a  hand.
The  hand  seems  to  oscillate  about  the  limits  of  definite  visibility,  like
vapour  which  in  a  changing  temperature  condenses  and  re-expands.

Two  short  passages  (quoted  from  Mr.  Moses'  note-books)  will  illus-
trate this  semi-materialisation.

Q.  The  beads  that  came  in  the  light  seemed  to  be  projected  from  behind
me  ;  in  the  dark  they  seemed  to  fall.

A.  "  It  is  necessary  to  use  the  force  or  power  emanating  from  your  body
more  carefully  in  light.  It  is  far  more  difficult  to  regulate  it.  The  objects


548  APPENDICES  [926  A

were  thrown  near  you  gently.     At  other  times  they  were  allowed  to  fall  as
might  chance."

Q.    One  seemed  to  come  out  of  the  letter  I  was  handing  to  Mrs.  G.

A.  "  No,  but  the  movement  of  your  hand  threw  off  force,  as  in  darkness  you
may  see  luminous  vapour  proceeding  from  the  fingers.  The  force  is  given  off
at  the  fingers  and  head  most,  hence  objects  are  brought  or  moved  more  readily
near  your  head  or  hands.  Hence  the  movement  of  objects  over  your  head  and
the  production  of  the  scent.  Hence,  too,  rubbing  the  hands  is  useful,  and
placing  the  fingers  on  the  table  charges  the  wood.  So  when  you  moved  your
hand  it  gave  the  opportunity  which  was  used."

Q.  That  scent  from  my  head  is  very  curious.     Is  it  put  on,  or  drawn  out  ?

A.  "  Drawn  out,  but  I  cannot  tell  you  of  that."

Monday,  March  2$rd,  1874.

Q.  Can  I  have  any  information  about  that  extraordinary  writing?

(We  held  a  stance  last  night  at  which  some  very  minute  direct  writing  was
given  by  Doctor  and  Prudens.)

A.  "  It  was  done  with  great  pains  and  care  as  an  experiment.  We  can  do
more  than  that."

Q.  It  is  the  most  curious  piece  I  ever  saw.     Who  wrote  it  ?

A.  "  The  spirits  who  signed,  aided  by  many  others.  We  were  assisted  last
night  by  a  powerful  band  who  were  able  to  overcome  unfavourable  conditions.
We  have  said  before  that  no  such  manifestation  is  ever  done  by  us  alone,  but
by  many  assistants."

Q.  The  writing  is  so  minute  and  clear.

A.  *'  We  could  do  more  minute  writing  and  will  endeavour  so  to  do.  Much
power  was  used  in  endeavouring  to  complete  the  manifestation  with  care.  To
that  reason  is  due  the  physical  contortion  which  attends  the  manifestation.  It
is  more  difficult  to  write  with  minute  care.  We  will  show  you  what  we  can  do
one  day."

Q.  Doctor  and  Prudens  were  the  actual  amanuenses  ?

A.  "  Yes,  they  actually  wrote,  as  you  would  see  from  the  character  of  the
writing.  It  is  always  so."

Q.  I  thought  Prudens'  writing  was  not  his,  but  an  imitation.

A.  "  That  would  not  be  allowed."

Q.  Was  the  pencil  actually  used  ?

A.  "  Oh,  yes."

Q.  Was  a  hand  materialised  ?

A.  "  Not  as  you  understand  it,  but  sufficiently  so  to  use  the  instrument.  It
would  not  have  been  visible  to  the  natural  eye."

Q.   The  pencil  would  have  seemed  to  move  alone,

A.  "  Yes,  to  the  natural  eye."

(e)  In  describing  these  imperfectly  aggregated  ectoplasms  we  have  ,
already  touched  on  the  next  class,  that  of  quasi-organic  detached  ecto-
plasms. These  are  especially  hands,  sometimes  with  wrists  or  arms
attached,  but  now  with  no  mere  shadowy  or  duplicated  drapery,  but  a
drapery  which  is  their  own,  and  for  the  time  being  is  as  tangible  as  them-
selves. Such  hands  are  reported  in  the  cases  of  D.  D.  Home  and  Mr.
Moses.

These  ectoplasms,  moreover,  when  developed,  may  be  recognisable  •


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  549

they  may  serve  as  indications  of  identity.  With  D.  D.  Home  this  seems
frequently  to  have  been  the  case  ;  and  the  special  shape  and  character  of
hands  seen  formed  one  of  the  most  generally  impressive  points  in  his
phenomena.  In  Mr.  Moses'  case  the  hands  (except  once  in  a  photo-
graph) were  not  claimed  as  belonging  to  personal  friends;  but  the  lean
brown  hand  and  wrist  which  usually  appeared  (Mr.  Moses'  own  hand
being  thick,  plump,  and  white)  seemed  appropriate  to  the  Arabian
philosopher  to  whom  it  was  asserted  to  belong.

Amongst  these  detached  ectoplasms  must  be  reckoned  the  pheno-
menon of  "  the  direct  voice."  Utterance  may  be  referable  to  an  ectoplastic
throat  as  distinctly  as  grip  to  ectoplastic  fingers  ; — and  may  form  of  course
an  even  higher  manifestation, — capable  of  manifesting  more  intelligence
and  of  giving  more  convincing  indications  of  identity.  But  this  pheno-
menon (which  I  believe  myself  to  have  observed  elsewhere)  has  been
only  imperfectly  shown  in  the  cases  on  which  this  present  survey  is  based.

(£)  Nor  is  it  desirable  here  to  dwell  at  length  upon  the  most  advanced
type  of  ectoplasy ; — when  an  apparently  complete  form  seems  to  live  for
the  time  an  independent  life.  This  never  occurred  through  Mr.  Moses.
Something  like  it  occurred  through  D.  D.  Home  several  times ;  though
the  solidity  of  the  form  was  not  tested.  No  more,  therefore,  need  here  be
said  than  that  this  completer  development  of  the  isolated  or  independent
ectoplasm  differs  in  no  fundamental  way  from  the  types  which  we  have
already  discussed.  On  the  frequent  fraudulent  simulations  of  this
phenomenon,  there  is  no  need  here  to  dwell.  But  for  those  who  admit
that  a  hand  can  be  temporarily  thrown  off  in  this  strange  kind  of  asexual
gemmation,  it  would  be  illogical  to  deny  the  possibility  of  a  whole  apparent
human  form  thus  originated,  and  thus  re-absorbed  or  disappearing.

At  whatever  point,  indeed,  among  the  phenomena  of  ectoplasy  we  may
draw  our  evidential  line,  it  seems  to  me  probable  that  we  have  here  got  at
the  root  of  most  of  the  physical  phenomena  assignable  to  external  control.
It  is  this  power  of  using  the  vital  force  of  men  which  brings  unembodied
beings  into  relation  with  the  material  world.  It  is  this  power,  too,  which
links  the  physical  with  the  mental  phenomena  of  spirit-control ; — enabling
the  unseen  guide  to  use  the  machinery  of  thought  as  well  as  of  motion,  in
wa>s  which  the  unaided  organism  could  never  have  devised.  To  some  of
these  intellectual  phenomena  we  must  now  turn.

(5)   MENTAL  NUTRITION  MODIFIED  BY  SPIRIT  CONTROL.

(a)  Ordinary  Sensory  Perception  Spiritually  Controlled. — The  next
heading  in  our  previous  series  was  sensory  receptivity.  In  the  scheme
of  supraliminal  faculty  this  included  the  ordinary  action  of  the  sense-
organs,  whose  limits  so  largely  determine  our  intellectual  life.  In  the
subliminal  scheme,  we  found  that  the  action  of  these  senses  was  some-
times heightened  in  hyperaesthesia,  and  sometimes  deadened  in  anaesthesia


550  APPENDICES  [926  A

more  or  less  complete.  We  found  also, — and  this  was  the  most  significant
extension  of  faculty, — that  under  certain  circumstances  the  sensation  of
pain  could  be  voluntarily  inhibited,  and  the  organism  thus  devoted  with-
out interruption  to  those  higher  purposes,  with  which  pain, — an  ancient
form  of  warning,  now  often  worse  than  useless, — too  frequently  interferes.
Passing  on  to  the  effects  on  sensory  receptivity  produced  by  spiritual
control,  we  find,  as  under  previous  headings,  that  the  effects  which  self-
suggestion  can  produce  on  the  organism  are  produced  also,  and  with
apparently  greater  facility,  by  spirit  power;  and  moreover  that  a  new
delicacy  of  directive  or  selective  action  is  observable  under  the  more
skilful  manipulations  (so  to  say)  of  disembodied  intelligence.  Such  at
least  is  the  claim  advanced;  although  naturally  it  is  often  only  by  the
analogy  of  other  phenomena  occurring  in  connection  that  one  can  be
guided  in  attributing  these  intellectual  results  to  an  external  rather  than  a
merely  subliminal  influence.  The  hyperaesthesia,  anaesthesia,  or  analgesia  of
trance,  for  example,  does  not  in  itself  indicate  whether  a  spirit  external  to
the  subject  has  been  at  the  work  or  no.  If  however  during  a  trance
D.  D.  Home  places  his  head  without  pain  or  injury  amid  glowing  coals,
and  if  we  there  admit  a  spirit's  action  (although  perhaps  on  the  environ-
ment rather  than  on  the  organism),  we  may  consequently  attribute  to
similarly  external  influence  other  forms  of  insensibility  shown  during  the
same  or  similar  trances.  And  in  connection  with  trance,  when  we  reach
that  topic,  there  will  be  further  instances  of  the  abeyance  in  which  ordinary
sensation  can  be  held  by  spirit-control.

(b)  Memory  Controlled;  Retrocognition  Spiritually  Given. — And  some-
what similarly,  just  as  the  subliminal  control  over  memory  is  greater  than
the  supraliminal,  so  it  is  claimed  by  spirits  also  that  they  can  influence
the  sensitive's  memory;  can  make  him  recall  things  forgotten  or  never
noticed,  and  on  the  other  hand,  can  obliterate  from  his  recollection  things
previously  known.     This  claim — thoroughly  concordant  with  our  scheme
— is  hardly  capable  of  objective  proof.

(c)  Sensory   Automatism   Spiritually    Controlled ;  Phantasms   of  the
Dead,  &c. — This  parallelism  of  action  continues  under  our  next  heading
of  "sensory  automatism."     Even  as  the  subliminal  self  can  present  visual
or  auditory  phantasms  for  supraliminal  observation ;  even  as  the  human
agent,  acting  telepathically,  can  present — still  through  subliminal  agency—
his  own  phantasmal  appearance  for  the  percipient  to  recognise,  so  can  the
spirit.     The  "ghost  "  of  common  parlance — the  "phantasm  of  the  dead"
— may   often   seem  but  a  dreamy  and  purposeless   reflection   of  some
portion  only  of  the  departed  spirit's  being;  but,  nevertheless,  it  comes
from  that  spirit,  I  believe,  as  truly  as  the  still  living  agent's  phantasm
comes  from  him,  in  his  dying  or  his  critical  hour.     The  spirit  here  i
acting   concurrently  with  the  supraliminal   intelligence,  just  as  the   sub-
liminal intelligence  has  already  done.


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  551

(^/)  Telcesthesia  Developed  into  Perception  of  Spiritual  Environment ;
Precognition. — But  this  series  of  spiritual  modifications  of  sensory  recep-
tivity which  has  thus  far  seemed  merely  to  run  parallel  with  the  similar
modifications  introduced  by  subliminal  control,  takes  here  a  great,  a
significant  extension.  We  have  come  to  the  heading  of  tel&sthesia — to
the  point  where  the  man's  unaided  spirit  has  seemed  already,  though  still
acting  in  the  physical,  the  planetary,  environment — to  transcend  the
bounds  of  space.  Whether  and  how  far  at  the  same  time  it  has  learnt
to  transcend  the  bounds  of  time — in  retrocognition  or  precognition — is  a
point  which  we  have  not  here  felt  it  needful  to  discuss  at  length.  But
now,  when  we  consider  the  scope  of  clairvoyance  under  spiritual  guidance,
we  find  that  the  word  must  assume  a  strange  and  novel  meaning.  There
are,  indeed,  some  instances  of  spiritually-guided  clairvoyance  of  the
terrestrial  type.  It  was  clairvoyance  of  that  kind,  one  may  say,  when,
under  spiritual  control,  Mr.  Moses  felt  himself  present — though  rather  as
by  translation  than  by  clairvoyant  vision — at  the  distant  funeral  of  his
friend.

But  the  form  of  clairvoyance  characteristic  of  spirit-guidance  is  that
which  enables  the  sensitive  to  perceive  the  spiritual  environment  inter-
penetrating the  environment  which  we  know.

To  perceive  it  how?  with  what  senses?  with  what  standard  of  inter-
pretation or  faculty  of  control?  We  cannot  say.  We  know  that  even
our  perception  of  this  common  world  is  in  a  sense  symbolical ;  that  the
whirling  molecules  are  translated  for  us  by  our  narrow  senses  into  patterns
which  our  minds  can  comprehend.  Still  more  strangely  symbolical  must
be  man's  perception  of  those  things  which  come  to  him  through  channels
which  he  knows  not,  and  on  a  tide  of  life  which  he  can  neither  sound  nor
stem.  When  hues  beyond  his  spectrum  are  revealed  to  him,  with  what
words  shall  he  describe  the  broadening  ray?  We  have  seen  the  single
phantasm  presented  as  by  a  special  subliminal  effort  to  the  still  dominant
supraliminal  view;  we  have  seen  the  ghost  stand  in  detachment  and
incommensurable  amid  a  scene  of  common  day.  But  at  the  farther  stage
at  which  we  have  now  arrived  there  is  for  the  percipient  a  fusion  of
subliminal  and  supraliminal  outlook ;  he  sees  the  terrene  perspective  still,
but  the  cloud  qua  nunc  obducta  tuenti  Mortalis  hebetat  visus  has  been
caught  away,  and  he  sees  moving  through  the  familiar  outlook  the
visitants  of  an  interwoven  world.

Such  a  condition — varying  in  degree  and  duration — has  been  described
in  various  places  as  coming  upon  Mr.  Moses  during  or  after  a  stance.
The  habit  of  double  perception  grew  on  him  as  time  went  on,  and  is
described  in  the  latter  paragraph  of  a  letter  which  I  print  as  given  in
Light,  January  2Oth,  I894.1

1  The  letter  is  quoted  "by  Light  from  Col.  Olcott,  to  whom  it  was  written  September
4th,  1876.  I  have  not  seen  the  original  MS.,  but  the  internal  evidence  of  genuineness
is  convincing.


552  APPENDICES  [926  A

I  have  followed  out  the  train  of  thought  myself  of  late.  Myself,  what  is  it?
I  do  things  one  day,  and  especially  say  things,  of  which  I  have  no  remem-
brance. I  find  myself  absorbed  in  thought  in  the  evening,  and  go  to  bed  with
no  lecture  for  the  morrow  prepared.  In  the  morning  I  get  up,  go  about  my
work  as  usual,  lecture  a  little  more  fluently  than  usual,  do  all  my  business,
converse  with  my  friends,  and  yet  know  absolutely  nothing  of  what  I  have
done.  One  person  alone,  who  knows  me  very  intimately,  can  tell  by  a  far-off
look  in  the  eyes  that  I  am  in  an  abnormal  state.  The  notes  of  my  lectures  so
delivered — as  I  read  them  in  the  books  of  those  who  attend  my  lectures — read
to  me  precise,  accurate,  clear,  and  fit  into  their  place  exactly.  My  friends  find
me  absent,  short  in  manner,  brusque  and  rude  of  speech.  Else  there  is  no
difference.  When  I  "come  to  myself"  I  know  nothing  of  what  has  taken
place,  but  sometimes  memory  recurs  to  me,  and  I  gradually  recollect.  This  is
becoming  a  very  much  more  frequent  thing  with  me,  so  that  I  hardly  know
when  I  am  (what  I  call)  my  proper  self,  and  when  I  am  the  vehicle  of  another
intelligence.  My  spirit  friends  give  hints,  but  do  not  say  much.  I  am  begin-
ning, however,  to  realise  far  more  than  I  once  could,  how  completely  a  man
may  be  a  "gas-pipe  " — a  mere  vehicle  for  another  spirit.  Is  it  possible  a  man
may  lead  the  life  I  do,  and  have  no  Individuality  at  all?  I  lead  three  distinct
lives,  and  I  often  think  that  each  is  separate.  Is  it  possible  for  a  man,  to
ordinary  eyes  a  common  human  being,  to  be  a  vehicle  for  Intelligences  from
above,  and  to  have  no  separate  personality  ?  Can  it  be  that  my  spirit  may  be
away,  learning  perhaps,  leading  a  separate  spiritual  life,  whilst  my  body  is
going  about  and  is  animated  by  other  Intelligences?  Can  it  be  that  instruction
is  so  administered  to  my  soul,  and  that  growth  in  knowledge  becomes  manifest
to  me  as  now  and  again  I  return  from  my  spirit  life  and  occupy  my  body
again  ?  And  is  it  possible  that  I  may  one  day  become  conscious  of  these
wanderings,  and  lead  a  conscious  spiritual  existence  alongside  of  my  corporeal
existence  ?

Once  or  twice — once  very  lately  in  the  Isle  of  Wight — my  interior  dormant
faculties  awoke,  and  I  lost  the  external  altogether.  For  a  day  and  a  night  I
lived  in  another  world,  while  dimly  conscious  of  material  surroundings.  I  saw
my  friends,  the  house,  the  room,  the  landscape,  but  dimly.  I  talked,  and
walked,  and  went  about  as  usual,  but  through  all,  and  far  more  clearly,  I  saw
my  spiritual  surroundings,  the  friends  I  know  so  well,  and  many  I  had  never
seen  before.  The  scene  was  clearer  than  the  material  landscape,  yet  blended
with  it  in  a  certain  way.  I  did  not  wish  to  talk.  I  was  content  to  look  and
live  among  such  surroundings.  It  was  as  I  have  heard  Swedenborg's  visions
described.

(6)  RESPONSE  TO  STIMULI  SPIRITUALLY  CONTROLLED.

(a)  Ideation  Inspired  by  Spirits. — We  enter  in  this  section  6  upon  a
group  of  phenomena  of  great  interest  and  importance,  but  not  of  a  type
on  which  objective  evidence  can  easily  be  forthcoming.

The  belief  that  unseen  powers  inspire  men — not  merely  by  prompting
their  hands  to  automatic  writing,  but  by  "  putting  thoughts  into  their
hearts  " — is  one  of  the  most  deeply-rooted,  the  most  widespread,  and  the
most  encouraging  to  which  the  higher  races  of  man  have  clung.  It  is
strongly  insisted  upon  by  Mr.  Moses'  guides ;  and  will  be  found  repeated


926A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  553

in  various  forms  in  his  book,  "  Spirit  Teachings."  What  are  held  as
inspirations  of  this  type,  however,  deal  mainly  with  religious  and  moral
conceptions,  or  if  unknown  and  verifiable  earthly  facts  are  included,  they
are  usually  such  as  might  with  equal  plausibility  be  deemed  to  arise  from
the  thinker's  subliminal  self.  The  strong  assertions  made  by  spirits
who  show  themselves  able  to  operate  powerfully  in  other  ways  may  fairly,
I  think,  be  taken  as  carrying  weight.  They  represent  the  fusion  of  the
spirit's  thought  with  the  man's  as  sometimes  becoming  indescribably  close
and  intimate.  When  we  have  compared  the  inspirations  of  a  man's  own
"  genius  "  to  subliminal  uprushes,  or  eruptions  from  a  volcano,  we  might
better  compare  the  combination  of  spiritual  and  human  thought  to  one
of  those  cases  where  crystals  of  two  totally  different  substances  have
developed  within  the  space  bounded  by  the  same  planes ;  and,  intergrown
as  they  are  and  interpenetrant,  still  testify  by  the  optical  characters  of
their  minutest  parts  that  here  is  no  congeries  of  fragments,  but  two
crystals  made  inextricably  one.

(b}  Motor  Automatism  Spiritually  Controlled ;  Possession. — I  have
spoken  of  the  difficulty  of  proving  or  tracing  spiritual  influence  so  long
as  its  manifestations  are  purely  intra-cerebral,  are  confined  to  infusing  into
the  mind  of  the  sensitive  ideas  which  he  cannot  distinguish  from  his
own.

But,  as  we  know,  there  are  various  methods  by  which  the  authorship
of  certain  ideas  can  be  claimed  by  the  inspiring  intelligence.  A  distinctive
mark  can  be  affixed  to  them  by  the  mode  of  their  promulgation — by
giving  them  expression  concurrently  with  the  expression  of  the  sensitive's
normal  thoughts,  or  even  while  the  sensitive's  ordinary  personality  is
plunged  in  trance.  In  the  one  case  there  may  be  automatic  writing  while
the  sensitive  is  reading  or  talking  on  other  matters.  In  the  other  case
there  may  be  "  trance-utterances  " — replies  to  questions,  or  long  addresses,
given  while  the  medium  is  unaware  of  what  is  going  on  around  him,  and
of  the  words  which  issue  from  his  lips.  In  each  case,  of  course,  the  proof
of  spirit-influence  depends  not  merely  on  the  manner  of  the  message,  but
on  the  facts  which  it  contains,  or  on  the  supernormal  phenomena  with
which  it  is  in  other  ways  associated.  There  is  no  need  here  to  re-discuss
these  automatisms  at  length.  They  form,  as  the  reader  will  see,  a  large
part  of  Mr.  Moses'  phenomena,  and  almost  the  whole  of  those  discussed
in  Mrs.  Piper's  case ;  and  indeed  in  their  various  forms  they  supply  the
bulk  of  the  evidence  to  the  very  existence  of  spirit  control,  which  physical
movements  by  themselves  could  never  demonstrate.

One  addition  to  previous  descriptions,  however,  must  be  made,  if  we
are  to  realise  the  extent  to  which  these  automatisms  may  be  carried.
The  control  may  be  pushed  beyond  the  point  at  which  our  analyses  of
evidence  generally  stop.  Consider,  for  instance,  the  scene  (948  A),
where  Mr.  Moses  is  entranced  by  the  spirit  of  a  suicide.  Here  we
have  evidential  writing  and  utterance, — agitated  words  uttered  in  a


554  APPENDICES  [926  B

trance, — rude  drawings  made.  But  we  have  also  more  than  this.  We
have  an  apparent  possession  ;  a  temporary  occupation  of  the  medium's
whole  personality  by  the  spirit  which  is  finding  utterance  through  him.
This  possession  is  not,  indeed,  a  matter  of  evidence  in  the  same  sense
that  messages  containing  facts  unknown  to  the  writer  may  be  evidence
of  external  control.  Yet  we  can  hardly  dissociate  the  two  parts  of  the
phenomenon ;  and  if  in  such  a  case  as  this  we  believe  that  the  message
really  came  from  the  suicide,  we  shall  probably  feel  also  that  the  distress,
the  agitation,  the  bewilderment,  which  did  not  leave  the  medium  for
many  hours,  were  due  also  to  the  influence  or  possession  of  the  same
unhappy  soul.

The  possibility  of  being  thus  dominated  by  some  unwelcome  spirit
was  naturally  regarded  by  Mr.  Moses  with  fear  and  dislike.  His  guides
admitted  it  as  a  real,  but  not  as  an  alarming,  danger.  Such  spiritual
infections,  they  said  in  effect,  take  root  only  in  a  congenial  soil.  The
healthy  spirit  can  repel  their  attack,  much  as  the  healthy  organism
destroys  the  germs  which  are  perpetually  seeking  lodgment  within  it.

(c)  Extension  of  Will-power  into  the  Spiritual  World ;  Prayer.  —  The
next  heading  in  the  scheme  of  subliminally  guided  faculty  for  which
we  are  now  seeking  parallels  under  spirit-control  includes  will-power
extended  beyond  the  organism,  and  affecting  telepathically  other  incarnate
minds.  The  parallel  to  this  would  be  some  influence  exerted  by  in-
carnate men  upon  disembodied  spirits.  The  exercise  of  such  an  in-
fluence must  necessarily  be  almost  impossible  to  prove ;  nor  is  it  at  first
easy  to  imagine  in  what  way  it  could  plausibly  be  represented  as  taking
place.  At  this  point  in  our  argument,  however,  we  have  become  familiar
with  conceptions  which,  when  looked  at  from  both  sides,  do  apparently
imply  some  reciprocal  action  between  spirits  and  incarnate  men.  But
what  further  I  have  to  say  of  prayer  has  been  said  in  the  final  chapter  of
this  book.  And  as  to  the  last  heading  in  my  "  Scheme  of  Vital  Faculty,"
namely,  "  Modifications  of  Spiritual  Personality,"  the  reader  who
studies  its  projected  headings  will  see  at  once  how  needful  their  dis-
cussion will  some  day  be,  and  how  far  we  are  as  yet  from  being  able  to
undertake  it.  That  must  be  the  task  of  a  later  age.  My  own  discussion,
already  so  highly  speculative,  could  hardly  be  pressed  further  without
overstepping  the  limits  of  all  legitimate  speculation.

926  B.  The  following  are  references  to  the  chief  accounts  of  tele-
kinetic  phenomena  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R. : —

"  On  some  Physical  Phenomena,  commonly  called  Spiritualistic,  wit-
nessed by  the  Author,"  by  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett  (vol.  iv.  p.  25).

"  Notes  of  Stances  with  D.  D.  Home,"  by  William  Crookes  (vol.  vi.
p.  98).

"  On  Alleged  Movements  of  Objects,  without  contact,  occurring  not  in
the  presence  of  a  paid  Medium,"  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  (vol.  vii.  p.  146,  and
P-  383).


927A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  555

"The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses,"  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers  (vol.  ix.
p.  245,  and  vol.  xi.  p.  24).

"  Poltergeists,"  by  Frank  Podmore  (vol.  xii.  p.  45).

"  The  Fire  Walk,"  by  Andrew  Lang  (vol.  xv.  p.  2).  This  gives
instances  of  an  alleged  capacity  on  the  part  of  certain  persons  under
certain  circumstances  of  resistance  to  the  normal  effects  of  fire  on  the
human  organism.  The  phenomenon,  if  genuine,  is  not  exactly  tele-
kinetic,  but  may  rather  be  regarded  as  an  extended  form  of  motor  auto-
matism. Some  mediums,  especially  D.  D.  Home,  are  said  to  have  had
the  same  power.

Other  works  dealing  with  telekinetic  phenomena  to  which  I  may  refer
the  reader  are  : —

Report  on  Spiritualism  of  the  Committee  of  the  London  Dialectical
Society  (London  :  Longmans,  Green,  Reader  &  Dyer,  1871).

Les  Tables  Tournantes,  par  le  Comte  Ag.  de  Gasparin  (Paris  :  Cal-
mann  LeVy ;  4th  edition,  1889).  A  pamphlet  describing  some  of  de  Gas-
parin's  experiments  was  published  by  Professor  Thury  under  the  title
of  Les  Tables  Tournantes,  considerees  au  point  de  vue  de  la  question  de
physique  generale  qui  s'y  rattache  (Geneva,  1885).  This  is  now  out  of
print  and  rare.  It  contains  various  cases  of  movements  obtained  without
contact,  by  seemingly  careful  observers.

Experimental  Investigation  of  the  Spirit  Manifestations,  by  Robert
Hare,  M.D.,  Emeritus  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania (New  York,  1855).

Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  by  William  Crookes ;
reprinted  from  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  (London:  J.  Burns,

1874).

Animismus  und  Spiritismus,  von  Alexander  N.  AksakorT.  2  vols.
(Leipzig:  Oswald  Mutze,  1890.)  An  account  of  this  book,  which  deals
chiefly  with  the  theoretical  side  of  the  subject,  in  opposition  to  the  views  of
von  Hartmann,  was  given  in  a  review  by  the  present  writer  in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  665.

The  Precursors  of  Spiritism  for  the  last  250  years,  by  A.  N.  AksakorT
(in  Russian,  St.  Petersburg,  1895) ;  reviewed  by  Dr.  Walter  Leaf  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  p.  319.

The  Scientific  Investigation  of  Physical  Phenomena  with  Mediums,  by
M.  M.  Petrovo-Solovovo  (in  Russian,  St.  Petersburg,  1900)  ;  reviewed  by
Dr.  Walter  Leaf  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xv.  p.  416.

For  the  physical  phenomena  connected  with  D.  D.  Home,  see  the
references  given  in  938  A.

For  the  so-called  "  Reichenbach  "  phenomena,  see  the  brief  discussion
given  in  vol.  i.,  541  D.

927  A.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  119.  In  the  follow-
ing case  the  phenomena  described  were  various,  but  consisted  mainly  of
automatic  writing  and  speech.  Some  of  the  writings  evinced  a  knowledge


556  APPENDICES  [927  A

greater  than  the  automatist  possessed.  Especially  two  lines  from  Homer
were  correctly  written  in  response  to  a  request  for  some  Greek,  although
the  writer  was  certainly  quite  ignorant  even  of  the  Greek  alphabet.  Some
indications  of  identity  were  also  given.

Certain  physical  phenomena  (the  most  important  of  which  occurred
in  my  informant's  absence)  were  interpolated,  as  it  were,  at  random  among
the  intellectual  phenomena,  and  carried  with  them  no  clear  indication  of
their  source ;  except  that  they  occurred  only  in  the  presence  of  the  sitter
here  styled  Mr.  Andrew.

For  my  introduction  to  Mr.  O.  (as  I  shall  call  him),  the  narrator  of
these  incidents,  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Andrew  Lang.  I
first  heard  Mr.  O.'s  narrative  from  himself  by  word  of  mouth  on  November
2Oth,  1889,  while  the  events  were  still  fresh  in  his  memory.  I  regard  him
as  an  excellent  witness.  The  delay  in  producing  the  evidence  has  been
partly  caused  by  Mr.  O.'s  persistent  but  unavailing  efforts  to  induce
the  survivors  among  his  fellow-sitters  to  add  their  testimony  to  his  own.
I  have  reason  to  believe  that  their  refusal  is  in  no  way  due  to  any  dis-
agreement with  Mr.  O.'s  account,  but  mainly  to  scruples  of  a  quasi-religious
nature.  Such  scruples  have  repeatedly  baulked  our  inquiries ;  but  I  hope
that  they  may  gradually  die  out  among  our  informants,  as  the  inno-
cence and  the  importance  of  experiments  of  this  kind  come  to  be  better
understood.  In  Mr.  O.'s  own  case  there  are,  I  think,  amply  sufficient
reasons  why  his  anonymity  should  be  preserved.  His  brother — in  defer-
ence to  whose  serious  wish  during  dangerous  illness  the  sittings  were
undertaken — is  now  dead.

I  will  add  that  the  intimacy  among  the  members  of  the  circle  was  such
that  I  cannot  doubt  that  Mr.  O.  heard,  without  delay,  from  his  brother  and
others,  of  the  physical  phenomena  which  had  occurred  during  his  own
absence  from  the  circle.  Mr.  O.  writes  in  1890  : —

In  the  winter  of  '88-9  I  began,  along  with  a  few  intimate  friends,  to  investi-
gate the  phenomena  commonly  called  Spiritualistic.  None  of  the  company  was
at  all  anxious  for  any  specific  communication  from  another  sphere,  but  partly
for  the  gratification  of  an  invalid  brother,  and  partly  for  the  sake  of  satisfying
ourselves  as  to  the  possibility  of  some  things  we  had  read,  we  attempted  a
sitting.  The  results  far  exceeded  our  expectation.  We  were  favoured  with
phenomena  somewhat  startling  to  novices  in  the  art — phenomena  styled  in
Scotland  uncanny — but  their  interesting  nature  soon  overcame  our  natural
diffidence,  and  before  the  end  of  the  winter  we  were  on  quite  familiar  terms
with  our  unsubstantial  vistants.

As  a  rule  the  circle  consisted  of  two  of  my  brothers,  two  personal  friends,
and  myself,  though  occasionally  we  admitted  other  members  of  the  family,  and
once  or  twice  an  acquaintance.  We  were  not  Spiritualists,  nor  had  we  any
desire  to  be  known  as  such  ;  all  we  did  was  done  solely  by  way  of  experiment
and  amusement.  The  opportunity  was  the  best  possible ;  we  had  all  our
sittings  in  our  own  home,  the  circle  was  confined  to  personal  friends  in  whom
we  had  full  confidence,  so  that  there  was  neither  motive  nor  opportunity  for


927A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  557

deception.  We  usually  met  twice  a  week  when  my  invalid  brother  was  able
for  company,  but  during  the  winter  months  relapses  of  his  illness  caused  inter-
ruptions ;  and  indeed,  I  often  thought  the  excitement  of  our  sittings  did  not
affect  him  beneficially.

Our  sittings  were  all  in  the  dark.  Our  medium  was,  in  most  cases,  Mr.

Andrew,  though  we  had  also  a  less  efficient  medium  in  the  case  of  Mr.  S .

The  performances  of  the  latter  were  mostly  of  a  somnambulistic  kind,  and  do
not  call  for  special  notice.

With  Andrew,  however,  phenomena  assumed  quite  another  aspect.  He
would  play  charming  music  on  the  violin,  or  produce  beautiful  pencil  sketches
of  city  and  rural  scenes.  Sometimes  the  locus  of  these  scenes  was  named,
oftener  not,  but  they  were  invariably  unknown  to  any  member  of  the  com-
pany.

For  a  time  I  failed  to  see  anything  very  unaccountable  in  Andrew's  trance
productions.  I  knew  him  to  be  an  accomplished  violinist  and  a  fairly  good
sketcher,  and  I  naturally  put  everything  down  to  an  unconscious  exercise  of
his  own  skill.  One  little  thing  did  perplex  me,  namely,  the  very  different  styles
of  handwriting  he  seemed  to  accomplish  with  equal  facility.

I  mentioned  an  invalid  brother.  He  suffered  from  a  heart  affection  known
as  presystolic  murmur.  At  one  sitting  we  consulted  a  medical  man,  who
called  himself  Dr.  Snobinski  of  Russia.  This  gentleman  not  only  prescribed
for  my  brother,  but  also  furnished  us  with  a  diagram  of  the  human  heart,  and
put  a  special  mark  to  indicate  the  valve  diseased  in  my  brother's  case.  How
this  diagram  was  actually  drawn  by  a  person  ignorant  of  human  physiology,
and  how  the  diseased  valve  was  shown  and  explained  by  one  ignorant  of  path-
ology, was  more  than  I  could  account  for.

On  another  occasion  another  doctor,  calling  himself  Arnold,  confirmed  the
diagnosis  of  Dr.  Snobinski,  and  rated  my  brother  for  having  neglected  to  follow
the  regimen  recommended  by  the  famous  Russian.  On  this  occasion,  during
examination  of  the  chest,  when  the  patient  chanced  to  laugh,  the  doctor  [in  the
person  of  Mr.  Andrew]  suddenly  gave  him  a  mild  box  on  the  ear  with  his  open
palm.  This,  I  understood,  was  to  rebuke  his  laughter,  which,  as  is  well  known,
is  a  dangerous  luxury  to  one  suffering  from  valvular  disease.

At  times  we  were  entertained  by  a  negro,  who  gave  us  no  little  fun.  His
effort  to  speak  English  was  most  amusing,  and  presented  just  those  difficulties
which  perplex  the  negro  in  this  more  matter-of-fact  sphere.

These  phenomena  had  led  me  to  perplexing  thoughts,  and,  though  unable
to  explain  them  on  purely  psychological  grounds,  I  was  slow  to  admit  that  the
medium  was  not  also  the  cause  of  the  effects  he  produced.  I  had  so  far
accounted  for  the  music  and  the  sketches  ;  the  varieties  of  the  handwriting  were
a  little  puzzling,  the  diagram  and  the  prescription  a  little  more  so,  but  I  was
still  inclined  to  suspend  judgment  till  I  should  acquire  more  facts.  With  a
view  to  this,  lone  evening  interrogated:  "Where  are  you?"  Answer:  "In
the  sphere  next  the  earth."  "  Could  you  tell  anything  of  the  future  ?  "  Answer :
"  We  are  as  ignorant  of  the  future  as  you  are."  This  I  thought  was  at  least
honest,  and  very  probable,  but  too  general  to  be  of  service  to  me  in  arriving  at
any  decision.  I  resolved  to  put  what  seemed  to  me  a  searching  test.  None
of  the  others  knew  Latin  or  Greek,  so  I  asked  an  answer  in  Latin.  This  was
readily  given,  but  so  badly  spelt  that  I  failed  to  fully  translate  it.  Not  yet
satisfied,  I  asked  any  quotation  from  a  Greek  author — so  that  by  comparison


558  APPENDICES  [927  A

with  the  original,  identity  or  variation  might  be  satisfactorily  apparent.     This
resulted  in  a  quotation  from  the  Odyssey,  Bk.  xi.,  lines  57-8:  —


wy  y\6es  VTTO  £o0oi>  rjepocvra  ;
€(fedr}s  TTf^os  f(i>v  %  eyeb  crvv  vr)t  jje\aivrj.

These  lines  were  beautifully  written  in  cursive  characters,  and  minute  even  to
the  accents.  As  a  student  I  had  read  Odyssey  XI.,  but  could  not  have
given  the  lines  from  memory,  or  written  them  out  with  correct  accents.  On
comparing  the  lines  with  the  Greek  text  I  found  them  to  be  without  flaw.
My  puzzle  was  now  twofold  :  (i)  That  I  was  not  able  to  read  the  Latin  proved
that  what  was  given  was  not  anything  I  had  previously  been  revolving
in  my  own  mind,  but  had  come  from  an  independent  intelligence;  (2)  The
medium  was  not  acquainted  with  either  Latin  or  Greek  —  did  not  know  one
from  the  other.  Clearly  I  must  now  quit  the  hypothesis  that  the  medium  was
the  author  of  his  own  message,  as  not  adequate  to  account  for  all  the  facts.

The  Greek  and  the  Latin  [Mr.  O.  adds  in  a  later  letter]  were  both  obtained
at  the  same  sitting.  I  asked  for  the  Greek  because  the  Latin  was  so  badly
written  that  I  could  not  fully  make  it  out.  The  medium  that  evening  was
Andrew,  who,  I  am  fully  convinced,  could  not  possibly  have  any  knowledge
that  Greek  would  be  asked  for  —  and  even  if  he  had  known,  he  could  not  have
given  it,  since  he  did  not  know  the  Greek  when  it  was  given.  The  controlling
spirit  was  unknown  to  any  of  the  company.  In  reply  to  my  questions  he
described  himself  as  a  youth  of  nineteen,  according  to  their  reckoning,  but  was
only  twelve  years  of  age  when  he  died.  When  I  asked  how  he  was  occupied
he  told  us  he  was  still  at  school.  This  information  led  me  to  ask  for  the  Latin
and  subsequently  for  the  Greek.

Still  more  inexplicable  was  the  evidential  sign  given  to  a  doubting  acquaint-
ance. This  gentleman  requested  permission  to  be  present  at  one  of  the  sittings,
but  his  general  behaviour  there  indicated  that  he  regarded  a  sitting  as  a  kind
of  farce.  He  brought  with  him  another  gentleman  of  equally  sceptical  temper.
The  first  remark  from  the  medium  that  evening  was,  "There  are  strangers
present  to-night."  This  remark  seemed  to  our  friend  so  commonplace  that  he
requested  evidence  of  the  presence  of  a  spirit.  On  being  asked  what  evidence
he  would  like,  he  jokingly  said,  "  Bring  a  candle  !  "  —  an  idea  probably  suggested
by  sitting  in  the  dark.  The  wish  had  scarcely  been  expressed  when  a  candle
was  placed  on  the  table  before  him,  with  the  request  that  he  should  immediately
quit  the  company.  The  candle  was  found  to  be  warm,  a  circumstance  explained
by  the  fact  that  it  had  been  used  in  the  next  room  only  a  few  minutes  before.
My  brother  immediately  went  to  the  next  room  and  asked  for  a  candle.  The
good  lady  was  much  surprised  to  find  that  while  the  candlestick  was  still  stand-
ing where  she  had  placed  it  shortly  before,  the  candle  itself  was  gone.  My
brother  then  showed  her  the  candle  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  and  this  she
identified  as  the  one  she  had  used  a  few  minutes  before  —  indeed  there  could  not
be  two  opinions,  as  there  was  only  one  candle  in  the  house.  This  was  regarded
by  the  circle  as  the  most  wonderful  result  yet  obtained.  Here  was  proof  amount-
ing to  a  demonstration  that  a  material  object  had  been  passed  through  matter  ;
the  candle  had  been  brought  from  one  room  to  another,  though  both  doors
(there  were  two  doors  in  the  room  in  which  the  sittings  were  held)  were  locked
before  the  sitting  was  commenced.

This  candle  incident  I  give  on  the  testimony  of  the  others,  as  I  myself  was


927B]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  559

not  present  that  evening,  a  circumstance  which  I  afterwards  regretted.  Person-
ally I  have  not  seen  a  case  of  matter  through  matter.

During  that  winter  we  obtained  many  interesting  phenomena.  The
spirits  (?)  would  strike  any  note  we  asked  on  a  violin  or  harmonium  which
stood  by.  The  notes  requested  would  sound  forth  distinctly,  though  no  visible
hand  was  near  ;  and  this  was  done  both  in  the  dark  and  in  the  light,  though
more  often  in  the  dark.

One  evening  a  visitant  addressed  one  of  my  brothers  as  an  old  schoolfellow,
and  in  proof  of  his  identity  he  reminded  my  brother  of  a  poem  they  had  once
learnt  together  as  boys,  namely,  one  by  "  Surfaceman"  (Alexander  Anderson),
entitled  "  The  blood  on  the  'wheel.'1''  My  brother  perfectly  recollected  the  exercise,
and  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  the  speaker.  The  wonderful  thing  here
was  that  the  medium  had  become  acquainted  with  my  brother  later  in  life  and
had  no  knowledge  of  his  schooldays.

Of  the  scientific  value  of  these  results  I  was  not  aware  till  I  had  the  pleasure
of  meeting  yourself,  and  if  we  had  met  some  months  earlier  I  should  certainly
have  preserved  the  legible  results  of  our  sittings.  They  were  destroyed  in
ignorance  of  their  scientific  worth,  and  chiefly  because  associated  with  a
departed  brother  whose  early  death  we  still  lament.  Though  our  sittings  are
long  past  their  results  still  dwell  with  me  in  all  but  their  first  freshness.  Cir-
cumstances conspired  to  break  up  our  little  company.  Of  our  circle  of  five  two
have  since  married,  one  has  left  the  district,  and  another  has  departed  this  life.
The  death  of  our  most  spirited  member  was  the  end  of  our  meetings.

927  B.  The  experiences  described  in  connection  with  Miss  White  and
Miss  Lottie  Fowler  (both  of  whom  are  now  dead)  seem  analogous  to  ex-
periences with  Mrs.  Piper.  The  case  of  Miss  White  comes  from  America,
and  is  specially  interesting  both  in  the  apparent  fulfilment  of  the  promise
made  by  the  alleged  discarnate  spirit  control  to  appear  to  the  narrator's
sick  wife,  and  in  the  apparent  knowledge  shown  of  the  immediate  approach
of  death.

From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  227.

January  2$th,  1891.

About  eleven  years  ago  I  was  much  distressed  owing  to  the  illness  of  my
wife,  who  suffered  from  cancer  in  the  stomach.  I  heard  about  a  medium,  Miss
Susie  Nickerson  White,  who  was  said  to  have  given  some  remarkable  tests,  and
I  called  on  her  as  a  stranger  and  requested  a  sitting.  My  wife's  sister  pur-
ported to  "  control,"  giving  her  name,  Maria,  and  mentioning  facts  about  my
family  which  were  correct.  She  also  called  my  wife  by  her  name,  Eliza  Anne,
described  her  sickness,  and  said  that  she  would  pass  over,  but  not  for  some
months.  I  said,  "  What  do  you  call  this  ?  Is  it  psychology,  or  mesmerism,  or
what?"  Maria  said,  "  I  knew  you  were  going  to  ask  that ;  I  saw  it  in  your
mind."  I  said,  "  Do  you  get  all  the  things  out  of  my  mind  ?  "  She  replied,
"  No.  I'll  tell  you  some  things  that  are  not  in  your  mind.  Within  three  days
Eliza  Anne  will  say  that  she  has  seen  me  and  mother,  too,  if  I  can  get  mother
to  come  along."  (My  wife's  mother  had  died  about  forty-five  years  previously,
and  my  wife's  sister  had  been  dead  from  six  to  eight  years.)

I  kept  these  circumstances  to  myself,  but  within  three  days  the  nurse  who  was
in  attendance  upon  my  wife  came  running  to  me  and  said  that  my  wife  was
worse,  and  was  going  out  of  her  mind;  that  she  had  called  upon  Maria  and


56o  APPENDICES  [927  C

mother,  and  had  sprung  out  of  bed  and  ran  towards  the  door  crying,  "  Stop,
Maria  !     Stop,  mother  !     Don't  go  yet !  "

I  soon  consulted  Miss  White  again,  and  Maria  again  purported  to  control.
My  wife  had  been  unable  for  some  days  to  retain  any  food  in  her  stomach,
could  not  keep  even  water  or  milk,  and  was  very  weak  and  also  unable  to  sleep.

Maria  told  me  to  give  her  some  hot,  very  strong  coffee,  with  plenty  of  cream
and  sugar  and  some  cream  toast.  This  prescription  amazed  me,  but  it  was
prepared.  My  wife  ate  and  drank  with  relish,  and  slept  soundly  afterwards.
She  lived  upon  this  food  for  some  days,  but  gradually  became  unable  even
to  take  this.

I  consulted  Miss  White  again,  and  Maria  told  me  to  get  some  limes,  and
to  give  my  wife  some  pure  juice  of  the  lime  several  times  a  day  ;  she  said  that
this  would  give  her  an  appetite  and  enable  her  to  retain  food.  The  pre-
scription was  a  success ;  but  gradually  my  wife  failed,  and  I  consulted  Miss
White  again,  and  asked  Maria  how  long  my  wife  would  continue  to  suffer.  She
said  she  could  not  tell  exactly  when  she  would  pass  away,  but  would  give  me  a
warning—"  The  next  time  she  says  she  has  seen  me,  don't  leave  her  afterwards."

Some  days  later,  as  I  was  relieving  the  nurse  about  three  or  four  in  the
morning,  the  nurse  said,  "  Mammie  "  (meaning  my  wife)  "  says  she  has  seen
Maria  again."     In  a  few  minutes  my  wife  said,  "  I  must  go."     And  she  expired.
(Signed)  E.  PAIGE,  MARY  A.  PAIGE.

[Formerly  Mary  A.  Dockerty,  the  nurse.]

[I  have  had  long  interviews  with  Mr.  Paige.  He  seems  to  be  a  shrewd  and
careful  witness.— RICHARD  HODGSON.]

927  C.  Concerning  Miss  Lottie  Fowler,  I  quote  accounts  of  two
incidents,  one  recorded  by  Mr.  W.  Stainton  Moses  and  the  other  by  Mr.
C.  C.  Massey.  Mr.  Moses'  account  is  given  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.
p.  78,  as  follows  : —

Perhaps  one  of  the  most  striking  cases  I  can  present  is  the  first  experience
that  occurred  to  me.  (See  Spirit  Identity,  pp.  124-126,  Appendix  V.)  :—

I  inquired  where  I  could  see  for  myself  these  new  phenomena,  and  was  in-
formed that  Miss  Lottie  Fowler  [a  well-known  professional  medium]  was  about
to  hold  a  stance  that  very  evening  (April  2nd,  1872),  at  15  Southampton  Row.
I  went,  and  was  greatly  astonished  at  what  I  saw  and  heard.  I  need  not  take
up  time  by  detailing  the  occurrences  of  the  first  part  of  the  sitting;  most
Spiritualists  are  familiar  with  the  usual  routine  of  Miss  Fowler's  stances.
Much  hazy  nonsense  was  talked,  and  many  vague  statements  made,  which
seemed  to  me  to  be  of  no  use  whatever  as  tests  of  spirit  identity.  I  was  rapidly
becoming  nauseated.  I  craved  for  something  more  clear,  something  on  which
I  could  rest  as  a  staple  piece  of  evidence.  I  inquired,  therefore,  whether  I  might
endeavour  to  obtain  some  such  proof  for  myself.  Leave  was  at  once  given  by
the  director  of  the  circle,  and  I  addressed  the  spirit  who  controlled  the  medium.

"  You  are  tiring  your  medium,  and  making  fun  of  us.  Go  and  send  some
one  who  is  serious."

The  medium  shivered  and  turned  away,  and  the  voice  came  as  though
troubled.

"  You've  nothing  to  do  with  me.     I  won't  go.     Me  no  go."

"  Yes,  you  will.    You'll  go  and  send  some  one  else."

After  more  colloquy  the  medium  shivered  again,  seemed  to  be  in  pain,  and
stood  rooted  to  the  spot,  crouching  as  if  in  dread.


927C]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  561

After  a  time  the  voice  came  again,  but  utterly  changed  ;  the  voice,  this  time
of  a  man,  very  calm  and  unimpassioned,  instead  of  the  child-voice  speaking
baby  jargon.

"  You  want  me  ?  "

"  Yes.     What  is  your  name  ?  "

"  I'd  rather  not  tell  you.     You  can  ask  me  any  questions."

"  No.  Tell  me  what  you  see,  or  describe  any  one  whom  you  see  near  me.
I  will  answer  yes  or  no  ;  no  more."

"  I  see  a  man,  very  old,  tall,  with  a  long  white  beard,  and  long  hair."

"Yes."

"  The  beard  is  very  white  indeed."

"  No.     Go  on."

"  He  has  a  very  high,  broad  forehead,  and  his  eyes  are  drawn  down.  Why,
he's  blind!"

"  Yes."

"  And  his  face  is  black  and  blue.  And "  (here  the  medium  shuddered
violently) — "  oh  !  what's  that  in  his  mouth  ?  It's  like  slime — and  mud — and
oh !  blood."

"  Yes  ? "

"  And— it's  dark.     I  can't  see."

"  Go  on.     How  is  he  dressed  ?  "

"He  has  a  long  blue  coat.  No,  not  exactly  a  coat — something  long.  I
can't  see  his  feet."

"Where  does  he  stand?"

"  Right  opposite  ;  close  by  you."

"  Can  you  see  his  name  ?  "

"  No.  He  seems  in  trouble.  I  think  it's  money.  He  looks  so  horrible.
Let  me  go.  Why  do  you  keep  me  here."

"  Go,  then.     Do  you  know  me  ?  "

"  No."     (This  very  emphatically.)

I  shall  not  attempt  to  describe  the  scene  during  the  time  that  this  conversa-
tion was  held.  I  have  quoted  from  a  full  and  careful  record  written  at  the
time,  and  the  whole  scene  is  photographed  indelibly  on  my  mind.  Every
one  seemed  petrified  and  astonished.  They  would  have  been  still  more
so  had  they  known  with  what  photographic  accuracy  a  scene  in  my  own
private  experience  was  being  re-enacted  before  my  eyes.  It  was,  I  am
,  sure,  as  unknown  as  I  was  myself.  It  was  a  scene  that  passed  in  a  very
distant  part  of  Great  Britain,  and  it  was  reproduced  with  a  realistic  power
that  bore  down  before  it,  as  with  torrent  force,  all  doubt  and  hesitation.  I
lelt  that  the  man  was  there  before  me ;  himself  reproducing  the  story  of  his
death  for  my  conviction.

Here  we  have  the  case  of  a  man  who  went  to  a  seance  with  absolutely  no
expectations  in  his  mind;  he  did  not  know  what  to  expect;  he  did  not  expect
anything ;  and  he  got  what  in  any  police-court  would  be  considered  perfect
evidence  of  life  beyond  the  grave.

I  quote  Mr.  Massey's  account  from  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  5.

January  i&tA,  1890.

On  April  yth,  1883,  died  an  old  and  dear  friend  of  mine,  by  name  Francis
-Paynton  Pigott-Carleton  (his  patronymic  was  Pigott— he  took  the  name  of

VOL.    II.  2  N


562  APPENDICES  [934  A

Carleton  on  his  marriage).  On  April  27th  in  the  same  year  I  took  an  old
glove  of  his,  given  to  me  for  the  purpose  by  his  widow,  to  Lottie  Fowler,
putting  it  into  her  hand  when  she  was  apparently  into  trance,  and  was
"controlled,"  and  requesting  the  "control"  to  get  into  rapport  with  the
owner  of  the  glove,  and  give  me  any  particulars  concerning  that  person.  The
"  control "  gave  me  a  description  of  the  person  of  my  friend  which  I  thought
remarkably  good.  I  then  asked  for  the  name.  She,  or  the  "  control,"  seemed
to  listen  for  it,  and  then  said,  with  apparent  vexation,  "  Oh,  it  is  all  nonsense,
I  can  make  nothing  of  it.  I  hear  only  '  Pig — Pig  ' — that  is  not  a  name  ;  what
do  they  (sic)  mean  by  4  Pig  '  ?  "

It  is  obvious  that  the  first  syllable  of  the  name  "Pigott"  is  that  which
would  be  accentuated  most  strongly,  and  the  sound  dropping  (we  may
suppose),  the  latter  half  of  the  name  would  not  be  caught  by  an  ear  unfamiliar
with  it.

I  had  given  her  not  the  slightest  clue,  except  the  glove,  which  was  not
marked  with  the  name,  and  she  had  never  seen  or  heard  of  my  friend,  who
lived  in  the  country  and  was  not  interested  in  "Spiritualism,"  and  was  quite
unknown  to  "mediums";  though  his  wife  had  on  more  than  one  occasion
been  with  me  to  stances.  (Not,  however,  to  Lottie  Fowler,  to  the  best  of  my
present  memory  and  belief.)  And  I  had  not  mentioned  my  friend's  death
among  my  spiritualistic  friends,  nor  my  intention  to  visit  her  to  any  one  who
might,  intentionally  or  otherwise,  prepare  her.

C.  C.  MASSEY.

934  A.  An  account  of  the  experiences  of  the  Rev.  C.  B.  Sanders  was
published  in  a  book  entitled  X+  Y=Z;  or,  The  Sleeping  Preacher  of
North  Alabama.  Containing  an  account  of  most  wonderful  mysterious
mental  phenomena,  fully  authenticated  by  living  witnesses.  By  Rev.  G.  W.
Mitchell.  (New  York:  VV.  C.  Smith,  65  John  Street.  1876.)  The  book
includes  statements  by  numerous  witnesses  of  the  supernormal  manifesta-
tions of  Mr.  Sanders,  and  additional  corroborations  were  obtained  by
Professor  James  and  Dr.  Hodgson  in  reply  to  inquiries  about  the  case.
From  these  sources  of  information  the  following  brief  sketch  is  made.

Mr.  F.  G.  Bromberg,  of  Mobile,  Ala.,  a  friend  of  Professor  James,
wrote  to  the  latter  in  1886  : —

The  book  has  only  recently  been  called  to  my  attention  by  Chief-Justice
Stone,  of  this  State,  and  a  copy  was  sent  to  me  by  late  Chief-Justice  Brickell,
whose  home  is  at  Huntsville,  Ala.,  and  amongst  the  witnesses  cited  in  the  book.
In  a  letter  which  accompanied  the  book  he  writes  as  follows  :  "  I  have  fre-
quently seen  Mr.  Sanders,  the  subject  of  the  book,  and  of  many  of  the  incidents
related  I  heard  soon  after  their  occurrence.  The  witnesses  or  contributors
referred  to  are  of  the  most  unquestionable,  unimpeachable  character.  Two  of
them,  Dr.  Ross  and  Dr.  Shelby,  were  of  very  considerable  learning,  and  of  very
high  character ;  the  first  as  a  theologian,  the  other  as  a  physician."  .  .  .

Jud^e  Brickell's  assurances  put  at  rest  all  doubts  as  to  the  absolute  integrity
of  all  parties  named  therein,  either  as  observers  or  observed.  The  elements  of
fraud,  collusion,  or  fabrication  are  entirely  eliminated  from  the  problem  to  be
solved.


934  A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  563

Constantine  Blackmon  Sanders  was  born  in  1831,  near  Huntsville,
Alabama,  the  seventh  child  in  a  family  of  ten  children.  His  father  died
when  he  was  in  his  sixth  year.

Constantine  lived  with  his  mother,  and  laboured  on  the  farm  until  he  was  a
full-grown  man.  From  his  mother,  and  others  who  knew  him  during  the  days
of  his  youth,  we  learn  that  he  was  dutiful  to  his  mother,  kind  to  his  sisters,  moral
in  his  habits,  and  avoided  association  with  the  vicious.  His  temperament  was
cheerful,  and  he  had  considerable  fondness  for  music.  From  his  early  child-
hood his  mind  was  much  interested  on  the  subject  of  preaching  the  gospel.
And  he  was  in  the  habit  of  preaching  juvenile  funeral  sermons  over  dead
chickens,  pigs,  &c.,  and  baptizing  the  boys,  both  black  and  white;  and,  on  this
account,  was  often  familiarily  called  "  The  Preacher."

When  he  was  twenty  years  old  he  attended  a  revival  meeting,  and
became  deeply  interested  in  religious  matters  ;  presented  himself  as  a  can-
didate for  the  ministry  under  the  care  of  the  Presbytery  of  Tennessee ;
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1855,  and  ordained  in  1862.  At  the  time  he
joined  Presbytery  in  1852,  when  he  was  twenty-one  years  old,  he  could
scarcely  read  and  write.  In  the  spring  of  1854,  when  studying  at  school
in  Elkton,  Tenn.,  he  had  attacks  of  sickness,  described  by  Mrs.  Harlow,
in  whose  family  he  was  living,  as  follows.  Until  then  his  health  is  de-
scribed as  having  always  been  good.

Though  at  times  he  had  spells  of  mental  trouble,  yet,  in  the  main,  he  was
quite  cheerful.  When  he  had  been  with  us  about  three  months,  he  was  taken
quite  sick  of  a  flux.  And  when  he  had  so  far  recovered  as  to  be  able  to  begin
to  walk,  he  was  taken  down  with  typhoid  fever,  and  confined  to  bed  again  for
several  weeks.  During  this  confinement  he  was  seized  with  occasional  con-
vulsions, affecting  at  times  his  whole  system,  but  especially  his  arms,  chest,
throat,  and  tongue.  He  also  complained  terribly  of  his  head.  Often  would  he
exclaim :  —

"  It  surely  will  kill  me."     On  one  occasion  he  said  :

"  My  head  feels  like  it  has  opened."

Taking  my  hand  with  his,  he  placed  it  on  his  head,  when,  to  my  astonish-
ment, I  found  what  appeared  to  be  a  separation  of  the  bone,  nearly  wide  enough
to  bury  my  little  finger,  ranging  from  above  his  eyes  near  the  centre  of  his
forehead  to  the  top  of  his  head,  and  from  the  top  down  towards  and  near  to
each  ear.  The  opening  increased  in  width  as  it  reached  the  top  of  the  head.
This  condition  of  his  head  I  saw  frequently.  When  the  paroxysms  would  sub-
side, the  openings  would  nearly  close  up.

He  had  many  similar  attacks  of  these  paroxysms  during  the  next  five
years,  accompanied  by  much  physical  suffering.  In  the  meantime,  in
1856,  he  married,  and  his  family  consisted  in  1876  "of  six  healthy  chil-
dren, of  more  than  ordinary  promise."  After  recovering  from  an  unusually
violent  convulsive  cramp  in  1859,  he  declared  that  it  had  been  "shown  to
him  that  he  would  never  have  another  spell  of  cramping."  But  although


564  APPENDICES  [934  A

the  violent  convulsions  apparently  did  not  recur,  he  still  suffered  much,  as
appears  from  the  following  statement  made  by  Dr.  W.  T.  Thach  in  1876.

I  have  been  acquainted  with  him  about  sixteen  years.  He  has  complained
ever  since  my  acquaintance  with  him,  and  he  says,  for  a  number  of  years
previous,  with  a  continuous  headache,  though  differing  in  severity  at  different
times,  often  becoming  excruciating;  and  until  a  year  or  two  since  attended
with  violent  lancinating  pains  in  the  chest,  accompanied  with  great  difficulty  of
respiration,  which  indeed  I  have  often  seen  suspended  for  such  a  length  of  time
as  to  induce  me  to  believe  it  impossible  that  it  could  ever  be  restored  ;  at  length
returning  with  a  gurgling  sound  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  trachea.  In  these
extreme  cases  the  pulse  is  very  feeble,  and  in  frequency  from  120  to  such  a
celerity  as  to  render  it  impossible  to  count  it.  Extremities  cold,  temples  throb-
bing violently,  eyes  surcharged  with  blood  to  such  an  extent  that  frequently  the
blood  would  trickle  down  the  cheeks  in  drops.  These  paroxysms  are  attended
with  very  great  nervous  excitement,  so  that  he  cannot  bear  to  be  touched  by
any  one  without  producing  a  shock  to  the  system  (very  similar  to  that  felt  by
one  who  comes  in  contact  with  a  galvanic  battery  with  considerable  charge),
which  seems  to  increase  the  already  excruciating  pain.

With  these  paroxysms  of  suffering  there  is  almost  always  a  peculiar  condi-
tion, to  me  inexplicable,  and  which  I  know  not  what  to  denominate,  which  those
acquainted  with  him  generally  call  "  sleep,"  merely  from  the  fact  that,  when
recovered  from  this  condition,  he  is  totally  ignorant  of  any  and  everything  that
has  occurred  while  in  this  state  (even  the  length  of  time  that  has  elapsed,  not
knowing  whether  an  hour  or  a  week).  Hence  the  name  of  the  "  Sleeping
Preacher."  And  yet,  at  the  time,  he  seems  conscious  of  everything  that  is  going
on  around  him;  and  not  only  so,  but  of  what  is  transpiring  at  any  point  to
which  his  attention  is  directed,  regardless  of  distance.  The  length  of  these
paroxysms  is  quite  variable,  extending  from  a  moment  to  hours  and  days,
during  which  time  he  gets  no  natural  sleep ;  the  mind  to  all  appearance  being
much  more  active  than  when  in  a  normal  condition ;  being  all  the  time  engaged
in  conversation  or  writing  (of  which  he  does  a  great  deal),  or  some  other  active
mental  exercise.  In  this  condition  he  frequently  complains  of  hunger,  and
partakes  of  food  as  at  other  times.  Except  in  cases  of  protracted  spells  of
nervous  sleep  (when  he  gets  none),  he  usually  averages  about  three  hours  in
twenty-four  of  natural  sleep ;  yet  the  physical  man  does  not  seem  to  suffer
from  loss  of  sleep.  He  looks  as  hearty  as  any  man,  and  weighs  about  195
pounds.

This  condition  is  not  always  attended  with  an  unusual  amount  of  pain,
being  often  very  cheerful ;  at  which  times  he  is  more  than  ordinarily  com-
municative.

In  all  of  his  notes,  letters,  and  writing  of  every  kind,  while  in  this  condition,
he  ignores  the  name  of  "  Sanders."  His  signature  is  "  X  +  Y  =  Z."

While  in  these  sleeps,  if  left  to  himself,  his  thoughts  are  confined  mostly  to
theology  or  medicine.  And  though  never  having  studied  medicine,  he  seems,
while  in  this  mental  state,  to  be  very  conversant  with  it ;  using  the  technical
names,  giving  the  properties,  uses,  &c.,  thereof.  He  always  examines  the  sick
who  may  happen  to  be  about  him  when  in  this  state,  without  coming  in  contact
with  the  patient;  making  in  writing  a  diagnosis  and  prescription,  which  he
will  usually  give,  if  requested.  And  I  could  mention  a  great  many  who  have
been  relieved  by  his  directions.  I  have  frequently  had  him  to  give  me  the


934A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  565

exact  condition  of  patients  whom  he  had  never  seen,  and  who  were  miles
distant.  His  prescriptions  frequently  contain  medicines  which  cannot  be  pro-
cured in  this  country ;  which  he  makes  arrangements  to  import ;  showing  his
comprehensive  view  of  Materia  Medica  in  this  preternatural  way.

Mr.  Mitchell  writes  : —

This  peculiar  state,  which  is  involuntary  in  its  recurrence,  is  not  usually
heralded  by  any  premonitions  visible  to  those  who  may  be  present.  He  may
be  taking  part  in  social  conversation,  when  all  at  once,  if  looking  at  him,  you
will  see  his  eyelids  fall  and  his  head  droop ;  at  the  same  time  making  a  slight
but  audible  noise  through  his  nose,  which  may  be  called  a  grunt,  usually
repeated  in  quick  succession  two  or  three  times,  and  he  is  asleep.  The  spell
may  continue  for  a  few  moments ;  a  quarter,  a  half-hour,  or  an  hour,  or  a  num-
ber of  hours ;  a  day,  or  a  night ;  or  a  day  and  night ;  or  several  days  and  nights ;
or  a  week,  or  even  several  weeks,  without  an  interval  of  consciousness.

When  in  ordinary  health,  without  bodily  fatigue,  or  any  strong  or  exhaust-
ing mental  excitement,  he  can  be  easily  aroused  to  consciousness,  when  he  first
goes  into  this  state,  by  giving  him  a  shake  or  by  slapping  him  with  the  hand.
In  coming  to  consciousness,  he  seems  to  be  momentarily  surprised;  and  his
body  is  slightly  affected,  as  if  lightly  shocked  by  a  galvanic  battery.

When  under  the  more  favourable  conditions  of  body  and  mind,  upon  his
going  to  sleep,  by  immediately  waking  him  up,  he  has  been  enabled  to  keep
awake  for  many  hours  in  succession,  though  there  was  a  constant  inclination  to
go  to  sleep.  As  a  general  rule,  the  longer  the  spells  are  protracted,  the  more
intense  are  his  sufferings.  .  .  .

In  these  sleeps  his  eyes  are  generally  closed,  but  there  are  instances  in
which  they  are  as  wide  open  as  when  awake.  In  this  case,  if  he  is  free  com-
paratively from  suffering,  one  not  acquainted  with  his  peculiarities  would  not
likely  suspect  that  there  was  anything  unusual  in  his  condition.

The  "  sleeping  personality  "  of  Mr.  Sanders,  calling  himself"  X  +  Y  =  Z,"
"  never  betrays  any  scepticism  nor  the  slightest  taint  of  heresy,"  and  seems
to  have  held  the  ordinary  chief  orthodox  doctrines  of  the  church  to  which
Mr.  Sanders  belonged.  He  apparently  wrote  a  good  deal — including
letters  to  other  persons,  and  instructions  to  his  own  normal  self  (to
whom  he  invariably  referred  as  "  my  casket,")  and  various  books  and
papers  which  have  not  been  published,  and  which  he  enjoined  Mr.  Sanders
"on  no  account  to  exhibit  till  I  come."  This  injunction  appears  in  a
message  from  "X+Y  =  Z's  Valedictory  to  His  Casket"  in  May  1876,
when  he  took  leave  of  his  "  casket,"  but  indicated  that  at  a  later  period
he  would  return.  In  reply  to  inquiries  in  July  1890,  Mr.  Mitchell  stated
that  the  peculiar  mental  indications  had  recurred  several  times  during  the
previous  eighteen  months.

The  separation  of  the  cranial  bones  referred  to  by  several  witnesses  is
a  curious  feature  of  the  case,  and  in  reply  to  a  special  inquiry,  Mr.
Mitchell  states  that  "  when  the  patient's  head  was  greatly  affected  with
pain  the  sutures  would  separate,  but  in  some  instances,  when  the  suffering
was  slight  while  he  was  in  one  of  his  peculiar  states,  the  sutures  were  not
visibly  separated."


566  APPENDICES  [934  A

The  normal  Mr.  Sanders  had  no  recollection  of  anything  occurring  in
his  "sleep"  state,  "but  X  +  Y  =  Z  seems  to  have  had  entire  conscious-
ness of  Mr.  Sanders,  or  of  his  '  casket,'  as  he  always  called  him."

Hyperaesthesia  might  be  invoked  as  an  explanation  to  account  for  a
few  of  the  apparently  supernormal  incidents  recorded,  such  as  shooting  a
rifle  ball  through  a  hat  "  very  near  the  centre  "  at  the  distance  of  forty
yards  at  night  when  Dr.  Thach,  who  describes  the  incident,  could  not
even  see  the  sights  of  the  gun.  Such  an  explanation  might  also  be
stretched  to  cover  the  cases  of  reading  books  and  writing  on  paper
under  cover,  allowing  for  a  margin  of  malobservation  or  misdescription
by  the  witnesses.  It  would,  however,  be  quite  inadequate  to  account
for  the  bulk  of  the  manifestations  recorded.  The  cases  on  the  whole
suggest  the  action  of  telaesthesia  rather  than  telepathy,  although  telepathy
might  be  extended  to  apply  to  most  of  them,  as,  for  example,  his  oc-
casional knowledge  of  conversations  and  scenes  occurring  elsewhere,  or
of  letters  written  or  sermons  preached  at  a  distance.1  He  himself,  how-
ever, described  such  matters  as  if  seeing  or  hearing  them  directly.  I  now
quote  the  details  of  a  few  cases  in  illustration  of  the  supernormal  powers
of  "X  +  Y  =  Z."

Mr.  John  W.  Pruit  gives  the  following  account.

MERIDIANVILLE,  ALA.,  May  "jth,  1876.

I  certify  that  one  day  about  the  middle  of  the  month  of  February  1866,
while  Brother  Sanders  was  confined  to  his  bed  from  his  dislocated  thigh,  I  was
at  his  house,  and  he  was  lying  in  his  bed  and  in  one  of  his  so-called  "  sleeps."
He  attracted  my  attention  by  a  hearty  laugh.

I  asked  him  the  cause  of  his  amusement.

He  replied,  "  I  was  laughing  at  De  Witt."

I  asked  what  De  Witt  was  doing.

He  said,  "  He  was  having  a  hard  scuffle  to  keep  from  falling  off  the  fence,
for  the  top  rail  was  turning  with  him  and  he  was  trying  to  keep  from  falling
over  it."

Nothing  more  was  said  on  the  subject  until  De  Witt  arrived,  which  was  in
ten  or  fifteen  minutes.

The  fence  where  the  difficulty  occurred  was  from  three-fourths  to  a  mile
distant,  on  the  other  side  of  a  thick  grove  of  timber  and  underbrush,  and  of  an
intervening  hill.

And  I  further  certify  that  no  communication  from  any  person  or  source  was
received  in  reference  to  De  Witt  until  he  arrived  and  confirmed  what  S.  said.

J.  W.  PRUIT.

Mr.  De  Witt  gives  a  concordant  account,  explaining  the  trouble  he  had
in  getting  over  the  fence  with  a  sack  of  pease  in  one  hand  and  a  bowl  of
custard  in  the  other,  and  referring  to  the  knowledge  of  the  incident  shown
on  his  arrival  by  Mr.  Sanders.

Various  cases  are  described  of  Mr.  Sanders'  finding  lost  articles, — such

1  Some  of  these  cases  resemble  those  given  in  Dr.  J.  W.  Haddock's  Somnolism  and
Psycheism,  referred  to  in  vol.  i.  p.  556.


934  A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  567

as  dollar-bills,  coins,  a  watch  chain,  a  bunch  of  keys, — or  specifying
correctly  where  they  would  be  found.  I  give  an  instance.  Mr.  Bentley
writes  : —

STATE  OF  ALA.,  MADISON  Co.,

MERIDIANVILLE,  May  iotk,  1876.

In  1867,  I  lived  two  and  a  half  miles  east  of  this  village,  on  what  is  known
as  the  Harris  place,  on  the  other  side  of  Brier  Fork  Creek  ;  and  was  engaged
in  selling  goods  in  this  place,  spending  the  nights  at  home.

Some  time  during  the  summer  a  bunch  of  keys,  among  which  was  my
wheat-garner  key,  was  lost.  After  a  lapse  of  about  one  week  I  requested
Mr.  William  White,  who  was  employed  in  the  store  and  boarded  at  Rev.  C.  B.
Sanders'  in  the  village,  on  going  to  his  dinner,  to  ask  him  to  tell  me  where  my
keys  were.  On  his  return  Mr.  White  said  he  made  the  request,  but  Mr.
Sanders  paid  no  attention  to  what  he  said,  he  being  in  one  of  his  spells.
However,  during  the  same  afternoon,  while  my  younger  sister,  in  company
with  other  persons,  was  at  his  house,  he  told  her  that  my  keys  were  under  the
steps  at  the  west  door  of  my  dwelling.  In  consequence  of  this  information
I  returned  home  earlier  than  usual.  As  soon  as  I  arrived  I  told  my  wife  what
I  had  heard.  She  ran  immediately  and  found  the  keys  under  the  door-step,
just  as  Mr.  Sanders  had  said,  and  somewhat  rusty.  They  must  have  been
thrown  there  a  week  before  by  a  little  child  that  played  about  the  house.

I  add  that  I  know  Mr.  Sanders  had  not  been  in  my  house  nor  on  the  place
for  at  least  twelve  months  before  that  time.

A.  J.  BENTLEY.

We,  the  undersigned,  certify  that  the  above  statements  are  true  as  far  as
they  relate  to  us  personally,  and  that  we  heard  all  the  particulars,  as  above
mentioned,  at  the  time  they  occurred.

Mrs.  JOSEPHINE  E.  BENTLEY.

Miss  MARY  A.  BENTLEY.

Several  cases  are  given  of  his  supernormal  knowledge  of  accidents
occurring  to  distant  persons,  such  as  the  stumbling  of  a  lady  carrying  some
boiling-hot  water,  and  the  scalding  of  her  arm  in  consequence  (the  inci:
dent  occurring  in  another  State)  ;  he  also  gave  a  description  of  injuries
to  another  lady  (thirty-five  miles  distant)  from  a  lightning  stroke,  at  the
time  of  the  occurrence.  His  account  of  a  fire  in  Salisbury,  N.C.,  with  a
description  of  "  the  tin-shop  in  which  it  broke  out,  and  the  extent  of  its
ravages,"  reminds  one  of  the  incident  of  Swedenborg's  description  of  the
fire  at  Stockholm  when  he  was  at  Gottenburg  (see  936  A).

Several  cases  are  also  recorded  of  his  knowledge  that  a  distant  person
was  just  dying  or  dead.  I  quote  one  of  these  : —

On  the  same  night  he  revealed  the  place  of  the  lost  gold  coin,  as  before
related,  and  perhaps  about  one  hour  afterwards,  Dr.  Blair,  my  wife,  and  my-
self being  present,  Mr.  Sanders  took  his  seat  at  the  front  window  of  the  par-
lour. Our  attention  was  attracted  by  manifestations  of  sympathy,  sadness,  and
distress  from  him,  accompanied  by  such  expressions  as  "  Poor  fellow !  What
a  pity !  "  He  continued  to  repeat  them,  alternated  with  inarticulate  expres-
sions of  intense  emotion  for  a  short  time — I  would  say  from  one  to  several


568  APPENDICES  [934  A

minutes.  Then  he  said,  as  well  as  I  remember,  "  He  is  gone!  gone!  gone!  "
closing  in  a  solemn  whisper.  There  was  for  a  short  time  a  silence  and  still-
ness, such  as  usually  is  witnessed  at  the  closing  scene  of  a  dying  friend,  which
was  broken  by  my  asking  him  the  cause  of  these  manifestations.  We  were
quite  shocked  on  hearing  his  reply  that  "  Lieutenant  McClure  has  just  died
suddenly  from  an  internal  haemorrhage,  near  Clarkesville,  Tennessee."

We  append  the  following  facts:  Lieutenant  Robert  McClure  some  few
months  previous  had  married  Miss  Pattie,  daughter  of  R.  W.  Vasser,  deceased
(long  a  prominent  citizen  and  merchant  in  this  place),  and  had,  a  few  days
before  this,  gone  on  a  visit  to  his  father,  whose  residence  was  then,  and  still  is,
in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Clarkesville,  Tennessee,  about  forty  miles  below
Nashville,  having  left  his  wife  at  her  mother's,  as  he  expected  to  make  a  flying
trip.  On  the  next  morning  after  Mr.  Sanders'  development,  above  written,  a
telegram  was  received  from  Clarkesville  bringing  to  his  young  bride  the  unex-
pected and  melancholy  news  of  her  husband's  sudden  death.  And  it  confirmed,
in  every  circumstance,  what  Mr.  Sanders  had  stated  the  night  before.  Clarkes-
ville, Tennessee,  vid  Nashville,  is  nearly  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  distant
from  Athens,  Ala.

A  recent  letter,  from  a  lady  who  was  present,  states  that  Lieutenant  McClure
died  on  Wednesday  night,  between  eight  and  nine  o'clock,  the  2nd  of  November
1866.  He  was  sitting  in  her  room,  reading  aloud  a  book;  had  a  paroxysm  of
coughing,  and  remarked  to  her  that  it  was  blood  that  he  spit  out.  She  put  her
babe  down,  which  she  was  nursing,  and  assisted  him  in  sitting  down,  for  he
had  arisen  to  his  feet.  She  thinks  he  did  not  breathe  after  being  seated.

After  writing  these  last  two  cases,  I  received  the  following  testimony  from
J.  S.  Blair,  M.D.  G.  W.  MITCHELL.

Mr.  Mitchell  adds  the  corroborative  testimony  of  Dr.  Blair.

The  last  account  which  I  quote  is  of  an  incident  which  occurred  much
later  than  those  recorded  in  the  book  by  Mr.  Mitchell.  An  account  of  it
was  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  Mr.  Mitchell,  in  a  letter  of  February  1891,
which  agrees  with  what  follows  from  the  witnesses  themselves  : —

BODENHAM,  GILES  Co.,  TENN.,  May  27,    1891.

We,  the  undersigned,  certify  that  on  Saturday  night,  August  the  [24th],  1889,
Rev.  C.  B.  Sanders,  who  was  holding  a  protracted  meeting  with  our  pastor,
Rev.  G.  W.  Mitchell,  at  Mt.  Moriah  Church,  repaired  to  our  house,  where  they
(the  preachers)  lodged.  Mr.  Sanders  was  suffering  considerable  pain  in  his
head  and  chest,  and  lying  upon  a  bed,  and  after  hours  spent  in  conversation
and  singing  religious  songs,  and  while  Mr.  Mitchell  was  temporarily  absent—
we  think  it  was  about  eleven  o'clock,  or  later — he  said,  with  evident  amusement,
"  Humph !  Brother  Forsythe,  like  a  child,  knelt  down  to  pray  and  has  gone  to
sleep."  Mrs.  Wheeler  said  to  him,  "  How  do  you  know  ?  "  He  replied,  "  Child,
you  ask  too  many  questions."

On  that  night,  before  Mr.  Sanders  dismissed  the  congregation,  he  proposed
that  all  who  would  join  in  praying  for  the  penitents  until  midnight  to  make  it
known  by  rising  to  their  feet.  To  which  Deacon  Forsythe  was  a  respondent*
Mr.  Forsythe  lived  about  two  miles  on  an  air  line  from  our  home.  .  .  .

GEO.  E.  WHEELER.

Mrs.  GEO.  E.  WHEELER.


936A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  569

WALES,  TENN.,  May  28,  1891.

I,  the  undersigned,  hereby  certify  that  on  the  night  of  the  [24th]  of  August
1889,  I  did  kneel  at  my  chair  for  prayer,  in  my  own  house,  between  the  hours  of
eleven  and  twelve  o'clock,  and  having  been  labouring  day  and  night  for  a  week
past,  and  being  quite  weary,  in  a  short  time  I  went  to  sleep.  I  went  to  church
next  morning,  and  Deacon  Long  and  myself  were  asked  by  a  brother  if  we  com-
plied with  our  pledge  last  night.  I  replied  that  I  did  not  fully,  as  I  went  to
sleep  on  my  knees  a  short  time  before  the  time  expired.  .  .  .

I  had  not  heard  then  what  Mr.  Sanders  had  said  about  me  at  Mr.  Wheeler's.
When  we  got  to  the  church  door,  Mr.  Wheeler  was  telling  the  incident  that  took
place  at  his  house  on  the  night  before,  as  having  occurred  about  the  time  I  went
to  sleep.  R.  H.  FORSYTHE.

Mr.  Mitchell  writes  in  July  1902,  that  he  has  not  been  notified  that
Mr.  Sanders  has  had  any  recent  communications  from  "  X  +  Y  =  Z."

936  A.  For  Kant's  evidence  in  regard  to  the  supernormal  powers  of
Swedenborg,  see  Dreams  of  a  Spirit  Seer,  by  Immanuel  Kant,  translated
by  E.  F.  Goerwitz;  edited  by  Frank  Sewall  (London:  Swan  Sonnen-
schein  &  Co. ;  New  York  :  The  Macmillan  Company,  1900).

The  three  most  famous  cases  are  :  (i)  Swedenborg's  communication
to  the  Queen  of  Sweden  of  some  secret  information,  which  she  had  asked
him  for,  and  believed  that  no  living  human  being  could  have  told  him.
(2)  The  widow  of  the  Dutch  Ambassador  at  Stockholm  was  called  upon
by  a  goldsmith  to  pay  for  a  silver  service  which  her  husband  had  pur-
chased. She  believed  that  it  had  been  paid  for,  but  could  not  find  the
receipt ;  so  she  begged  Swedenborg  to  ask  her  husband  where  it  was.
Three  days  later  he  came  to  her  house  and  informed  her  in  the  presence
of  some  visitors  that  he  had  conversed  with  her  husband,  and  had  learnt
from  him  that  the  debt  had  been  paid,  and  the  receipt  was  in  a  bureau  in
an  upstairs  room.  The  spirit  had  said  that  after  pulling  out  the  left-hand
drawer  a  board  would  appear,  and  on  drawing  out  this  a  secret  compart-
ment would  be  disclosed,  containing  his  private  Dutch  correspondence
and  the  receipt.  The  whole  company  went  upstairs  and  the  papers  were
found,  as  described,  in  the  secret  compartment,  of  which  no  one  had
known  before.

(3)  In  September,  1759,  at  four  o'clock  on  a  Saturday  afternoon,
Swedenborg  arrived  at  Gottenburg  from  England,  and  was  invited  by  a
friend  to  his  house.  Two  hours  after  he  went  out  and  then  came  back
and  informed  the  company  that  a  dangerous  fire  had  just  broken  out  in
Stockholm  (which  is  about  fifty  German  miles  from  Gottenburg),  and
that  it  was  spreading  fast.  He  was  restless  and  went  out  often.  He
said  that  the  house  of  one  of  his  friends,  whom  he  named,  was  already
in  ashes,  and  that  his  own  was  in  danger.  At  eight  o'clock,  after  he  had
been  out  again,  he  declared  that  the  fire  was  extinguished  at  the  third
door  from  his  house.  This  news  occasioned  great  commotion  throughout
the  whole  city,  and  was  announced  to  the  Governor  the  same  evening.


5/0  APPENDICES  [936  B

On  Sunday  morning  Swedenborg  was  summoned  to  the  Governor,  who
questioned  him  about  the  disaster.  He  described  the  fire  precisely,  how
it  had  begun  and  in  what  manner  it  had  ceased,  and  how  long  it  had
continued.  On  Monday  evening  a  messenger  arrived  at  Gottenburg,
who  had  been  despatched  by  the  Board  of  Trade  during  the  time  of  the
fire.  In  the  letters  brought  by  him,  the  fire  was  described  precisely  as
stated  by  Swedenborg,  and  next  morning  the  news  was  further  confirmed
by  information  brought  to  the  Governor  by  the  Royal  Courier.  As
Swedenborg  had  said,  the  fire  had  been  extinguished  at  eight  o'clock.

These  cases  are  given  in  Kant's  letter  to  Fraulein  Charlotte  von
Knobloch,  which  is  quoted  in  Appendix  II.  of  Dreams  of  a  Spirit  Seer,
the  original  letter  being  contained  in  Borowsky's  Darstellung  des  Lebens
und  Charakters  Immanuels  Kant,  Konigsberg,  1804,  pp.  211  to  225.

See  also  Documents  concerning  Swedenborg,  by  R.  L.  Tafel.

936  B.  Frau  Frederica  Hauffe,  better  known  as  the  "  Seeress  of
Prevorst,"  was  one  of  the  most  noted  of  the  group  of  somnambules  who
flourished  in  Germany  in  the  early  part  of  the  nineteenth  century.  A
history  of  her  trances  was  published  soon  after  her  death  by  Justinus
Kerner, — a  well-known  poet  and  physician  to  whom  she  had  come  for
"  magnetic"  treatment, — under  the  title  of  Die  Seherin  von  Prevorst :  Eroff-
nungen  uberdas  innere  Leben  des  Menschen  unduber  das  Hereinragen  einer
Geisterwelt  in  die  Unsere  (Stuttgart  und  Tubingen,  I829).1  It  was  claimed
that  the  Seeress  possessed  supernormal  powers  of  vision,  both  of  distant
scenes  and  of  the  future ;  she  was  supposed  to  see  and  converse  with
discarnate  spirits,  who  gave  her  information  on  their  affairs  and  family
history,  and  physical  phenomena  were  observed  in  her  presence.  The
evidence,  however,  for  her  supernormal  powers  was  what  would  now  be
considered  quite  inadequate.  She  excited  even  greater  interest  by  her
supposed  revelations  of  things  spiritual.  These  revelations  formed  the
study  of  Gorres,  Eschenmayer,  and  other  members  of  a  circle  of  mystics,
and  were  expounded  by  them  in  the  Blatter  aus  Prevorst,  of  which
several  volumes  appeared  from  1831  onwards.  Besides  the  doctrine —
more  or  less  common  to  all  the  mystics  of  the  time — of  the  threefold
nature  of  man,  the  revelations  of  the  Seeress  included  descriptions  of
certain  intricate  systems  of  circles — designated  respectively  Sun-Circles
and  Life -Circles — which  represented  symbolically  spiritual  conditions  and
the  passage  of  time.  Diagrams  of  these  are  given  in  Kerner's  work.
Their  interpretation  was  furnished  partly  by  cyphers,  partly  by  words  of
the  supposed  primitive  universal  language  written  in  the  primitive  ideo-
graphs. These  have  some  resemblance  to  Hebrew  characters,  and  the

1  A  second  edition  was  published  in  1832,  and  later  ones  in  1838  and  1846.  An
English  translation,  greatly  abridged,  by  Mrs.  Crowe,  was  published  in  London  in  1845.
See  also  The  Pioneers  of  the  Spiritual  Reformation:  Life  and  Works  of  Dr.  Justinus
Kerner :  William  Howitt  and  his  -work  for  Spiritualism,  by  Anna  Mary  Howitt  Watts
(London:  The  Psychological  Press  Association  and  E.  W.  Allen,  1883).


936  C]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  571

Seeress  herself  compared  the  language  to  Hebrew,  and  maintained  that  it
resembled  the  language  actually  spoken  in  the  time  of  Jacob,  and  that  it
was  the  common  language  of  the  inner  life.  She  frequently  spoke  it  in
her  trances,  and  it  is  asserted  that  she  was  quite  consistent  in  her  use  of
the  words.  It  was  supposed  to  be  the  primitive  Nature-speech,  which  was
lost  and  forgotten  with  the  coming  of  sin,  but  something  of  which  can  be
recovered  in  rare  states  of  exaltation.  There  are,  of  course,  many  other
instances  of  this  type  of  supposed  languages, — e.g.  the  unknown  tongues
spoken  in  Edward  Irving's  church,1  and  the  Martian  and  other  languages
,of  MIla  Helene  Smith  (see  837).

936  C.  The  following  is  another  case  of  ecstasy,  which  was  reported
to  us  along  with  a  series  of  incidents  suggesting  an  unseen  protection
or  guidance.  The  narrator,  Mr.  J.  W.  Skilton,  was  a  railway  engineer,
residing  at  Jacksonville,  Florida,  U.S.A.,  who  had  several  times  had
veridical  dreams  or  impressions,  which  in  some  cases  saved  himself  and
his  train  from  serious  accidents.  One  of  these — a  premonition  of  an
accident — was  published  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  333,  and  further
cases  in  vol.  xi.  pp.  559-567.  I  quote  from  vol.  xi.  p.  560.  Mr.  Skilton's
narrative  is  dated  November  roth,  1890.

I  would  say  that  I  have  been  engaged  a  great  part  of  my  life  as  a  loco-
motive engineer,  and  this  happened  while  engaged  in  that  business.  I  was

^ngaged  with  two  other  men  one  day  about  two  o'clock  P.M.  in  taking  out  some
evergreen  trees  from  a  box  car  to  take  home  and  set  out  ;  they  were  large  and
heavy ;  I  had  to  run  the  car  up  on  the  switch  rails  to  get  them  out ;  but  as
there  was  no  train  due  till  forty  minutes  I  would  have  plenty  of  time  to  get
them  out,  and  push  the  car  back  out  of  the  way.  There  had  been  a  great  deal

;of  other  freight  put  in  the  car  after  mine  was,  so  it  was  necessary  to  take  out
some  of  it  before  I  could  get  at  mine.  I  opened  the  car  door,  and  a  barrel  of
eggs  fell  out  on  the  ground,  and  just  at  that  instant  I  saw  a  medium-sized
person  standing  at  my  right  hand  clothed  in  white  with  a  bright  countenance,
beaming  with  intelligence.  I  knew  what  he  wanted  in  an  instant,  although  he
put  his  hand  on  my  shoulder  and  said,  "  Come  with  me."  We  moved  upward,
and  a  little  to  the  south-east,  with  the  speed  of  lightning,  as  it  were  ;  I  could  see
the  hills,  trees,  buildings,  and  roads  as  we  went  up  side  by  side  till  they
vanished  out  of  our  sight.  As  we  passed  on,  this  glorious  being  that  was  with
me  told  me  he  was  going  to  show  me  that  bright  heavenly  world.  We  soon
came  to  a  world  of  light  and  beauty,  many  thousand  times  larger  than  this
earth,  with  at  least  four  times  as  much  light.  The  beauties  of  this  place  were
beyond  any  human  being  to  describe.  I  was  seated  by  the  tree  of  life  on  a
square  bunch  of  what  appeared  to  be  a  green  velvet  moss,  about  eighteen  inches
high  ;  there  I  saw  many  thousand  spirits  clothed  in  white,  and  singing  the
heavenly  songs,  and  I  could  think  of  but  one  verse  that  I  had  ever  heard  that

•  would  do  justice  to  this  heavenly  music,  and  that  is  this  :  "  Hark  !  what  sweet
music,  what  a  song  Sounds  from  the  bright,  celestial  throng  !  "  for  it  was  the
sweetest  song  I  have  ever  heard.  I  here  told  my  attendant  that  it  was  the  first

1  For  a  description  of  these,  see  The  Life  of  Edward  Irving,  by  Mrs.  Oliphant
(Hurst  &  Blackett,  1862).


572  APPENDICES  [936  C

time  I  had  ever  been  perfectly  at  rest  in  my  life.     They  did  not  converse  by  !
sound,  but  each  knew  the  other's  thoughts  at  the  instant,  and  conversation  was
carried  on  in  that  way,  and  also  with  me.

After  viewing  the  wonderful  beauties  of  the  place  for  some  time,  and  the
thousands  of  spirits,  robed  in  spotless  white,  passing  through  the  air,  for  they
did  not  confine  themselves  to  the  surface,  but  went  every  direction  as  they
pleased,  I  wanted  to  see  my  dear  mother,  two  sisters,  and  a  child  of  mine  that
had  died  some  time  before  this.  The  request  was  granted  at  once,  but  I  was
not  allowed  to  converse  with  them.  They  were  standing  in  a  row  in  front  of
me,  and  I  looked  at  them  and  coolly  estimated  the  distance  we  were  apart  at
thirty  feet,  and  wondered  how  these  things  could  be.  They  seemed  very  much
pleased  to  see  me,  and  I  shall  never  forget  how  they  welcomed  me  when  I  first
saw  them,  although  no  conversation  passed.  About  this  time  my  attendant  told
me  we  must  go  back  ;  I  wished  to  stay,  but  he  told  me  my  time  had  not  come
yet,  but  would  in  due  time,  and  that  I  should  wait  with  patience.  At  this  we
started  back,  and  were  soon  out  of  sight  of  that  heavenly  land.  When  we  came
in  sight  of  this  world,  I  saw  everything  as  it  looked  from  a  great  height,  such  '•.
as  trees,  buildings,  hills,  roads,  and  streams,  as  natural  as  could  be,  till  we  came
to  the  car  that  I  had  opened  the  door  of,  and  I  found  myself  there  in  the  body,
and  he  vanished  out  of  my  sight.  I  spoke  then  (just  as  I  opened  my  watch  and  '
found  it  had  been  just  twenty-six  minutes  that  I  had  been  engaged  with  that  ,
mysterious  one),  and  said  I  thought  I  had  left  this  world  for  good.  One  of  the
men  said,  "  There  is  something  the  matter  with  you  ever  since  you  opened  the
car  door;  we  have  not  been  able  to  get  a  word  out  of  you,"  and  that  I  had  done
all  the  work  of  taking  out  everything  and  putting  it  back  into  the  car,  and  one
item  was  eight  barrels  of  flour  I  had  taken  off  the  ground  alone  and  put  them
back  in  the  car,  three  feet  and  a  half  high,  with  all  the  ease  of  a  giant.  I  told
them  where  I  had  been  and  what  I  had  seen,  but  they  had  seen  no  one.

This  I  count  the  brightest  day  of  my  life,  and  what  I  saw  is  worth  a  life-
time of  hardship  and  toil.  Being  in  good  health,  and  in  my  right  mind  in
mid-day,  while  busy  about  my  work,  and  my  mind  not  more  than  ordinarily  en-
gaged on  the  great  subject  of  eternal  life,  I  consider  this  a  most  extraordinary
incident.  I  was  told  by  this  mysterious  person  that  if  we  are  counted  worthy
at  death,  we  shall  be  accompanied  to  that  bright  world  by  one  of  those  glorious
beings,  and  this  is  my  firm  belief.

Mr.  Skilton  writes  to  me  that  he  has  never  had  any  trance  save  this —
which  he  regards  as  "  worth  a  lifetime  of  hardship  and  toil."

As  I  have  elsewhere  said,  I  incline  to  believe  that  ecstasy  is  the  highest
condition  into  which  a  spirit  still  incarnate  can  pass.  The  so-called
ecstasy  of  hysteria  I  regard  as  merely  an  instance  of  the  imperfect  simula-
tions of  various  psychical  states  which  the  disintegrated  personality  of  the
hysteric  readily  affords.  True  ecstasy  I  regard  as  a  condition  where  the
centre  of  consciousness  changes  from  the  supraliminal  to  the  subliminal
self,  and  realises  the  transcendental  environment  in  place  of  the  material.
The  reminiscence  of  such  a  momentary  enlightenment  I  regard  as  in-
evitably confused  and  coloured  by  pre-existing  supraliminal  notions.  I  no
more  accept  Mr.  Skilton's  picture  of  the  unseen  world  as  exact  than  I
accept  Swedenborg's ;  but  I  incline  to  believe  that  both  alike  were  in  truth


937A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  573

exalted  into  an  "  interior  condition,"  where  their  perception  of  the  Cosmos,
though  less  distinct  and  intelligible,  was  wider  and  profounder  than
our  own.

937  A.  [The  first  volume  of  Alphonse  Cahagnet's  Arcanes  de  la  vie
future  devoiles  was  published  at  Paris  in  1848,  and  the  second,  reporting
his  sittings  with  Adele  Maginot,  in  1849.  This  medium  had  been  long
known  to  him ;  she  had  been  a  natural  somnambulist  from  her  childhood,
and  he  had  "  magnetised  "  her  to  put  a  stop  to  the  spontaneous  attacks
which  were  impairing  her  health.  He  found  her  an  excellent  clairvoyant,
especially  for  the  diagnosis  and  cure  of  diseases.  Later,  she  was  chiefly
consulted  by  persons  who  wished  for  interviews  with  deceased  friends.  It
appears  that  Cahagnet  took  great  care  to  report  the  communications,  and
to  obtain  signed  attestations  from  witnesses,  so  that  the  case  stands  on  a
much  higher  evidential  level  than  most  early  records  of  clairvoyants.  An
account  of  Cahagnet's  work,  quoting  the  records  of  some  of  the  best  cases,
is  given  in  an  article  by  Mr.  F.  Podmore  (in  which  he  compares  the
trance  performances  of  Adele  with  those  of  Mrs.  Piper)  in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  xiv.  p.  50,  and  I  give  below  some  extracts  from  this
article.]

The  following  (says  Mr.  Podmore)  are  a  few  representative  records  : —

No.  1 29. — M.  Petiet  asks  for  M.  Jerome  Petiet.  Adele  sees  a  young  man,  about
twenty-four  or  twenty-six  years  of  age  (he  was  thirty),  not  so  tall  as  his  brother
now  present;  auburn  hair,  rather  long;  open  forehead,  arched  and  very  pro-
nounced eyebrows  ;  brown  and  rather  sunken  eyes ;  nose  rather  long,  pretty  well
formed  ;  complexion  fresh,  skin  very  white  and  delicate  ;  medium-sized  mouth,
round  dimpled  chin.  "  He  was  weak  in  the  chest ;  he  would  have  been  very
strong  had  it  not  been  for  this.  He  wears  a  rough  grey  vest,  buttons  with  a
shank  and  eye  such  as  are  no  longer  worn.  I  do  not  think  they  are  brass  ones,
nor  of  the  same  stuff  as  the  vest.  They  don't  look  to  me  very  bright.  His
pantaloons  are  of  a  dark  colour,  and  he  wears  low  quartered  shoes  without  any
instep.

"  This  man  was  of  a  stubborn  disposition,  selfish,  without  any  fine  feelings,
had  a  sinister  look,  was  not  very  communicative,  devoid  of  candour,  and  had
but  little  affection  for  any  one.  He  had  suffered  with  his  heart.  His  death  was
natural,  but  sudden.  He  died  of  suffocation."  Adele  chokes  as  this  man  choked,
and  coughed  as  he  did.  She  says  that  "  he  must  have  had  moxas  or  a  plaster
applied  to  his  back,  and  this  accounts  for  the  sore  I  see  there.  He  had  no
disease,  however,  in  that  part.  The  spine  was  sound.  Those  who  applied  this
remedy  did  not  know  the  seat  of  the  disease.  He  holds  himself  badly.  His
back  is  round  without  being  humped."

M.  Petiet  finds  nothing  to  alter  in  these  details,  which  are  very  exact,  and
confirm  him  in  his  belief  that  the  application  of  this  plaster,  advised  by  a  man
who  was  not  a  doctor,  brought  on  his  brother's  death,  which  was  almost
sudden.

"  Signed  the  present  report  as  very  exact.

PETIET,
19  Rue  Neuve-Coquenard."


574  APPENDICES  [937  A

Note. — The  buttons  that  Adele  was  unable  to  describe  were  of  metal,  a  dirty
white  ground,  and  surrounded  by  a  blue  circle.  In  this  apparition  there  is  a
remarkable  fact  to  be  noted — viz.,  that  Adele  experienced  the  same  kind  of
illness  as  this  man.  I  was  obliged  to  release  her  by  passes ;  she  suffered
terribly.

No.  117. — M.  du  Potet  [a  well-known  writer  on  Animal  Magnetism]  wishes
to  call  up  M.  Dubois,  a  doctor,  a  friend  of  his  who  had  been  dead  about  fifteen
months.

Adele  said  :  "  I  see  a  grey-headed  man,  he  has  very  little  hair  on  the  front
of  his  head ;  his  forehead  is  bare  and  prominent  at  the  temples,  making  his
head  appear  square.  He  may  be  about  sixty  years  of  age.  He  has  two  wrinkles
on  either  side  of  his  cheeks,  a  crease  under  his  chin,  making  it  look  double ;  he
is  short-necked  and  stumpy  ;  has  small  eye$,  a  thick  nose,  a  rather  large  mouth,
a  flat  chin,  and  small  thin  hands.  He  does  not  look  to  me  quite  so  tall  as  M.
du  Potet;  if  he  is  not  stouter,  he  is  more  broad-shouldered.  He  wears  a  brown
frock-coat  with  side  pockets.  I  see  him  draw  a  snuff-box  out  of  one  of  them
and  take  a  pinch.  He  has  a  very  funny  walk,  he  does  not  carry  himself  well,
and  has  weak  legs ;  he  must  have  suffered  from  them.  He  has  rather  short
trousers.  Ah  !  he  does  not  clean  his  shoes  every  day,  for  they  are  covered  with
mud.  Taking  it  altogether,  he  is  not  well  dressed.  He  has  asthma,  for  he
breathes  with  difficulty.  I  see,  too,  that  he  has  a  swelling  in  the  abdomen,  he
has  something  to  support  it.  I  have  told  him  that  it  is  M.  du  Potet  who  asked
for  him.  He  talks  to  me  of  magnetism  with  incredible  volubility ;  he  talks  of
everything  at  once ;  he  mixes  everything  up :  I  cannot  understand  any  of  it ;  it
makes  him  sputter  saliva."

M.  du  Potet  asks  that  the  apparition  may  be  asked  why  he  has  not  appeared
to  him  before  as  he  had  promised  ?  He  answers  :  "  Wait  till  I  find  out  my
whereabouts  ;  I  have  only  just  arrived,  I  am  studying  everything  I  see.  I
want  to  tell  you  all  about  it  when  I  appear,  and  I  shall  have  many  things  to  tell
you."

"  Which  day  did  you  promise  me  you  would  do  so  ?  "  "  On  a  Wednesday."
Adele  adds  :  "  This  man  must  be  forgetful ;  I  am  sure  that  he  was  very  absent-
minded."  M.  du  Potet  asks  further :  "  When  will  you  appear  to  me  ?  "
cannot  fix  the  time;  I  shall  try  to  do  so  in  six  weeks."  "Ask  him  if  he  was
fond  of  the  Jesuits."  At  this  name  he  gives  such  a  leap  in  the  air,  stretching
out  his  arms,  and  crying  "  The  Jesuits,"  that  Adele  draws  back  quickly,  and  is
so  startled  that  she  does  not  venture  to  speak  to  him  again.

M.  du  Potet  declares  that  all  these  details  are  very  accurate,  that  he  cannot
alter  a  syllable.  He  says  that  this  man's  powers  of  conversation  were  inexhaus-
tible ;  he  mixed  up  all  the  sciences  to  which  he  was  devoted,  and  spoke  with
such  volubility  that,  as  the  clairvoyante  says,  he  sputtered  in  consequence.  He
took  little  pains  with  his  appearance ;  he  was  so  absent-minded  that  he  some-
times forgot  to  eat.  When  any  one  mentioned  the  Jesuits  to  him  he  jumped  as
Adele  has  described.  He  was  always  covered  with  mud  like  a  spaniel.  It  is
not  surprising  that  the  clairvoyante  should  see  him  with  muddy  shoes.  He
had,  in  fact,  promised  M.  du  Potet  that  he  would  appear  to  him  on  a  Wednes-
day or  a  Saturday.  M.  du  Potet  has  acknowledged  the  accuracy  of  this  apparition
in  No.  75  of  the  Journal  du  Magnetisme.

In  effect,  in  the  Journal  of  August  loth  of  the  same  year,  in  reviewing


937  A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  575

the  first  volume,  Du  Potet  gives  handsome  testimony  to  the  striking
nature  of  the  impersonation,  "  si  bien  que  je  croyais  le  voir  moi-meme,
tant  le  tableau  en  e"tait  saisissant.  Bientot  cette  ombre  s'est  enfuie  en
effrayant  la  somnambule ;  un  seul  mot  avait  cause"  cette  disparition  subite,
et  mon  e"tonnement  en  fut  porte  a  son  comble,  car  ce  meme  mot  le  mettait
toujours  en  fureur."  But  Du  Potet,  for  all  that,  is  inclined  to  attribute
the  phenomenon  to  transmission  of  thought  from  his  own  mind ; l  and  a
few  months  later,2  in  reviewing  the  second  volume,  he  takes  occasion  to
give  the  result  of  his  further  inquiries  on  this  seance.  Generally,  the
minute  description  of  the  personal  appearance  and  other  particulars  which
were  prominent  in  Du  Potet's  own  mind  at  the  time  were  correct ;  and
other  details  were  correctly  given  which  Du  Potet  might  have  heard,  but
had  certainly  not  remembered  at  the  time.  He  had  ascertained,  however,
from  the  widow  and  children,  that  Dr.  Dubois  took  no  tobacco ;  never
had  a  redingote  of  the  colour  described ;  had  no  hernia,  and  consequently
wore  no  bandage.  Moreover,  the  apparition  predicted  never  came  off.
Du  Potet,  however,  adds  expressly  that  Dr.  Dubois  was  unknown  in  life
to  Cahagnet  and  his  somnambule.

In  some  cases,  with  the  express  object  of  excluding  thought-transference,
the  sitter  came  armed  with  the  name  of  some  dead  person  of  whom  he

knew  nothing — as  in  the  following  case.     M.  1'Abbe"  A ,  mentioned  at

the  beginning  of  the  record,  had  had  a  successful  experiment  of  the  same
kind  at  a  previous  sitting  (No.  112).

No.  122. —  Pastor  Rostan,  who  is  referred  to  in  the  preceding  stance  in  con-
nection with  the  conversion  of  M.  1'Abbe  A ,  desired  in  his  turn  to  obtain  an

apparition.  He  asked  for  a  person  unknown  to  him,  whose  name  had  been
given  to  him  ;  but  there  had  been  a  mistake  made  in  giving  him  this  name ;  in
consequence  a  person  appeared  whose  description  we  took,  but  who  could  not
be  recognised.  At  least,  such  is  this  gentleman's  version,  and  I  do  not  imagine
that  I  was  imposed  upon.  I  suggested  a  second  stance  to  him,  especially  as
he  persisted  in  asking  for  a  person  entirely  unknown  to  him,  to  such  an  extent
had  he  been  influenced  by  M.  Hubert's  arguments.  He  then  asked  his  maid-
servant to  give  him  a  name  of  one  of  her  acquaintances  who  had  been  dead
some  time ;  he  came  armed  with  this  name,  and  asked  for  Jeannette  Jex.
Adele  replied  :  "  I  see  a  woman  who  is  not  tall,  she  may  be  between  thirty  and
forty  years  of  age  ;  if  she  is  not  hump-backed  she  must  be  crook-backed,  for
she  carries  herself  very  badly.  I  cannot  make  her  turn  round.  Her  hair  is
auburn,  approaching  to  red ;  she  has  small  grey  eyes,  a  thick  nose.  She  is  not
good-looking.  She  has  a  prominent  chin,  a  receding  mouth,  thin  lips;  her
dress  is  countrified.  I  see  that  she  has  a  cap  with  two  flat  bands,  rounded  over
the  ears.  She  must  have  suffered  from  a  flow  of  blood  to  the  head,  she  has  had
indigestion.  I  see  she  has  a  swelling  in  the  abdomen  on  the  left  side  and  in
the  glands  of  one  breast.  She  has  been  ill  a  long  time."

M.  Rostan  handed  over  the  report  to  his  servant,  and  gave  it  back  to  me
after  adding  his  signature  and  the  following  remarks  : —

"  This  is  correct  as  regards  stature,  age,  dress,  carriage,  the  disease  and
deformed  figure.  (Signed)        J.  J.  ROSTAN."

1  Journal  du  Magnetisme,  vol.  vii.  p.  89.          2  Journal  du  Magnetisme,  vol.  viii.  p.  24.


5/6  APPENDICES  [937  A

But  if  M.  Rostan  was  staggered  by  the  result  of  his  test,  his  friends
apparently  still  ascribed  the  results  to  thought-transference,  which  gives
Cahagnet  occasion  for  some  argument  on  the  subject.

There  are,  indeed,  indications  that  some  at  least  of  the  alleged  appari-
tions were  subjective — inspired,  that  is,  by  the  imagination  of  the  medium,
supplemented  occasionally  by  telepathic  drafts  from  the  sitter.  We  should
probably  be  justified  in  assuming — in  default  of  any  corroborative  evidence
as  to  their  reality — that  the  accounts  of  heaven  and  of  the  occupations  of
the  spirits  therein,  given  in  the  first  volume  [of  the  Arcanes~\t  had  no  more
remote  origin  than  the  medium's  own  mind,  whose  workings  were  no
doubt  directed,  now  by  memories  of  lessons  learnt  in  childhood,  now  by
hints  of  the  Swedenborgian  philosophy  received  from  Cahagnet  himself.

[Descriptions  of  various  visions  of  heaven,  quoted  by  Mr.  Podmore,
are  here  omitted.]

But  there  are  other  accounts  which,  while  they  point  to  the  action  of
telepathy,  are  extremely  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  theory  of  spirit-
intercourse  held  by  the  recorder.

On  two  occasions  Adele  was  asked  to  search  for  a  long-lost  relative  of
the  sitter.  On  each  occasion  she  found  the  man  alive,  and  conversed
with  his  spirit.

M.  Lucas,  a  carrier  (messager),  of  Rambouillet,  came  to  inquire  after
the  fate  of  his  brother-in-law,  who  had  disappeared  after  a  quarrel  some
twelve  years  previously.  Adele  in  the  trance  found  the  man  at  once,  said
that  he  was  alive,  and  that  she  saw  him  in  a  foreign  country,  where  there
were  trees  like  those  in  America,  and  that  he  was  busy  gathering  seeds
from  small  shrubs,  about  3  feet  high.  He  would  not  answer  her  question,
and  she  asked  to  be  awoke,  as  she  was  afraid  of  wild  beasts.  M.  Lucas
returned  a  few  days  afterwards,  bringing  with  him  the  mother  of  the
missing  man.

No.  99. — Adele,  as  soon  as  she  was  asleep,  said : — "  I  see  him."  "  Where
do  you  see  him  ?  "  "  Here."  "  Give  us  a  description  of  him  again  and  also  of
the  place  where  he  is."  "  He  is  a  fair  man,  tanned  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  ;  he
is  very  stout,  his  features  are  fairly  regular;  brown  eyes,  large  mouth;  he
appears  gloomy  and  meditative.  He  is  dressed  as  a  workman,  in  a  sort  of  short
blouse.  He  is  occupied  at  present,  as  he  was  last  time,  in  gathering  seed,
which  resembles  pepper-corns,  but  I  do  not  think  it  is  pepper;  it  is  larger.
This  seed  grows  on  small  shrubs  about  one  metre  high.  There  is  a  little  negro
with  him  occupied  in  the  same  way."  "  Try  to  obtain  some  answer  to-day.
Get  him  to  tell  you  the  name  of  the  country  where  you  see  him."  "  He  will  not
answer."  "  Tell  him  that  his  good  mother,  for  whom  he  had  a  great  affection,
is  with  you,  and  asks  for  news  of  him."  "  Oh  !  at  the  mention  of  his  mother  he
turned  round  and  said  to  me,  '  My  mother  !  I  shall  not  die  without  seeing  her
again.  Comfort  her,  and  tell  her  that  I  always  think  of  her.  I  am  not  dead  ! ' '
"  Why  does  he  not  write  to  her?"  "  He  has  written  to  her,  but  the  vessel  has
no  doubt  been  wrecked — at  least  he  supposes  this  to  be  so,  since  he  has  received
no  answer.  He  tells  me  that  he  is  in  Mexico.  He  has  followed  the  emperor,


937A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  577

Don  Pedro;  he  has  been  imprisoned  for  five  years,  he  has  suffered  a  great  deal,
and  will  use  every  effort  to  return  to  France  ;  they  will  see  him  again."  "  Can
he  name  the  place  in  which  he  is  living  ?  "  "  No  ;  it  is  very  far  inland,  those
countries  have  no  names."  "Is  he  living  with  a  European?"  "  No,  with  a
coloured  man. "  "  Why  does  he  not  write  to  his  mother  ?  "  "  Because  no  vessels
come  to  the  place  where  he  is.  He  does  not  know  to  whom  to  turn.  Besides,
he  only  knew  how  to  write  a  very  little,  and  has  almost  forgotten.  There  is  no
one  with  him  who  can  render  him  this  service ;  no  one  speaks  his  language ;  he
makes  himself  understood  with  great  difficulty.  Besides  that,  he  has  never  been
of  a  communicative  disposition  or  a  talker.  He  seems  to  be  rather  a  surly
fellow.  It  is  very  difficult  to  get  these  few  words  out  of  him.  One  would  think
he  were  dumb."  "  In  short,  how  can  one  manage  to  write  to  him  or  hear  news
of  him  ?  "  "  He  knows  nothing  about  it.  He  can  only  say  these  three  things  :
I  am  in  Mexico,  I  am  not  dead,  they  will  see  me  again."  "  Why  did  he  leave
his  parents  in  this  manner,  without  saying  anything  to  them,  as  he  was  happy
at  home  ?  "  "  This  man  was  very  reserved  ;  he  hardly  ever  spoke.  He  loved
his  mother  very  much,  but  he  had  not  the  same  affection  for  his  father,  who
was  a  passionate,  surly  man,  and  often  treated  him  brutally.  The  cup  had  long
since  been  full.  It  was  not  the  trifling  dispute  that  he  had  had  with  his  father
the  day  before  his  departure  that  made  him  decide  to  go  away ;  it  had  been  his
fixed  determination  for  some  time  past.  He  told  no  one  of  it.  He  went  away
on  the  sly.  Having  kissed  them  all  the  evening  before,  he  made  good  his
escape  next  day,  without  another  word.  Do  not  be  uneasy,  madam ;  you  will
see  him  again  !  "  This  good  woman  burst  into  tears,  because  she  recognised
the  truth  of  every  detail  given  her  by  Adele.  She  did  not  find  anything  at  fault
in  the  description.  The  disposition,  the  education,  and  the  departure  of  her
son  were  as  Adele  said ;  but  a  greater  semblance  of  probability  is  given  to  the
clairvoyante's  account  by  the  fact  that  his  relations  had  an  idea  that  he  had
enlisted  in  Don  Pedro's  army,  and  at  one  time  took  some  steps  to  ascertain  the
,  truth  of  it.  M.  Lucas  told  me  of  this  detail  on  a  journey  which  he  afterwards
made  to  Paris.  No  information  was,  however,  obtainable.  What  no  less  con-
tributed to  the  astonishment  of  this  good  woman,  of  M.  Lucas,  and  the  other
people  present  at  this  curious  sdance,  was  to  see  Adele  put  up  her  hand  to  the
left  side  of  her  face  to  keep  off  the  fiery  rays  of  the  sun  in  those  countries,  and
appear  to  be  suffocated  with  heat ;  but  the  most  extraordinary  part  of  this  scene
was  that  she  had  a  severe  sunstroke  which  turned  the  whole  of  that  side  of  her
face,  from  forehead  to  shoulder,  bluish  red,  whilst  the  other  side  remained
dead  white.  This  dark  colour  did  not  begin  to  disappear  till  twenty-four  hours
later.  At  the  time  the  heat  of  it  was  so  great  that  one  could  not  hold  one's
hand  on  it.

This  simulation,  by  the  subliminal  consciousness,  of  the  effects  of
severe  sunburn  is  no  doubt  not  more  incredible  than  the  production  in
hypnosis  of  mimic  stigmata.  Such  physical  effects  of  the  imagination,  if
rare,  are  well  authenticated.  But  if  Cahagnet's  last  sentence  refers  to  the
'heat  of  the  medium's  skin,  I  am  afraid  we  must  admit  that  the  imagination
of  the  recorder  possibly  played  as  prominent  a  part  in  the  marvel  as  that
of  the  patient.

[On  another  occasion,  inquiry  being  made  for  a  missing  man,  believed
'by  his  relatives  to  be  dead,  Adele  described  him  as  alive,  and  gave  many

VOL.  II.  2  O


578  APPENDICES  [938  A

details  of  his  personal  appearance,  which  were  recognised  as  correct,  and
of  his  then  whereabouts  and  occupations,  which  could  not  be  verified.
Full  details  are  given  by  Mr.  Podmore.]

We  have,  unfortunately  (Mr.  Podmore  continues l) ,  no  corroboration
of  the  truth  of  the  statements  made  about  those  two  persons.  It  follows,
then,  that  in  the  two  stances  all  that  we  are  entitled  to  say  is  that  Adele
was  able  to  divine  with,  it  may  be  admitted,  singular  accuracy  the  ideas
present  in  the  minds  of  her  interlocutors.  It  was  a  striking  example  of
telepathy ;  but  we  have  no  kind  of  proof  that  it  was  anything  more,  and
from  internal  evidence  it  seems  very  unlikely  that  it  was  anything  more.

It  appears,  in  fact,  that  no  evidence  is  forthcoming  of  Adele' s  power
of  conversing  with  the  living  at  a  distance,  since  the  only  two  cases  in
which  she  professed  to  do  so  could  not  be  verified,  and  this  affords,  I
submit,  a  strong  presumption  that  she  did  not  possess  that  power,  and
that  the  conversations  here  detailed  were  purely  imaginary,  the  authentic
or  plausible  details  which  they  contained  being  filched  telepathically  from
the  minds  of  those  present.  The  curious  similarity  of  the  two  accounts
also  points  in  the  same  direction.  Both  men  profess  to  have  written
home,  but  the  letters  must  have  miscarried.  Neither  can  write  now,  be-
cause they  are  far  from  the  sea,  in  the  interior.  Both  have  suffered  much ;
both  have  been  prisoners ;  both  protest  that  their  relations  will  see  them
before  they  die ;  neither,  however,  is  in  a  hurry  to  come  back ;  and
neither  is  willing  to  discover  the  name  of  his  present  place  of  abiding.

To  suppose,  as  the  recorder  supposes,  that  these  narratives  are
authentic  revelations  obtained  from  actual  conversations  with  the  spirits
of  men  living  in  unnamed,  and — as  Cahagnet  explains  at  length—
probably  nameless  localities  in  the  interior  of  Mexico  or  Asiatic  Russia,
is  to  strain  credulity  to  the  breaking- point.  But  if  these  two  narratives
are  not  what  they  seem  to  be,  what  are  we  to  say  of  the  other  narratives
in  the  book,  which  are  cast  in  the  same  dramatic  form,  and  contain
similar  details  harmonising  with  the  expectations  or  memories  of  the
interlocutors  ?  If  those  are  not  authentic  messages  from  the  distant  living,
we  require  some  further  warrant  for  the  assumption  that  these  are
authentic  messages  from  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  Considered  in  conjunc-
tion with  the  almost  certainly  subjective  visions  of  Heaven  and  dead
playmates  which  characterised  the  earlier  trances,  these  later  stances
certainly  point  to  an  exclusively  mundane  origin.

We  must,  however,  at  least  note  that  all  the  witnesses  cited  by
Cahagnet  seem  to  have  been  satisfied  that  nothing  less  than  thought-
transference  would  explain  the  revelations,  and  that  any  candid  reader
now  must  find  it  hard  to  resist  the  same  conviction.

938  A.  The  chief  sources  of  information  as  to  D.  D.  Home's  life  and
experiences  are  the  following  works  : —

Incidents  in  my  Life,  by  D.  D.  Home  (ist  edition,  London,  1863  ;  2nd
edition,  1864;  second  series,  1872).

1  Mr.  Podmore's  argument  is  here  abbreviated.


938B]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  579

D.  D.  Home :  His  Life  and  Mission,  by  Madame  Dunglas  Home
(London,  1888).

The  Gift  of  D.  D.  Home,  by  Madame  Dunglas  Home  (London,  1890).

Report  on  Spiritualism  of  the  Committee  of  the  London  Dialectical
Society  (London,  1871).  This  contains  the  evidence  of  the  Master  of
Lindsay, — now  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Balcarres, — and  others.

Experiences  in  Spiritualism  with  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  by  Viscount  Adare
(now  Lord  Dunraven;  privately  printed).

Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  by  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.
Reprinted  from  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  (London,  1874).

Notes  of  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home,  by  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.  (Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  98.)

See  also  a  review  by  Professor  Barrett  and  the  present  writer  of
Madame  Home's  first  book,  D.  D.  Home :  His  Life  and  Mission,  in  the
Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  101-136  ;  a  briefer  review  of  her  second  book,
The  Gift  of  D.  D.  Home,  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  249  ;  and  a
note  on  "The  Character  of  D.  D.  Home  "  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.
p.  176;  also  an  article  by  Mr.  Hamilton  Aide",  "Was  I  hypnotised?"  in
the  Nineteenth  Century  for  April  1890.

938  B.  I  give  here  a  brief  summary  of  the  review  by  Professor
Barrett  and  myself  of  D.  D.  Home  :  His  Life  and  Mission,  just  re-
ferred to.

Shortly  after  the  book  was  published  I  met  Madame  Home  in  Paris,
and  she  allowed  me  to  examine  the  original  letters  of  more  than  a
hundred  of  her  correspondents  and  compare  them  with  the  extracts  and
translations  printed  in  the  book,  where  I  found  that  they  were  correctly
reproduced.  Our  second  aim  was  to  acquire  further  evidence,  either  for
or  against  the  validity  of  Home's  claims.  Several  fresh  cases  confirma-
tory of  those  given  by  Madame  Home  were  obtained  and  printed  in  full
in  our  review  (pp.  122—136).  The  evidential  value  of  Home's  own  narra-
tive, Incidents  in  my  Life,  was  much  increased  by  a  letter  written  to  me
by  Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  the  well-known  solicitor,  of  44  Lincoln's  Inn
Fields,  stating  that  he  had  written  nearly  the  whole  of  the  book, — Home
staying  with  him  in  his  house,  producing  all  the  letters  and  documents,
and  giving  him  the  necessary  information ;  while  the  preface  to  the
second  series  of  Incidents,  dealing  with  Sir  David  Brewster,  was  written
by  Mr.  Wilkinson  from  information  given  him  by  Dr.  Robert  Chambers,
to  whom  the  proofs  of  the  whole  work  were  submitted.  Dr.  Chambers
also  wrote  the  introduction  and  concluding  chapter  of  the  first  series.

There  is  thus  a  considerable  body  of  evidence  as  to  Home,  which
enables  us  to  discuss  the  three  questions  :  (i)  Was  he  ever  convicted  of
fraud?  (2)  Did  he  satisfy  any  trained  observer  in  a  series  of  experiments
selected  by  the  observer  and  not  by  himself?  (3)  Were  the  phenomena
entirely  beyond  the  known  scope  of  the  conjurer's  art  ?

With  regard  to  (i),  Mr.  Robert  Browning  told  us  the  circumstances


58o  APPENDICES  [938  B

which  mainly  led  to  the  opinion  of  Home  which  he  expressed  in  Mr.
Sludge  the  Medium.  A  lady  had  repeated  to  him  a  statement  made  to  her
by  a  lady  and  gentleman  that  they  had  found  Home  experimenting  with
phosphorus  on  the  production  of  "spirit-lights."  This  evidence,  then,
came  to  us  at  third-hand ;  the  incident  had  occurred  nearly  forty  years
before,  and  it  was  impossible  to  learn  more  of  it,  since  all  the  witnesses
were  dead  and  had  left  no  written  record.

We  received  one  first-hand  account,  from  a  gentleman  of  character
and  ability,  of  a  stance  given  in  very  poor  light,  where  a  small  "  spirit
hand  " — visible  to  all  the  sitters — appeared,  and  moved  about.  It  seemed
to  him  that  he  could  see  slight  movements  in  the  shoulder  or  upper  part
of  Home's  arm  corresponding  with  the  movements  of  the  "  spirit  hand."
Afterwards,  "  the  movements  of  both  plainly  corresponded,  and  at  length
...  I  saw  continuous  connection  in  the  upper  outline  of  Home's  arm
and  the  thing,  whatever  it  was,  that  supported  the  *  spirit  hand.'  "  The
sitting  took  place  in  1855,  but  the  account  was  not  written  until  1889.
It  is  printed  in  full  in  our  review  {op.  cit.  p.  120).

There  is  also  a  frequently  repeated  story  that  Home  was  found  in
France  to  be  using  a  stuffed  hand;  our  inquiries  into  this  tended  to
show  that  the  story  was  a  fabrication.

The  most  serious  blot  on  Home's  character  was  that  revealed  by  the
Lyon  case.  He  had  sittings  with  Mrs.  Lyon,  at  which  communications
were  given  purporting  to  come  from  her  deceased  husband,  and  urging  her
to  adopt  Home  as  her  son  and  give  him  ^700  a  year.  An  admitted
letter  from  her  to  Home,  in  which  she  said  that  she  presented  him  with
^"24,000  "  as  an  entirely  free  gift,"  was  stated  by  her  at  the  trial  to  have
been  written  at  Home's  dictation  and  under  "  magnetic  influence."  The
strongest  evidence  against  Home  was  furnished  by  memorandum  books,
in  his  own  writing,  containing  accounts  of  his  experiences  with  her,  and
communications  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue  between  her  and  her  husband,
in  which  Home  was  alluded  to  as  "  our  beloved  son."  Of  Mrs.  Lyon,
the  judge  observed  that  "  Reliance  cannot  be  placed  on  her  testimony ;  "
but  there  was  much  evidence  besides  hers  to  show  that  Home  worked  on
her  mind  by  spiritualistic  devices,  especially  by  suggesting  communica-
tions from  her  husband,  and  the  Court  held  that  such  transactions  as
those  in  question  could  not  be  upheld  "unless  the  Court  is  quite
satisfied  that  they  are  acts  of  pure  volition  uninfluenced."  Such  proof
not  being  forthcoming,  the  case  was  decided  against  Home.  (A  review
of  the  evidence  in  this  case  was  furnished  us  by  Mr.  H.  Arthur  Smith,
and  is  printed  in  our  article,  p.  117.)

We  must  observe,  however,  that  the  Lyon  case,  however  discredit-
able to  Home  personally,  has  no  clear  bearing  on  the  reality  of  his
powers,  since  there  seems  to  have  been  no  assertion  that  any  of  the
phenomena  were  produced  by  fraudulent  means.

(2)  With  regard  to  our  second  question, — whether  his  powers  were


938  B]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  581

tested  by  competent  observers,— Home  in  this  respect  stands  pre-eminent ;
since  we  have  the  evidence  of  Sir  William  Crookes  (already  referred  to  in
938  A)  corroborated  by  the  testimony  of  the  Master  of  Lindsay  (now
Earl  of  Crawford  and  Balcarres)  himself  a  savant  of  some  distinction,  and
the  privately  printed  series  of  careful  observations  by  the  present  and  the
late  Lords  Dunraven.

(3)  As  to  our  third  question — whether  the  phenomena  could  have
been  produced  by  conjuring — many  of  them,  especially  the  "fire  tests"
and  the  movements  of  large  untouched  objects  in  good  light,  seem  in-
explicable by  this  supposition.  The  hypothesis  of  collective  hallucination
on  the  part  of  the  sitters  seems  very  improbable,  because  in  most  cases
all  those  present  saw  the  same  thing ; 1  and  often  without  receiving  from
Home  any  audible  suggestion  as  to  what  was  about  to  happen.

The  telekinetic  phenomena  observed  in  Home's  case  were  those
which  attracted  most  attention ;  but  the  communications  given  at  his
sittings  purporting  to  come  from  deceased  persons  are  also  noteworthy,
though  the  records  of  them  are  unfortunately  very  inadequate.  In  our
article  (op.  cit.  pp.  110—114)  we  give  a  brief  abstract  of  thirty-five  cases  of
"  recognition  "  taken  from  Madame  Home's  work,  omitting  those  which
rest  on  Home's  uncorroborated  testimony.2

These  cases  are  of  very  different  evidential  value.  But  many  are  first-
hand accounts,  volunteered  by  independent  witnesses,  of  messages  closely
affecting  themselves,  and  sometimes  involving  incidents  which  can  hardly
have  been  known  to  servants  or  dependants.

I  conclude  with  some  extracts  from  the  list  just  referred  to,  which
follows  the  paging  of  Madame  Home's  book  : —

i.  p.  15. — Mr.  S.  B.  Brittan's  testimony.  Home  suddenly  becomes
entranced;  says  "Hannah  Brittan  is  here," — a  relative  long  since  dead,  and
whose  existence,  as  Mr.  Brittan  believes,  was  not  known  to  any  one  "  in  all
that  region."  Home,  entranced,  acts  as  though  a  melancholic  in  terror  of  hell ;
Hannah  Brittan  "became  insane  from  believing  in  the  doctrine  of  endless
punishment."

12.  p.  153. — Mrs.  Senior's  evidence.  At  their  first  meeting  Mr.  Home
describes  Mr.  Senior  and  adds,  "  You  forgot  to  wind  his  watch,  and  how  miser-
able it  made  you."  "  Now  this  was  a  fact  known  to  no  living  being  but  myself.
I  had  wound  the  watch  the  night  I  lost  my  husband  and  resolved  never  to  let

1  The  famous  case  of  Home  floating  out  at  one  window  and  in  at  another,  related  by
:    Lords  Lindsay  and  Adare,  as  witnessed  by  them,  was  quoted  by  Dr.  Carpenter  in  the

Contemporary  Review  for  January  1876,  as  an  instance  of  believers  affirming  that  they
saw  the  phenomenon,  "  while  a  single  honest  sceptic  declares  that  Mr.  Home  was  sitting
in  his  chair  all  the  time."  In  reply  to  this,  the  only  other  person  who  was  present  at  the
!  time,  Captain  Wynne,  wrote  a  letter  (seen  by  the  present  writer  and  printed  in  Home's
Life]  stating  that  he  also  on  that  occasion  had  seen  Home  go  out  of  one  window  and  in
at  the  other.

2  A  further  list  of  cases  where  there  is  some  first-hand  evidence  for  the  identity  of  an
alleged  communicating  spirit  is  given  in  my  review  of  The  Gift  of  D.  D.  Home  in  the

i   Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  251.


582  APPENDICES  [943  A

it  go  down  again.  I  forgot  to  wind  it  one  night,  and  my  agony  was  great  when
I  discovered  it  in  the  morning,  but  I  never  mentioned  it  even  to  my  husband's
sister,  who  was  in  the  house  with  me."  Home  also  mentions  "  Mary,"  Mr.
Senior's  mother.

13.  p.  154. — Mrs.  Senior  narrates  how  at  another  sdance  Home,  entranced,
recalls  private  conversation  (date,  positions,  and  other  details  given)  between
herself  and  her  husband.

16.  p.  177. — Mr.  B.  Coleman's  evidence.     At  his  first  stance  messages  are
given  by  raps  as  from  his  aunts  Elizabeth  and  Hannah.     "  I  did  not  recognise
the  names.     I  had  never  known  of  any  aunts  of  those  names,"  but  he  learns
that  sisters  of  his  father,  thus  named,  died  before  he  was  born.

17.  p.  196. — Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall's  testimony.     Raps  from  deceased  Madame
Home   to    Mr.  Durham,  sculptor,  saying,  "  Thanks  for  your  early  morning
labour ;  I  have  often  been  near  you."     Mr.  Durham  had  been  rising  early  to
work  at  a  bust  of  Madame  Home  intended  as  a  present  to  Mr.  Home ;  "  this
fact  was  not  even  known  in  his  own  household."

18.  p.  206.— Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall's  evidence.     "Your  father,  Colonel  Hall,"  is
announced ;  test  asked  for,  "  The  last  time  we  met  in  Cork  you  pulled  my  tail."
Colonel  Hall  had  worn  a  queue,  and  this  fact  was  correct.

20.  p.  278. — Mrs.  Hennings'  testimony.     Home  says,  "  George  is  here  "-
nephew  of  Mrs.  Hennings,  recently  deceased ;  mentions  accident  from  bite  of
dog  when  a  boy  at  Dulwich — correct.     One  of  us  has  seen  Mrs.  Hennings,  who,
although  very  old,  retains  a  singularly  bright  intelligence.     She  confirmed  this
statement,  and  added  several  details.

21.  p.  278. — Mrs.  Hennings'  testimony.     Home  speaks  in  trance  as  from
her  father ;  "  The  night  before  your  father  passed  away  you  played  whist  with
him,"  some  details,  and  explanation  as  to  provisions  of  will.     "  Mr.  Home  had
never  seen  my  father,  nor  heard  anything  about  him ;  and  most  wonderful  to
me  was  this  detail  of  such  long-past  events,  known  only  to  myself."

22.  p.  288. — Lord  Lindsay's  testimony  (now  Lord  Crawford).    Lord  Lindsay
misses  train  at  Norwood,  sleeps  on  sofa  in  Home's  room;  sees  female  figure
standing  near  Home's  bed,  which  fades  away ;  recognises  face  among  other
photographs  next  morning;  it  was  Home's  deceased  wife.     Lord  Adare  (now
Lord  Dunraven)  and  two  others,  in  Lord  Adare's  rooms,  see  (February  1869)
a  shadowy  figure  resembling  this  form,  but  cannot  distinguish  features.

26.  p.  377. — Mrs.  Peck's  testimony.  "  By  permission  I  put  several  mental
questions,  each  of  which  was  promptly  and  correctly  answered,  with  the  full
names  of  friends  and  relatives  deceased,  and  circumstances  which  could  not
have  been  known  to  any  of  those  present  ;  all,  as  I  have  stated,  having  been
previous  to  the  past  twenty-four  hours  strangers  to  me."  (Mrs.  Peck  was  an
American,  staying  at  a  hotel  in  Geneva.)

27-  P-  378. — Mrs.  Peck's  testimony.  Home,  entranced,  says :  "  There  is  a
portrait  of  his  mother."  "  I  made  no  reply;  but  my  thought  was,  *  There  is  no
portrait  of  her.' "  Home  insists  that  there  is,  "  with  an  open  Bible  upon  her
knee."  There  was,  in  fact,  a  daguerreotype  thirty  years  old,  which  Mrs.  Peck
had  forgotten,  in  attitude  described — with  indistinct  book  on  knee,  which  was,
in  fact,  a  Bible.

943  A.  A  general  account  of  "The  Experiences  of  W.  Stainton
Moses"  was  given  by  me  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.  vol.  ix.  pp.  245-352,  and
vol.  xi.  pp.  24-113.  The  following  extract  is  from  vol.  ix.  pp.  245-252


943A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  583

I.  Among  his  printed  works  the   most   important  for  our  present  pur-
pose are —

1.  Researches  in  Spiritualism.     This   unfinished  work  was  published   in

Human  Nature — a   periodical  now  extinct — in    1874-5,  and  not  re-
printed.    It  is  now  difficult  of  access.

2.  Spirit  Identity,  published  in  1879.     This  work  also  has  been  for  some

years  out  of  print.

3.  Spirit   Teachings,  published  in   1883;    [reprinted  after  his  death  in  a

Memorial  Edition  (London,  1894)  with  a  short  biographical  notice

by  Mr.  Charlton  Speer.]
Two  other  volumes,  Psychography  and  Higher  Aspects  of  Spiritualism,

contain  .little  which  bears  on  our  present  theme.
Besides  these  books,  Mr.    Moses  wrote  much  in  the  weekly  periodical

Light,  of  which  he  was  for  some  years  the  editor.

II.  Mr.   Moses' MS S.  entrusted  to  me,  and  of  which  I   have   made  use,
consists  of  thirty-one  note-books,  ranging  from  September  1872  to  March  1883,
and  various  letters.

The  note-books  may  be  divided  as  follows : —

Twenty-four  books  of  automatic  script,  numbered  1-24,  and  extending  from
March  1873  to  March  1883.

Four  books  of  records  of  physical  phenomena,  September  i872-January  1875.
These  books  run  concurrently  with  the  books  of  automatic  script.  The  first
book  of  this  series  (April-September  1872)  is  missing.  Those  which  remain  I
have  numbered  2  B,  3  B,  4  B,  and  5  B.

Three  books  of  retrospect  and  summary,  which  I  number  25,  26,  27.  Books
25  and  26  recapitulate  physical  phenomena,  with  reflections.  Book  27  is
entitled  The  Identity  of  Spirit,  and  contains,  in  briefer  form,  much  of  the  evi-
dence first  printed  in  Spirit  Identity ;  which  work,  indeed,  this  later  tractate
may  have  been  intended  to  supersede.  Some  of  the  letters  also  are  of  value,
but  mainly  as  adding  contemporary  confirmation  to  facts  already  to  be  found
in  the  note-books.

III.  Among  the  records  made  by  friends   the  most  important  are  Mrs.
Stanhope  Speer's  "  Records  of  Private  Stances,  from  notes  taken  at  the  time
of  each  sitting."     Over  sixty  instalments  of  these  records  have  now  (October
1893)  been  published  in  Light.     They  begin  in  1872  and  go  down  to  1881 —
considerably  beyond  the  date  (1875)  at  which  Mr.  Moses'  extant  records  of
physical  phenomena  obtained  in  his  seances  cease.     As  will  be  seen  later  on,
these  independent  and  contemporary  records  are  evidentially  of  capital  import-
ance.    Dr.  and  Mrs.  Stanhope  Speer  were  Mr.  Moses'  most  intimate  friends  ;
and  they,  often  with  another  intimate  friend,  Mr.  F.  W.  Percival  (Barrister-at-
Law  and  Examiner  in  the  Education  Department),  were  the  habitual  members,
and  generally  the  only  members,  of  the  small  group  who  witnessed  the  pheno-
mena about  to  be  described.

Mr.  Percival,  the  late  Dr.  Speer,  Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison,  Dr.  Thomson,  and
the  late  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  have  at  different  times  printed  short  first-hand
records  of  certain  of  Mr.  Moses'  phenomena,  and  Mrs.  Garratt  and  Miss
Birkett  took  some  contemporary  notes  of  sittings  at  which  they  were  present.

Two  note-books  and  other  MSS.  by  Dr.  Speer  have  been  placed  in  my
hands,  and  contain  independent  contemporary  records  of  much  evidential  value.


584  APPENDICES  [943  A

[Many  additional  records  of  the  automatic  script  from  Mr.  Moses'  note-books
have  been  published  in  Light  during  the  last  few  years.]

IV.  In  estimating  the  evidential  value  of  oral  intercourse  as  to  Mr.  Moses'
phenomena,  the  character  of  my  own  friendship  for  him  is  an  item  on  which  I
am  bound  to  be  explicit.  Friendship  it  might  truly  be  called,  for  it  was  based
upon  a  consciousness  of  common  pursuits  of  great  moment,  and  I  felt  for  him
much  both  of  gratitude  and  of  esteem.  He  responded  to  my  unfeigned
interest  with  a  straighforward  intimacy  of  conversation  on  the  experiences  of
which  I  cared  so  much  to  learn.  But  there  was  no  such  close  personal  attrac-
tion as  is  likely  to  prompt  me  to  partiality  as  a  biographer  ;  and  indeed  both
Edmund  Gurney  and  I  were  conscious  in  him  of  something  like  the  impatience
of  a  schoolmaster  towards  slow  students ; — natural  enough  in  a  man  whose
inborn  gifts  have  carried  him  irresistibly  to  a  conviction,  on  the  edge  of  which
less  favoured  persons  must  needs  pause  and  ponder  long.  I  am  bound  to  add
that  the  study  of  his  note-books,  by  making  him  more  intimately  known  to  me
as  he  was  in  his  best  days,  has  brought  me  nearer  to  the  warm  and  even  enthu-
siastic estimate  implied  in  the  letters  of  various  more  intimate  friends  of  his
which  lie  before  me.

More  important,  however,  than  the  precise  degree  of  attractiveness,  or  of
spiritual  refinement,  in  Mr.  Moses'  personal  demeanour  are  the  fundamental
questions  of  sanity  and  probity.  On  these  points  neither  I  myself,  nor,  so  far  as  I
know,  any  person  acquainted  with  Mr.  Moses,  has  ever  entertained  any  doubt.
"  However  perplexed  for  an  explanation,"  says  Mr.  Massey,  "  the  crassest
prejudice  has  recoiled  from  ever  suggesting  a  doubt  of  the  truth  and  honesty
of  Stainton  Moses."  "  I  believe  that  he  was  wholly  incapable  of  deceit,"  writes
Mr.  H.  J.  Hood,  barrister-at-law,  who  knew  him  for  many  years.  The  people
who  assumed  that  he  must  somehow  have  performed  the  phenomena  of  his
dark  stances  himself — who  asked  triumphantly,  "  Where  was  Moses  when  the
candle  went  out  ?  " — even  these  never,  so  far  as  I  know,  suggested  anything
beyond  unconscious  fraud  in  a  trance-condition.

A  brief  record  of  Mr.  Moses'  life,  with  some  estimates  of  the  work  done  by
him  in  ordinary  professional  capacities,  will  help  the  reader  to  form  something
of  a  personal  judgment  on  his  character.

On  the  events  of  his  life  the  Speer  family,  who  were  his  most  intimate
friends,  and  are  well  acquainted  with  his  nearest  surviving  relatives,  are  my
main  authority.  Their  importance  as  witnesses  of  the  phenomena  is  so  great
that  I  must  be  pardoned  for  inserting  a  "  testimonial "  to  the  late  Dr.  Speer
(M.D.  Edinburgh),  which  shall  not,  however,  be  in  my  own  words,  but  in  those
of  Dr.  Marshall  Hall,  F.R.S.,  one  of  the  best  known  physicians  of  the  middle
of  this  century.  Writing  on  March  i8th,  1849,  Dr.  Marshall  Hall  says  (in  a
printed  collection  of  similar  testimonials  now  before  me):  "  I  have  great  satis-
faction in  bearing  my  testimony  to  the  talents  and  acquirements  of  Dr.  Stanhope
Templeman  Speer.  Dr.  Speer  has  had  unusual  advantages  in  having  been  at
the  Medical  Schools,  not  only  of  London  and  Edinburgh,  but  of  Paris  and
Montpellier,  and  he  has  availed  himself  of  these  advantages  with  extra-
ordinary diligence  and  talent.  He  ranks  among  our  most  distinguished  rising
physicians."

Dr.  Speer  held  at  different  times  various  hospital  posts  of  credit,  and  was
much  valued  as  a  practising  physician  at  Cheltenham  and  in  London.  The
work  of  a  physician,  however,  was  rendered  somewhat  trying  to  him  by  an


943A]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  585


over- anxious  temperament ;  and  as  he  possessed  private  means,  and  had
strong  scientific  and  artistic  tastes,  he  quitted  his  profession  at  thirty-four,
and  preferred  to  spend  the  latter  part  of  his  life  in  studious  retirement.  Dr.
Speer's  cast  of  mind  was  strongly  materialistic,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  his
interest  in  Mr.  Moses'  phenomena  was  from  first  to  last  of  a  purely  scientific,
as  contrasted  with  an  emotional  or  a  religious,  nature.

I  regret  that  I  never  met  Dr.  Speer,  who  died  in  1889.  His  widow,  Mrs.
Stanhope  Speer,  is  well  known  tome  ;  and  I  regard  her  as  an  excellent  witness.
Her  son,  Mr.  Charlton  T.  Speer  (also  an  excellent  witness),  is  an  Associate  of
the  Royal  Academy  of  Music,  and  is  well  known  in  musical  circles  as  a  success-
ful composer  and  performer.

With  these  words  of  preface  I  pass  on  to  the  facts — simple  and  ordinary
enough  in  their  external  aspect — of  Mr.  Moses'  life.

William  Stainton  Moses  was  born  in  Lincolnshire,  November  5th,  1839.
His  father  had  been  headmaster  of  a  grammar-school  at  Donington,  near
Lincoln.  His  mother's  family  name  was  Stainton.  Mr.  Stainton  Moses
believed  that  the  name  Moses  had  been  originally  Mostyn,  but  that  an
ancestor  had  changed  it  in  order  to  avoid  some  peril  in  the  time  of  the
Commonwealth.  There  seems  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  family,  which
had  been  for  some  time  settled  in  Lincolnshire,  was  of  Jewish  descent.  Mrs.
Moses — still  living  and  vigorous  (1893)  at  the  age  of  ninety-one — was  a
serious  and  intelligent  woman,  and  brought  up  her  only  son  with  pious  care.
He  showed  ability;  and  the  family  moved  to  Bedford,  about  1852,  that  he
might  have  the  advantage  of  education  at  Bedford  College.  There  he  did
well,  and  in  due  time  gained  a  scholarship  at  Exeter  College,  Oxford.  In  his
school  days  he  occasionally  walked  in  his  sleep,  and  on  one  occasion  his
mother  saw  him  go  down  into  the  sitting-room  and  write  an  essay  on  a
subject  which  had  puzzled  him  on  the  previous  evening,  and  return  to  bed
without  awaking.  The  essay  thus  written  was  the  best  of  those  sent  up  by
the  class  that  day  (Mr.  Moses  tells  us),  and  was  fully  up  to  the  level  of  his
waking  performances.  This  is  the  only  incident  of  which  I  have  heard  which
in  any  way  foreshadowed  his  future  gift.  He  is  not  recorded  as  having  been
a  specially  nervous  or  excitable  child ;  and  he  was  at  this  time  strong  and
healthy.  In  after  life  his  health  was  bad ;  but  his  troubles  were  mainly
respiratory — constantly  recurring  catarrh  and  bronchitis — until  near  the  end
of  his  life,  when  he  was  attacked  by  Bright's  disease,  which  ultimately  caused
his  death.  His  phenomena,  it  may  be  observed,  were  at  their  best  when  he
was  in  his  best  health,  and  declined  or  disappeared  altogether  when  he  was  ill.

To  return  to  his  Oxford  career.  At  Oxford  he  was  an  ambitious  and  hard-
vorking,  but  not  in  other  ways  a  very  noticeable,  undergraduate.  His  health
broke  down  from  overwork,  and  he  left  Oxford  without  taking  a  degree,  and
spent  some  considerable  time  in  travel,  mainly  with  friends,  but  in  part  alone.
He  was  already  much  interested  in  theology,  and  he  lived  for  some  six  months
[none  of  these  dates  are  very  precise)  in  a  monastery  on  Mount  Athos.  Beyond
the  mere  fact  of  his  residence  on  Mount  Athos,  to  which  his  surviving  friends
testify,  all  that  is  known  of  this  period  of  seclusion  consists  of  allusions  made
by  his  "  spirit  guides,"  who  say  that  they  directed  him  thither  that  he  might
study  the  Eastern  Church,  and  be  prepared  by  a  comparison  of  theologies  for
the  reception  of  a  wider  truth.  Be  this  as  it  may,  he  recovered  his  health,
returned  to  Oxford,  took  his  degree,  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Wilberforce,  and


586  APPENDICES  [943  A

accepted  a  curacy  at  Kirk  Maughold,  near  Ramsey,  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  at
the  age  of  twenty-four.  He  was  an  active  parish  clergyman,  liked  by  his
parishioners,  and  holding  Anglican  views  of  an  ordinary  type.  On  the
occasion  of  an  outbreak  of  small-pox  he  distinguished  himself  by  his  zeal
and  kindness;  and  it  is  recorded  that  in  one  case  he  helped  to  nurse  and
to  bury  a  man  whose  malady  was  so  violent  that  it  was  hard  to  get  any  one
to  approach  him.  During  this  period  also  he  began  to  write  for  periodicals,
Punch  and  the  Saturday  Review  being  specially  mentioned.  The  memorial
verses  to  the  Rev.  F.  D.  Maurice  which  appeared  in  Punch  have  since  been
quoted  as  of  Mr.  Moses'  writing ;  and  I  should  conceive  that  his  other  con-
tributions were  probably  in  this  serious  strain.  He  continued  to  write  much,
anonymously,  for  various  periodicals  during  many  years  of  his  life,  and  showed
an  easy  style  and  a  good  deal  of  miscellaneous  knowledge.

After  some  four  years  of  residence  near  Ramsey,  he  accepted  the  curacy  of
St.  George's,  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man.  Here  also  he  was  esteemed  as  an  active
clergyman,  and  admired  as  a  preacher.  In  April  1869  he  had  a  serious  illness,
and  hearing  that  Dr.  Speer,  whom  he  knew  slightly,  was  in  the  island  on  a
holiday,  he  called  in  his  medical  aid.  Dr.  Speer  brought  him  successfully
through  his  illness,  and  invited  him  as  a  convalescent  to  the  house  which  he
was  renting  in  the  island.  The  foundations  of  a  lifelong  friendship  with  Dr.
and  Mrs.  Speer  were  then  laid.

In  1870  he  took  a  curacy  somewhere  in  Dorsetshire,  where  also  he  was
liked,  and  was  appointed  "  Lent  preacher "  for  the  county.  A  very  severe
attack  of  whooping-cough  obliged  him  to  interrupt  his  parish  work,  which,  in
fact,  he  never  resumed.  Dr.  Speer  invited  him  to  become  his  son's  tutor,  and
for  seven  years  he  filled  that  office  in  a  way  that  attached  to  him  both  parents
and  pupil  more  closely  than  ever.  In  1871  he  was  offered  a  mastership  in
University  College  School ;  and  this  post  he  held  until  failing  health  compelled
him  to  resign  it  some  three  years  before  his  death.  The  physical  phenomena
about  to  be  described  began  in  1872,  and  continued  with  gradually  lessening
frequency  until  1881.  The  automatic  script  began  in  1873,  and  finally  died  out,
so  far  as  we  know,  in  1883.  During  these  later  years  Mr.  Moses  was  active  in
contributing  to,  and  afterwards  in  editing,  the  weekly  newspaper  Light;  and
he  took  a  leading  part  in  several  spiritistic  organisations.  Of  one  of  these—
the  London  Spiritualist  Alliance — he  was  president  at  the  time  of  his  death.
In  1882  he  aided  in  the  foundation  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research;  but
he  left  that  body  in  1886,  on  account  of  its  attitude  towards  Spiritualism,  which
he  regarded  as  unduly  critical.  It  is  worth  remarking  that  although,  as  the
fact  of  his  withdrawal  shows,  many  members  of  the  Society  held  an  intel-
lectual position  widely  differing  from  that  of  Mr.  Moses,  and  although  his  own
published  records  were  of  a  kind  not  easily  credible,  no  suspicion  as  to  his
personal  probity  and  veracity  was  ever,  so  far  as  I  know,  either  expressed  or
entertained.

Mr.  Moses'  health  became  steadily  weaker.  He  suffered  greatly  from  sup-
pressed gout,  in  addition  to  other  ailments.  A  serious  fall  from  the  top  of  an
omnibus  made  matters  worse.  In  1890  he  was  attacked  by  influenza  in  the
severest  form,  and  was  reckoned,  I  believe,  to  have  had  twelve  separate
relapses  or  recurrences  of  that  complaint.  An  accident  to  his  eyes  also  gave
him  much  trouble.  He  worked  on,  as  best  he  could,  to  the  last ;  but  the  period
of  decline  was  tedious  and  distressing;  and  it  would  be  very  unfair  to  judge


943  A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  587

him  from  the  utterances  of  these  last  years.  When  in  September  1892  he
passed  from  earth,  we  may  surely  trust  that  his  achievements  here  had  won
their  way  to  promotion,  and  his  sufferings  to  repose.

Mr.  Moses  never  married,  and  went  very  little  into  general  society.  His
personal  appearance  offered  no  indication  of  his  peculiar  gift.  He  was  of
middle  stature,  strongly  made,  with  somewhat  heavy  features,  and  thick
dark  hair  and  beard.  His  expression  of  countenance  was  honest,  manly,
and  resolute.  Many  testimonies  of  affection  and  esteem  appeared  in  Light
and  elsewhere  after  his  decease  ;  especially,  of  course,  from  those  to  whom  his
experiences  and  teachings  had  brought  a  convincing  hope.  I  subjoin  a  few
letters  from  friends  who  had  good  opportunities  of  estimating  his  value  in  the
common  duties  and  intercourse  of  life.

Dr.  Johnson,  of  Bedford,  writes  to  me  as  follows  : —

"68  HIGH  STREET,  BEDFORD,
March  24^,  1893.

"DEAR  SIR, — As  the  intimate  friend  and  medical  adviser  of  the  late
Stainton  Moses  I  have  had  ample  opportunities  of  thoroughly  knowing  his
character  and  his  mental  state.

"  He  was  a  man  even  in  temper,  painstaking  and  methodical,  of  exceptional
ability,  and  utterly  free  from  any  hallucination  or  anything  to  indicate  other
than  a  well-ordered  brain.

"He  was  a  firm  believer  in  all  that  he  uttered  or  wrote  about  matters  of  a
spiritual  nature,  and  he  impressed  me — and,  I  believe,  most  others  he  came  in
contact  with — with  the  genuineness  of  his  convictions,  and  a  firm  belief  not  only
that  he  believed  in  the  statements  he  had  made  and  written,  but  that  they
were  the  outcome  of  a  mind  which  had  given  itself  up  entirely  to  the  study  of
a  subject  which  he  considered  of  essential  value  and  importance  to  the  welfare
of  his  fellow  men.

"  I  have  attended  him  in  several  very  severe  illnesses,  but  never,  in  sickness
or  at  other  times,  has  his  brain  shown  the  slightest  cloudiness  or  suffered  from
any  delusion.  I  not  only  consider  that  he  believed  what  he  stated,  but  I  think
that  those  who  knew  him  best  would  not  for  an  instant  doubt  that  all  he  stated
were  facts  and  words  of  truth. — Sincerely  yours,  WM.  G.  JOHNSON."

In  another  letter  Dr.  Johnson  says  : —

"He  was  a  most  lovable  character ;  kind  and  generous  in  his  every  action  ;
and  with  a  fund  of  information  on  most  subjects  which  made  him  a  most
welcome  guest."

Dr.  Eve,  headmaster  of  University  College  School,  writes  as  follows  to
Professor  Sidgwick: —

"  UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE  SCHOOL,  GOWER  STREET,

LONDON,  W.C.,  March  i%th,  1893.

"My  DEAR  SIDGWICK, — Stainton  Moses  was  an  excellent  colleague.  He
confined  himself  entirely  to  English ;  in  that  subject  he  took  classes  in  all
parts  of  the  school,  and  his  work  was  always  well  and  methodically  done.
'  He  taught  essay-writing  well,  and  was  very  skilful  in  appreciating  the  relative
value  of  boys'  essays,  which  is  not  easy.  He  was  much  looked  up  to  by  boys,
and  had  considerable  influence  over  them.  On  general  points  connected  with
the  management  of  the  school  he  was  one  of  the  colleagues  to  whom  I  most
naturally  turned  for  advice,  and  I  have  every  reason  to  be  grateful  to  him. —
Yours  very  sincerely,  H.  W.  EVE."


588  APPENDICES  [946  A

Mr.  F.  W.  Levander,  a  master  at  University  College  School,  writes  to
me  thus : —

"UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE  SCHOOL,  GOWER  STREET,
LONDON,  W.C.,  May  i6tk,  1893.

"  DEAR  SIR, — My  acquaintance  with  the  late  W.  Stainton  Moses  com-
menced in  the  year  1871,  when  he  first  became  one  of  the  masters  here.
This  acquaintance  soon  extended  beyond  the  nature  of  that  generally  met
with  between  colleagues ;  it  ripened  into  a  constantly  increasing  friendship,
which  continued  unbroken  until  his  death.  During  the  whole  of  this  long
period  he  always  impressed  me  with  the  idea  that  he  was  thoroughly
earnest  and  conscientious,  and  I  believe  that  perfect  reliance  can  be  placed
on  all  his  statements. — Yours  faithfully,  F.  W.  LEVANDER."

I  have  often  heard  Mr.  Moses  discussed  by  persons  of  opinions  opposed
to  his  own ;  and  since  I  owe  it  to  my  readers  to  make  the  present  paper  not
merely  eulogistic,  but  as  accurately  descriptive  as  my  materials  allow,  I  feel
bound  to  reproduce  adverse  criticisms.  I  have,  then,  heard  him,  in  his  later
years,  characterised  as  an  obstinate,  confused,  and  irritable  controversialist.
I  have  heard  him  described  as  lacking  in  the  grace  of  humility,  and  in  that
spirituality  of  tastes  and  character  which  should  seem  appropriate  to  one  living
much  in  the  commerce  of  the  Unseen.  But  I  have  never  heard  any  one  who
had  even  the  slightest  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Moses  impugn  his  sanity  or  his
sincerity,  his  veracity  or  his  honour.

946  A.     From  the  preface  to  Spirit  Teachings,  by  W.  Stainton  Moses.

The  communications  which  form  the  bulk  of  this  volume  were  received
by  the  process  known  as  automatic  or  passive  writing.  This  is  to  be  distin-
guished from  Psychography.  In  the  former  case  the  psychic  holds  the  pen
or  pencil,  or  places  his  hand  upon  the  planchette,  and  the  message  is
written  without  the  conscious  intervention  of  his  mind.  In  the  latter  case  the
writing  is  direct,  or  is  obtained  without  the  use  of  the  hand  of  the  psychic,  and
sometimes  without  the  aid  of  pen  or  pencil.

Automatic  writing  is  a  well-known  method  of  communication  with  the
invisible  world  of  what  we  loosely  call  Spirit.  I  use  that  word  as  the  most
intelligible  to  my  readers,  though  I  am  well  aware  that  I  shall  be  told  that  I
ought  not  to  apply  any  such  term  to  many  of  the  unseen  beings  who  com-
municate with  earth,  of  whom  we  hear  much  and  often  as  being  the  reliquia
of  humanity,  the  shells  of  what  were  once  men.  It  is  no  part  of  my  business
to  enter  into  this  ghost  question.  My  interlocutors  call  themselves  spirits,
perhaps  because  I  so  call  them,  and  spirits  they  are  to  me  for  my  present
purposes.

These  messages  began  to  be  written  through  my  hand  just  ten  years  since
—  March  soth,  1873 — about  a  year  after  my  first  introduction  to  Spiritualism.
I  had  had  many  communications  before,  and  this  method  was  adopted  for  the
purpose  of  convenience,  and  also  to  preserve  what  was  intended  to  be  a
connected  body  of  teaching.  The  laborious  method  of  rapping  out  messages
was  manifestly  unfitted  for  communications  such  as  those  which  I  here  print.
If  spoken  through  the  lips  of  the  medium  in  trance  they  were  partially  lost,
and  it  was  moreover  impossible  at  first  to  rely  upon  such  a  measure  of  mental
passivity  as  would  preserve  them  from  admixture  with  his  ideas.  I  procured
a  pocket-book  which  I  habitually  carried  about  with  me.  I  soon  found  that


946A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  589

writing  flowed  more  easily  when  I  used  a  book  that  was  permeated  with  the
psychic  aura ;  just  as  raps  come  more  easily  on  a  table  that  has  been  fre-
quently used  for  the  purpose,  and  as  phenomena  occur  most  readily  in  the
medium's  own  room.

At  first  the  writing  was  very  small  and  irregular,  and  it  was  necessary
for  me  to  write  slowly  and  cautiously,  and  to  watch  the  hand,  following  the
lines  with  my  eye ;  otherwise  the  message  soon  became  incoherent,  and  the
result  was  mere  scribble.  In  a  short  time,  however,  I  found  that  I  could  dis-
pense with  these  precautions.  The  writing,  while  becoming  more  and  more
minute,  became  at  the  same  time  very  regular  and  beautifully  formed.  As
a  specimen  of  caligraphy  some  of  the  pages  are  exceedingly  beautiful.  The

1  answers  to  my  questions  (written  at  the  top  of  the  page)  were  paragraphed

,  and  arranged  as  if  for  the  press,  and  the  name  of  God  was  always  written  in
capitals  and  slowly,  and,  as  it  seemed,  reverentially.  The  subject  matter
was  always  of  a  pure  and  elevated  character,  much  of  it  being  of  personal
application,  intended  for  my  own  guidance  and  direction.  I  may  say  that
throughout  the  whole  of  these  written  communications,  extending  in  unbroken
continuity  to  the  year  1880,  there  is  no  flippant  message,  no  attempt  at  jest,
no  vulgarity  or  incongruity,  no  false  or  misleading  statement,  so  far  as  I  know
or  could  discover ;  nothing  incompatible  with  the  avowed  object,  again  and
again  repeated,  of  instruction,  enlightenment,  and  guidance  by  spirits  fitted
for  the  task.  Judged  as  I  should  wish  to  be  judged  myself,  they  were  what
they  pretended  to  be.  Their  words  were  words  of  sincerity,  and  of  sober,
serious  purpose.

The  earliest  communications  were  all  written  in  the  minute  characters  that

i  I  have  described,  and  were  uniform  in  style  and  in  the  signature,  "  Doctor,  the
Teacher,"  nor  have  his  messages  ever  varied  during  all  the  years  that  he  has
written.  Whenever  and  wherever  he  wrote,  his  handwriting  was  unchanged,
showing  indeed  less  change  than  my  own  does  during  the  last  decade.  The
tricks  of  style  remained  the  same,  and  there  was,  in  short,  a  sustained  indi-
viduality throughout  his  messages.  He  is  to  me  an  entity,  a  personality,  a
being  with  his  own  idiosyncrasies  and  characteristics  quite  as  clearly  defined
as  the  human  beings  with  whom  I  come  in  contact,  if  indeed  I  do  not  do  him
injustice  by  the  broad  comparison.

After  a  time,  communications  came  from  other  sources,  and  these  were
distinguished  each  by  its  own  handwriting,  and  by  its  own  peculiarities  of  style
and  expression.  These,  once  assumed,  were  equally  invariable.  I  could  tell  at
once  who  was  writing  by  the  mere  characteristics  of  the  caligraphy.

By  degrees,  I  found  that  many  spirits  who  were  unable  to  influence  my
hand  themselves  sought  the  aid  of  a  spirit  "  Rector,"  who  was  apparently  able
to  write  more  freely  and  with  less  strain  on  me  ;  for  writing  by  a  spirit  unac-
customed to  the  work  was  often  incoherent,  and  always  resulted  in  a  serious

!  drain  upon  my  vital  powers.  They  did  not  know  how  easily  the  reserve  of
force  was  exhausted,  and  I  suffered  proportionately.

Moreover,  the  writing  of  the  spirit  who  thus  became  a  sort  of  amanuensis
was  fluent  and  easy  to  decipher,  whereas  that  of  many  spirits  was  cramped,

1  archaic  in  form,  and  frequently  executed  with  difficulty,  and  almost  illegible.
So  it  came  to  pass,  as  a  matter  of  ordinary  course,  "  Rector  "  wrote,  but  when
a  spirit  came  for  the  first  time,  or  when  it  was  desired  to  emphasise  a  communi-

'  cation,  the  spirit  responsible  for  the  message  wrote  for  himself.


590  APPENDICES  [946  A

It  must  not  be  assumed,  however,  that  all  messages  proceeded  from  one
solitary  inspiration.  In  the  case  of  the  majority  of  the  communications  printed
in  this  volume  this  is  so.  The  volume  is  a  record  during  which  "  Impera-
tor"  was  alone  concerned  with  me,  though,  as  he  never  attempted  writing,
"  Rector  "  acted  as  his  amanuensis.  At  other  times,  and  especially  since  that
time,  communications  have  apparently  proceeded  from  a  company  of  asso-
ciated spirits,  who  have  used  their  amanuensis  for  the  purpose  of  their  mes-
sage. This  was  increasingly  the  case  during  the  last  five  years  that  I  received
these  communications.

The  circumstances  under  which  the  messages  were  written  were  infinitely
varied.  As  a  rule  it  was  necessary  that  I  should  be  isolated,  and  the  more
passive  my  mind  the  more  easy  the  communications.  But  I  have  received
messages  under  all  sorts  of  conditions.  At  first  they  came  with  difficulty,  but
soon  the  mechanical  method  appeared  to  be  mastered,  and  page  after  page  was
covered  with  matter  of  which  the  specimens  contained  in  this  book  will  enable
the  public  to  judge.

What  is  now  printed  has  been  subjected  to  revision  by  a  method  similar  to
that  by  which  it  was  first  written.  Originally  published  in  the  Spiritualist
newspaper,  the  messages  have  been  revised,  but  not  substantially  altered  by
those  who  first  wrote  them.  When  the  publication  in  the  Spiritualist  was
commenced,  I  had  no  sort  of  idea  of  doing  what  is  now  being  done.  Friends
desired  specimens  to  be  published,  and  the  selection  was  made  without  any
regard  to  continuity.  I  was  governed  only  by  a  desire  to  avoid  the  publication
of  what  was  of  personal  interest  only,  and  I,  perforce,  excluded  much  that
involved  allusion  to  those  still  living,  whom  I  had  no  right  to  drag  into  print.
I  disliked  printing  personal  matter  relating  to  myself;  I  had,  obviously,  no-
right  to  print  that  which  concerned  others.  Some  of  the  most  striking  and
impressive  communications  have  thus  been  excluded,  and  what  is  printed
must  be  regarded  as  a  mere  sample  of  what  cannot  see  the  light  now,  and
which  must  be  reserved  for  consideration  at  a  remote  period,  when  I  and  those
concerned  can  no  longer  be  aggrieved  by  its  publication.

It  is  an  interesting  subject  for  speculation  whether  my  own  thoughts
entered  into  the  subject-matter  of  the  communications.  I  took  extraordinary
pains  to  prevent  any  such  admixture.  At  first  the  writing  was  slow,  and  it  was
necessary  for  me  to  follow  it  with  my  eye,  but  even  then  the  thoughts  were  not
my  thoughts.  Very  soon  the  messages  assumed  a  character  of  which  I  had  no
doubt  whatever  that  the  thought  was  opposed  to  my  own.  But  I  cultivated
the  power  of  occupying  my  mind  with  other  things  during  the  time  that  the
writing  was  going  on,  and  was  able  to  read  an  abstruse  book,  and  follow  out  a
line  of  close  reasoning  while  the  message  was  written  with  unbroken  regu-
larity. Messages  so  written  extended  over  many  pages,  and  in  their  course
there  is  no  correction,  no  fault  in  composition,  and  often  a  sustained  vigour
and  beauty  of  style.

I  am  not,  however,  concerned  to  contend  that  my  own  mind  was  not
utilised,  or  that  what  was  thus  written  did  not  depend  for  its  form  on  the
mental  qualifications  of  the  medium  through  whom  it  was  given.  So  far  as  I
know  it  is  always  the  case  that  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  medium  are  traceable
in  such  communications.  It  is  not  conceivable  that  it  should  be  otherwise.
But  it  is  certain  that  the  mass  of  ideas  conveyed  to  me  were  alien  to  my  own
opinions,  were,  in  the  main,  opposed  to  my  settled  convictions,  and,  moreover.


947A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  591

that  in  several  cases  information,  of  which  I  was  assuredly  ignorant,  clear,
precise,  and  definite  in  form,  susceptible  of  verification,  and  always  exact,  was
thus  conveyed  to  me.  As,  at  many  of  the  stances,  spirits  came  and  rapped
out  on  the  table  clear  and  precise  information  about  themselves,  which  we
afterwards  verified,  so,  on  repeated  occasions,  was  such  information  conveyed
to  me  by  this  method  of  automatic  writing.

I  argue  from  the  one  case  to  others.  In  one  I  can  positively  assert  and
prove  the  conveyance  of  information  new  to  me.  In  others  I  equally  believe
that  I  was  in  communication  with  an  external  intelligence  which  conveyed  to
me  thoughts  other  than  my  own.  Indeed,  the  subject-matter  of  many  of  the
communications  printed  in  this  volume  will,  by  its  own  inherent  quality,  pro-
bably lead  to  the  same  conclusion.

I  never  could  command  the  writing.  It  came  unsought  usually,  and  when
I  did  seek  it,  as  often  as  not  I  was  unable  to  obtain  it.  A  sudden  impulse,
coming  I  know  not  how,  led  me  to  sit  down  and  prepare  to  write.  Where  the
messages  were  in  regular  course  I  was  accustomed  to  devote  the  first  hour  of
each  day  to  sitting  for  their  reception.  I  rose  early,  and  the  beginning  of  the
day  was  spent,  in  a  room  that  I  used  for  no  other  purpose,  in  what  was  to  all
intents  and  purposes  a  religious  service.  These  writings  frequently  came  then,
but  I  could  by  no  means  reckon  upon  them.  Other  forms  of  spirit-manifesta-
tion came  too ;  I  was  rarely  without  some  unless  ill-health  intervened,  as  it
often  did  of  late  years,  until  the  messages  ceased.

The  particular  communications  which  I  received  from  the  spirit  known  to
me  as  "  Imperator  "  mark  a  distinct  epoch  in  my  life.

I  have  noted  in  the  course  of  my  remarks  the  intense  exaltation  of  spirit,  the
strenuous  conflict,  the  intervals  of  peace,  that  I  have  since  longed  for,  but  have
seldom  attained,  which  marked  their  transmission.  It  was  a  period  of  educa-
tion in  which  I  underwent  a  spiritual  development  that  was  in  its  outcome  a
very  regeneration.  I  cannot  hope,  I  do  not  try,  to  convey  to  others  what  I
then  experienced.  But  it  may  possibly  be  borne  in  upon  the  minds  of  some
who  are  not  ignorant  of  the  dispensation  of  the  spirit  in  their  own  inner  selves,
that  for  me  the  question  of  the  beneficent  action  of  external  spirit  on  my  own
self  was  then  finally  settled.  I  have  never  since,  even  in  the  vagaries  of  an  ex-
tremely sceptical  mind,  and  amid  much  cause  for  questioning,  ever  seriously
entertained  a  doubt.

947  A.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  106-7.

I  will  now  give  the  account  of  "  Rector" — one  of  the  alleged  remoter
spirits— as  to  a  quotation  from  a  closed  and  unknown  book.  This  spirit
was,  as  described  above,  very  intimately  associated  with  Mr.  Moses,  and
habitually  wrote  for  "  Imperator,"  and  for  the  group  of  guides  generally.
His  handwriting  came  more  and  more  to  resemble  that  of  Mr.  Moses
himself.  To  him,  moreover,  was  attributed  the  power  of  reading  in
books  unknown  to  Mr.  Moses,  and  of  writing  out  matter  there  found
through  Mr.  Moses'  hand.

Q.  Can  you  read  ?

A.  "  No,  friend,  I  cannot,  but  Zachary  Gray  can,  and  Rector.     I  am  not
able  to  materialise  myself,  or  to  command  the  elements."
Q.  Are  either  of  those  spirits  here  ?


592  APPENDICES  [948  A

A.  "  I  will  bring  one  by-and-by.     I  will  send  .  .  .  Rector  is  here."

Q.  I  am  told  you  can  read.     Is  that  so?     Can  you  read  a  book ?

A.  [Spirit  handwriting  changed.]     "  Yes,  friend,  with  difficulty."

Q.  Will  you  write  for  me  the  last  line  of  the  first  book  of  the  ALnz'id  ?

A.  "  Wait Omnibus  errantem  terris  etfluctibus  azstas"

[This  was  right.]

Q.  Quite  so.  But  I  might  have  known  it.  Can  you  go  to  the  book-case,
take  the  last  book  but  one  on  the  second  shelf,  and  read  me  the  last  para-
graph of  the  ninety-fourth  page  ?  I  have  not  seen  it,  and  do  not  even  know
its  name.

A.  "  I  will  curtly  prove  by  a  short  historical  narrative,  that  Popery  is  a
novelty,  and  has  gradually  arisen  or  grown  up  since  the  primitive  and  pure
time  of  Christianity,  not  only  since  the  apostolic  age,  but  even  since  the
lamentable  union  of  kirk  and  the  state  by  Constantine."

[The  book  on  examination  proved  to  be  a  queer  one  called  "Roger's
Antipopopriestian,  an  attempt  to  liberate  and  purify  Christianity  from  Popery,
Politikirkality,  and  Priestrule."  The  extract  given  above  was  accurate,  but
the  word  "  narrative  "  substituted  for  "account."]

Q.   How  came  I  to  pitch  upon  so  appropriate  a  sentence  ?

A.  "I  know  not,  my  friend.  It  was  by  coincidence  The  word  was
changed  by  error.  I  knew  it  when  it  was  done,  but  would  not  change."

Q.  How  do  you  read?    You  wrote  more  slowly,  and  by  fits  and  starts.

A.  "  I  wrote  what  I  remembered,  and  then  I  went  for  more.  It  is  a  special
effort  to  read,  and  useful  only  as  a  test.  Your  friend  was  right  last  night ;  we
can  read,  but  only  when  conditions  are  very  good.  We  will  read  once  again,
and  write  and  then  impress  you  of  the  book : — '  Pope  is  the  last  great  writer
of  that  school  of  poetry,  the  poetry  of  the  intellect,  or  rather  of  the  intellect
mingled  with  the  fancy.'  That  is  truly  written.  Go  and  take  the  eleventh
book  on  the  same  shelf.  [I  took  a  book  called  Poetry,  Romance,  and  Rhetoric^
It  will  open  at  the  page  for  you.  Take  it  and  read,  and  recognise  our  power,
and  the  permission  which  the  great  and  good  God  gives  us,  to  show  you  of  our
power  over  matter.  To  Him  be  glory.  Amen."

[The  book  opened  at  page  145,  and  there  was  the  quotation  perfectly  true.
I  had  not  seen  the  book  before  :  certainly  had  no  idea  of  its  contents.]  [These
books  were  in  Dr.  Speer's  library. — F.  W.  H.  M.]

It  is  plain  that  a  power  such  as  this  of  acquiring  and  reproducing
fresh  knowledge  interposes  much  difficulty  in  the  way  of  identifying  any
alleged  spirit  by  means  of  his  knowledge  of  the  facts  of  his  earth-life.
948  A.  [Abridged  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  69-93.]
In  his  little  book  on  "  Spirit  Identity  "  (1879),  Mr.  Moses  had  collected
some  of  the  most  impressive  of  these  cases  of  identity,  and  added  some
interesting  matter  as  to  the  subjective  side  of  his  experiences.  The
book  was  never  widely  known  ;  and  when  the  small  edition  was  exhausted
Mr.  Moses  postponed  the  republication,  on  the  ground  that  the  book
was  imperfect,  and  that  he  had  no  time  to  improve  it.  I  repeatedly
pressed  him  on  the  subject ;  and  when  last  we  spoke  of  it  (October  i5th,
1886),  he  said  that  he  would  some  time  re-write  the  book,  and  would
consult  me*  as  to  further  passages  of  MS.  to  be  published.  The  book


948A]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  593

was  never  re-written ;  but  an  essay  called  "  The  Identity  of  Spirit,"  found
among  Mr.  Moses'  papers,  and  apparently  intended  to  be  read  to  the
London  Spiritualist  Alliance,  in  some  degree  fulfils  his  expressed  intention.
I  communicated  this  paper  first  to  Light,  the  newspaper  of  which  Mr.
Moses  was  Editor  until  his  death.  I  have  carefully  compared  it  with
the  MSS.  on  which  it  rests,  and  have  found  it  accurate.  I  have  also
discussed  it  with  Mrs.  Speer,  who  helped  Mr.  Moses  in  its  compilation
and  vouches  for  facts  of  verification,  &c.,  not  recorded  in  the  MS.  From
this  paper  I  cite  the  following  instances.  I  add  in  square  brackets  a  few
notes  where  I  have  been  able  to  bring  some  independent  corroboration.

(1)  It  was  in  August  1872,  that  I  first  became  acquainted  with  evidence  of
Spirit  Identity.     Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  I  were  then  sitting  regularly  almost
every  evening.     A  friend  of  Mrs.  Speer's,  of  whom  I  had  never  heard,  came
and  wrote  through  my  hand  her  name,  "A.  P.  Kirkland."     Dr.  Speer  said,  "Is
that  our  old  friend  ?  "     Then  I  wrote.     "  Yes.     I  came  to  tell  you  that  I  am
happy,   but   I    can't    impress  our    friend    to-night."     The   handwriting   then
changed,  and  there  came  communications  from  Mr.  Callister  (a  friend  of  mine) ;
and  from  my  cousin,  T.  J.  S. ;  and  from  another  spirit,  which  I  do  not  think  it
of  importance  to  mention  here.

With  regard  to  these  communications,  they  were  distinct  in  style,  and  it  is
of  importance  to  notice  that  the  handwriting  of  Miss  Kirkland  was  very  similar
to  her  own,  which  I  had  never  seen,  and  that  of  Mr.  Callister,  on  being  ques-
tioned as  to  his  identity,  recalled  to  my  memory  a  fact  which  had  escaped  it,
i  and  referred  to  a  conversation,  the  last  I  had  had  with  him  on  earth.  This  I  do
not  adduce  as  evidence  of  identity,  nor  do  I  withdraw  it  as  such.

This  was  on  August  2ist,  1872,  and  on  September  4th  in  the  same  year
there  came  a  little  sister  of  Dr.  Speer's,  particulars  respecting  which  case  are
printed  in  "  Spirit  Identity,"  p.  59,  as  follows : —

(2)  "  I  pass  to  a  case  in  which  a  spirit  who  first  manifested  her  presence  on
September  4th,  1872,  has  remained  in  permanent  communication  with  us  ever
since.     I  note  this  case  because  we  have  the  advantage  of  prolonged   inter-
course to  aid  us  in  forming  an  opinion  as  to  identity,  and  because  the  spirit  has
not  only  given  an  unequivocal  proof  of  her  characteristic  individuality,  but  has
evidenced  her  presence  in  various  ways.     This  is  a  remarkable  case,  too,  as
tending  to  prove  that  life  once  given  is  indestructible,  and  that  the  spirit  which
has  once  animated  a  human  body,  however  brief  its  tenure,  lives  on  with  unim-
paired identity.

"The  spirit  in  question  announced  herself  by  raps,  giving  a  message  in
French.  She  said  she  was  a  sister  of  Dr.  Speer's,  and  had  passed  away  at
Tours,  an  infant  of  seven  months  old.  I  had  never  heard  her  mentioned,  and
•her  brother  had  forgotten  her  existence,  for  she  lived  and  died  before  his  birth.
Clairvoyants  had  always  described  a  child  as  being  in  my  company,  and  I  had
wondered  at  this,  seeing  that  I  had  no  trace  of  any  such  relation  or  friend.
;Here  was  the  explanation.  From  the  time  of  her  first  appearance  she  had
remained  attached  to  the  family,  and  her  clear,  joyous  little  rap,  perfectly  indi-
vidual in  its  nature,  is  never-failing  evidence  of  her  presence.  It  never  varies,
and  we  all  know  it  at  once  as  surely  as  we  should  know  the  tone  of  a  friend's
yoice.  She  gave  particulars  of  herself,  and  also  her  four  names  in  full.  One
{Stanhope)  was  new  to  her  brother,  and  he  verified  it  only  by  reference  to

VOL.    II.  2   P


594  APPENDICES  [948  A

another  member  of  the  family  (Mrs.  Denis).  Names,  and  dates,  and  facts  were
alike  unknown  to  me.  I  was  absolutely  ignorant  of  the  fact  of  the  existence  of
any  such  person."

(3)  On  an  evening  in  the  month  of  January  1874,  I  repeatedly  said  to  Mrs.

Speer,  "Who  is  Emily  C .?     Her  name  keeps  sounding  in  my  ear."     Mrs.

Speer  replied  that  she  did  not  know  any  one  of  that  name.     "  Yes,"  I  said  very
emphatically,  "  there  is  some  one  of  that  name  passed  over  to  the  world  of
spirit."     She  could  give  me  no  information,  and  I  was  disturbed,  in  the  way  in
which   I  always  am  when  such  things  take  place.     This  is  one  of  the  many
cases  occurring  about  this  time.     When  the  evening  paper  came  in  we  looked
(as  we  frequently  did)  at  the  obituary.     I  may  say  that  our  minds  were  set  on
this  subject  of  identity.     At  our  daily  sittings  fact  on  fact  was  given  to  prove  it
and  to  remove  any  doubts.     It  became  a  regular  thing  for  us  to  receive  a
message  giving  such  facts  as  an  obituary  notice  would  contain.     We  therefore
looked  for  them,  and  we  found  an  announcement  of  the  death  of  "  Emily,

widow  of  the  late  Captain  C C ."     On  a  subsequent  evening  in  the

following  year,  the  date  of  which  I  can  produce,  but  which  I  have  not  by  me  at
the  moment,  she  returned  again.     Dr.  Speer  and  I  had  gone  out  for  a  walk  in
the  afternoon — I  was  then  staying  with  him  at  Dudley  Villa,  Shanklin,  Isle

of  Wight — and  at  our  stance  in  the  evening  came  "  Emily  C C ."    I

inquired  what  brought  her,  and  her  answer  was  rapped  out  on  the  table,  "  You
passed  my  grave."     Here  I  should  explain  that  at  this  time  I  never  went  near
a  graveyard  but  I  attracted  some  spirit,  identified  afterwards  as  one  whose
body  lay  there.     I  said,  "  No,  that  is  impossible ;  we  have  been  near  no  grave-
yard," and  Dr.  Speer  confirmed  my  impression.     The  communication,  however,
was  persistent,  and  we  agreed  that  we  would  take  the  same  walk  the  next  day.
We  did  so,  and  at  a  certain  place  I  had  an  impulse  to  climb  up  and  look  over
a  wall,  which  quite  shut  out  from  the  view  of  the  ordinary  passer-by  what  was
behind  it.     I  climbed  up  and  looked  over,  and  my  eye  fell  at  once  on  the  grave

of  "  Emily  C C ,"  and  on  the  dates  and  particulars  given  to   us,  all

exactly  accurate.

(4)  Another  instance  similar  in  kind — though  this  is  of  a  personal  friend
of  Mrs.  Speer's— is  the  case  of  Cecilia  Feilden.    (See  "  Spirit  Identity,"  p.  58.)
We  were  then  at  Shanklin,  sitting  regularly  every  evening,  when  on  January
ist,  1874,  there  came  a  fresh  sound,  a  little  ticking  sound  in  the  air,  close  to;
Mrs.  Speer.     We   inquired  what  it  might  represent,  and  were   told  that  it:
indicated  the  presence  of  Cecilia  Feilden,  who  had  died  17  years  ago.     We
asked  why  she  came,  and  were  told  that  she  had  been  attracted  to  her  old
friend,  Mrs.  Speer,  through  me,  and  in  consequence  of  Dr.  Speer's  and  my
presence   at  her  grave   at   Bonchurch  that  afternoon.     She  answered  many
questions,  and  finally  rapped  out,  "  I  must  now  depart.     Adieu."     This  word
Miss  Feilden  always  used  at  the  end  of  her  letters.     Mrs.  Speer  tells  me  thai
she  seldom  concluded  a  letter  otherwise.     I  had  never  known  her,  or  heard  oJ,
her  until  Dr.  Speer  pointed  out  her  grave.     When  we  rose  from  the  table  we
found  that  a  piece  of  marked  paper,  which  we  had  put  down  under  the  table. j
had  written  upon  it  the  words,  "  passed  17  years."

(5)  Again,  there  is  the  case  of  Henry  Spratley.     We  were  then  the  sarw,
circle,  sitting  in  the  same  way,  on  January  2nd,  1874,  and  I  can  aver  that  no1,
one  of  us  had  ever  heard  of  this  person.     He  had  lately  departed  (Decembe:
1 873)5  and  it  was  alleged  that  he  had  been  brought  by  the  controlling  spirit


948A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  595

"  Imperator,"  for  purposes  of  evidence,  and  in  pursuance  of  a  plan  intended
to  break  down  my  persistent  scepticism.  We  had  from  him  messages  of  the
usual  type,  saying  simply  who  he  was,  when  he  was  born,  and  when  he  died.
We  found  it  difficult,  I  remember,  to  verify  the  facts,  but  in  the  end  Mrs.  Speer
succeeded  in  doing  so  by  writing  (i)  to  the  Post  Office,  making  a  general  in-
quiry, to  which  no  answer  came ;  (2)  to  the  vicar  of  Maidenhead,  with  no
reply  (we  afterwards  discovered  that  he  was  on  his  holiday)  ;  (3)  to  the
"present  occupant  of  Moor  Cottage,"  the  address  given  to  us  by  the  spirit;
(4)  to  his  nearest  surviving  representative,  who  wrote  back  with  some  surprise
to  say  that  all  things  were  quite  true.  "  My  father  lived  here  till  he  died  on
December  24th."

(6)  Another  account  to  which  I  should  like  to  refer  is  that  of  Rosamira
'Lancaster : —

"  On  February  28th,  1874,  and  following  evening  a  spirit  came  by  raps,  and
gave  the  name  of  '  Rosamira.'  She  said  that  she  died  at  Torquay  on  January
loth,  1874,  and  that  she  had  lived  at  Kilburn.  She  stated  that  her  husband's
name  was  *  Lancaster.'  At  this  time  I  was  troubled  about  details,  and  so  I
isked  her  husband's  Christian  name,  and  I  got  'Ben,'  and  then  the  power
iailed.  (The  obituary  showed  that  the  full  name  was  Benjamin.)  I  then
massed  under  the  control  of  '  Imperator,'  and  he  said  that  he  had  tried  as  far  as
ic  could  to  bring  this  spirit  to  us.  Afterwards  the  truth  of  the  statements  was
verified  by  me,  and  they  were  found  to  be  absolutely  exact ;  and  it  is,  perhaps,
mportant  to  say  in  this  connection  that  not  only  were  they  (i.e.  the  facts)
iterally  true,  but  that  nothing  was  said  that  was  not  true ;  nor  was  there  any
urplusage  of  detail — only  plain,  definite,  positive  facts."

[We  have  verified  this  death  from  an  announcement  in  the  Daily  Telegraph
if  January  isth,  1874,  of  course  published  long  before  the  name  was  given  by
aps  at  the  stance.  It  is  therefore  quite  possible  that  the  name  should  have
•een  unwittingly  seen  by  Mr.  Moses,  and  here  reproduced  from  his  subliminal
aemory.— F.  W.  H.  M.]

(7)  I  will  now  quote  the  case  given  in  "  Spirit  Identity,"  p.  193  (Appendix
II.),  of  a  "  Man  Crushed  by  a  Steam-roller,"  as  contributed  by  an  eye-witness
f  the  stance  [F.  W.  Percival]  to  the  Spiritualist  of  March  27th,  1874.

"  On  the  evening  of  Saturday,  February  2ist,  a  few  friends  met  together  at
ic  house  of  Mrs.  Makdougall  Gregory,  21  Green  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  W.
'he  party  numbered  six  in  all,  and  included  the  Baron  Du  Potet,  and
le  gentleman  to  whose  mediumship  we  are  indebted  for  the  '  Spirit  Teachings  '
hich  have  appeared  from  time  to  time  in  your  columns.  There  was  no
itention  of  having  a  seance,  and  ordinary  topics  were  the  subject  of  conversa-
Dn,  when  suddenly,  in  the  middle  of  dinner,  this  gentleman  surprised  us  by
.ying  that  he  felt  a  spirit  standing  near  him  between  himself  and  the  Baron
vho  sat  on  his  right);  whether  good  or  bad  he  could  not  tell,  but  the  influence
as  by  no  means  pleasant.  The  spirit  was  also  perceived  by  the  Baron,

whom  it  conveyed  the  impression  that  it  was  in  a  state  of  great  distress,
ltd  that  it  was  the  spirit  of  a  person  then  alive.  Nothing  more  was  said

the  time,  but  the  medium  continued  to  feel  a  disagreeable  influence
tar  him,  and  spoke  of  it  to  me  when  dinner  was  over.  As  soon  as  we
lached  the  drawing-room  he  was  impelled  to  sit  down  and  write  ;  and
•ien  a  pencil  and  paper  had  been  brought,  his  hand  was  moved  backwards
;  d  forwards  with  great  rapidity,  and  an  object  was  roughly  drawn  on  the  paper


596  APPENDICES  [948  j

which  resembled  a  horse  fastened  to  a  kind  of  cart  or  truck.  Several  attempt
were  made  to  depict  it  more  clearly,  and  then  the  following  sentences  wer
written : — *  I  killed  myself — I  killed  myself  to-day — Baker  Street — mediun
passed.'  Here  the  writing  became  unintelligible,  as  the  medium  grew  mon
and  more  agitated,  until  at  length  he  rose  from  his  seat  in  a  state  of  trance
and  exclaimed  in  broken  sentences :  '  Yes,  yes.  Killed  myself  to-day,  unde
a  steam-roller.  Yes,  yes.  Killed  myself — blood,  blood,  blood.'  The  contro
then  ceased,  but  the  medium  felt  the  same  unpleasant  influence  for  som<
hours  afterwards,  and  could  not  entirely  shake  it  off  for  some  days.  Ii
reference  to  the  communication,  I  may  state  that,  although  the  medium  hac
passed  through  Baker  Street  in  the  afternoon,  neither  he  nor  any  one  preserr
was  aware  that  a  man  had  committed  suicide  there  in  the  morning  by  throwing
himself  under  a  steam-roller.  A  brief  notice  of  the  occurrence  appeared  in  the
Pall  Mall  Gazette  in  the  evening,  but  none  of  the  party  had  seen  that  paper,
It  is  worth  remarking  that  on  the  front  of  the  steam-roller  which  was  used
in  Baker  Street  a  horse  is  represented  in  brass,  and  this,  perhaps,  may  serve
to  account  for  its  appearance  in  the  medium's  drawing  where  we  should
certainly  not  expect  to  find  it."

[It  appears  that  the  deceased  was  a  cab-driver,  and  the  drawing  more
probably  had  reference  to  this,  as  Mr.  Podmore  suggests  in  Studies  in
Psychical  Research,  p.  131,  footnote.  See  also  the  reference  to  this  case  in
the  entry  connected  with  Blanche  Abercromby,  section  949. — F.  W.  H.  M.j

(8)  Out  of  a  profusion  of  cases  here  is  one  of  a  different  kind.  In  the  year
1880,  one  Thursday  afternoon  (date  unknown),  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  and  I  had
dined  together,  and  the  party  included  a  lady  who  had  been  visiting  a  con-
nection of  Dr.  Speer's  family  in  that  spring.  There  she  had  seen,  and  been
much  attracted  to,  a  lovely  little  girl  about  seven  months  old.  The  child  used
to  be  brought  in  after  dinner,  and  the  lady  in  question  grew  very  fond  of  her.
Between  the  time  of  leaving  her  friends  and  coming  to  London  the  child
passed  away.  It  is  important  to  notice  that  none  of  these  points  had  ever
been  mentioned  to,  or  were  known  by,  myself.  On  the  occasion  to  which  I
refer,  this  lady  had  risen  from  her  seat  and  was  about  to  place  herself  in
another  chair,  when  I  suddenly  called  out,  "  Don't  sit  down  on  it,  don't  sit
down  on  it.  Little  Baby  Timmins."  None  of  us  knew  its  first  name,  and  the)
asked  me.  I  said  "  Marian  ;  the  grandmother  has  brought  it."  I  then  sud-
denly came  out  of  the  trance  in  which  I  had  been,  and  in  my  own  natura
voice — so  different  to  the  voice  in  which  I  had  been  speaking — said,  "  Mrs
Speer,  will  you  have  some  coffee  ? "  quite  ignorant  of  all  that  had  passed.  W<
wrote,  and  then  found  out  a  fact  unknown  to  any  of  us, — that  the  child'^
name  was  Marian.  I  do  not  put  this  forth  as  a  complete  piece  of  evidence,  fo:
the  lady  may  have  heard  and  forgotten  the  name.

[Mrs.  Speer  has  described  to  me  this  incident,  which  is  remarkable  as  th
only  observed  case  where  Mr.  Moses  had  a  sudden  access  of  unconsciousnes
during  ordinary  life,  although  he  himself  mentions  others.— F.  W.  H.  M.]

As  evidence  from  another  point  of  view,  I  may  mention  that  I  have  ha
repeated  cases  of  signatures  which  are  veritable  fac-similes  of  those  used  b
the  persons  in  life  ;  such,  for  example,  are  the  signatures  of  Beethoven,  Mozar
and  of  Swedenborg,  in  connection  with  Judge  Edmonds.  It  is  remarkab
that  his  signature,  or  rather  initials,  in  my  book  are  those  which  he  used,  ar
that  Swedenborg's  signature,  a  very  peculiar  one,  is  a  fac-simile  of  his  know
handwriting  ;  quite  unknown,  however,  to  me.


948B]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  597

948  B.  I  add  two  other  cases  not  included  by  Mr.  Moses  in  his  paper
on  "The  Identity  of  Spirit."  (From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  100.)

(i)  Fanny  Westoby. — This  case  was  described  by  Mr.  Moses  to
Edmund  Gurney  and  myself,  while  it  was  still  fresh,  on  our  first  meeting
with  him,  May  Qth,  1874.

On  the  evening  of  April  8th,  1874,  while  at  Bedford  with  his  father  and
mother,  Mr.  Moses,  who  had  been  receiving  messages  about  ancient  religions

during  the  day,  began  to  ask  a  question,  "  I  should  1 ,"  when  a  meaningless

drawing  was  made  in  place  of  intended  words.

Q.  What  is  all  that  ?     And  why  was  I  stopped  ?

A.  "  A  spirit  wishes  to  communicate,  and  we  are  commanded  to  permit  her.
She  is  not  able  to  write  with  ease,  but  will  communicate  through  us.  Her  name
is  Fanny  Westoby.  Do  you  know  the  name  ?  "

Q.  I  do  not  remember.

A.  "  Your  mother  knows  her  well.  She  is  a  cousin  of  hers.  She  passed
from  your  earth  May  I5th  last.

Q.  Was  she  married  ?

A.  "  Yes,  her  maiden  name  was  Kirkham."

Q.  Fanny  Kirkham.  Yes,  I  have  a  dim  remembrance.  She  used  to  live
at  Markby.

A.  "  She  says  that  she  was  born  in  Alford,  in  the  house  now  occupied  by
Sam  Stevenson.  She  then  lived  at  Markby,  and,  having  married,  at  Belchford.
She  passed  away  at  Horncastle,  at  63  years  of  age.  You  do  not  remember
her,  when,  in  the  year  1845,  7OU  went  to  see  her  at  Markby.  Her  mother,
Elizabeth  Kirkham,  was  then  just  released  from  a  lingering  illness,  and  your
mother  had  gone  to  condole  with  her  cousin.  You  were  taken  round  the  farm,
and  rode  on  a  goat  (she  is  anxious  on  this  point),  and  she  threw  you  in  sport
into  a  heap  of  wheat  which  was  being  threshed.  The  result  was  that  you
were  severely  bitten  by  the  harvest  bug.  She  is  very  anxious  that  you  should
recall  this  to  your  mother."

Q,  I  will.     But  is  it  wise?

A.  "You  will  not  be  able  to  induce  her  to  search  into  this  matter,  but  you
nay  satisfy  yourself  that  what  is  said  is  true."

Q.  Has  she  any  message  ?

A.  "She  says,  '  I  lost  much  of  my  opportunity  for  progress  through  the
gratification  of  bodily  appetite,  which  cast  me  back.  My  course  of  progress  is
^et  to  come.  I  find  my  present  life  not  very  different  from  yours.  I  am  nearly
ne  same.  I  wish  I  could  influence  Mary,  but  I  can't  get  near  her.' "

Q.  Can  she  assure  me  that  she  is  F.  W.  ?

A.  "She  can  give  you  no  further  evidence.  Stay,  ask  your  father  about
Donnington  and  the  trap-door."

Q.  I  have  not  the  least  idea  what  she  means.  All  the  better.  I  will  ask.
\ny  more  ?  Is  she  happy  ?

A.  "  She  is  as  happy  as  may  be  in  her  present  state."

Q.  How  did  she  find  me  out  ?

A.  "She  came  by  chance,  hovering  near  her  friend  [i.e.  Mrs.  Moses],  and
liscovered  that  she  could  communicate.  She  will  return  now."

Q.  Can  I  help  her  ?


598  APPENDICES  [948  B

A.  "  Yes,  pray.  She  and  all  of  us  are  helped  when  you  devote  your  talents
willingly  to  aid  us."

Q.  What  do  you  mean  ?

A.  "In  advocating  and  advancing  our  mission  with  care  and  judgment.
Then  we  are  permeated  with  joy.  May  the  Supreme  bless  you."  [Book  VIII.
pp.  78-83.]

"  X  Rector."

[I  have  inquired  of  my  mother  and  find  the  particulars  given  are  exactly
true.  She  wonders  how  I  remember  things  that  occurred  when  I  was  only
5  years  old  !  I  have  not  ventured  to  say  how  I  got  the  information,  believing
that  it  would  be  unwise  and  useless.  My  father  I  can  get  nothing  out  of  about
the  trap-door.  He  either  does  not  remember  or  will  not  say.]

[April  qth,  1874.  My  father  has  remembered  this  incident.  A  trap-door
led  on  to  the  roof  in  the  house  he  occupied  at  Donnington.  The  house  was
double  roofed,  and  a  good  view  could  be  had  from  it.  F.  K.  on  a  visit  wanted
to  go  there,  and  got  fixed  half-way  amid  great  laughter.

\         \       Elevation  of  double  roof.]


[We  have  verified  Mrs.  Westoby's  death  in   the   Register  of   Deaths.—
F.  W.  H.  M.]

(2)   President  Garfield.  —  This  is  a  communication  made,  not  by  the
departed  spirit  itself,  but  by  friends.

30  ST.  PETER'S,  BEDFORD.

September  2ot/t,  1881,  10  A.M.  —  This  morning,  on  waking  at  5.54  A.M.,  I
was  aware  of  a  spirit  who  desired  to  communicate.  It  turned  out  to  be
Mentor,  with  him  B.  Franklin,  [Epes]  Sargent  and  others.  They  told  me
in  effect  "  The  President  is  gone.  We  were  with  him  to  the  last.  He  died
suddenly,  and  all  our  efforts  to  keep  him  were  unavailing.  We  laboured  hard,
for  his  life  was  of  incalculable  value  to  our  country.  He  would  have  done
more  to  rescue  it  from  shame  than  any  one  now  left."  I  asked  why  it  had
been  deemed  necessary  to  come  to  me  with  the  news.  It  was  replied  that  a
period  of  great  activity  in  the  spirit  world  was  now  being  renewed,  and  that
my  sympathies  with  him  and  with  his  work,  and  their  own  knowledge  of  me,
had  inclined  them  to  bring  the  news.  The  Daily  News  contained  no  tidings,
though  the  bulletins  were  bad.  It  seemed,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  news  of  the
previous  night  which  they  contained  was  a  little  more  favourable.  I  walked
down  to  the  station  feeling  convinced  that  the  news  would  come,  but  up  to
11.30  A.M.  could  not  hear  of  it.  About  12.37  I  again  went  and  found  that  a
rumour  had  reached  Bedford.  The  evening  papers  —  Globe  and  Echo  —  which
I  purchased  at  4.30  P.M.  gave  me  the  first  mundane  information  of  the  event.
It  is  now  stated  that  he  died  at  10.50  P.M.  on  the  ipth  (yesterday).  That  in
English  time  is  3.50  A.M.  of  this  day  (2oth)  or  two  hours  before  I  woke  and  got  ;
the  message.

I   have  since  learned   that  the  death   was  sudden,  and   the  remarkable
fluctuations  are  not  inconsistent  with  efforts  such  as  described.

September  2ist.  —  The  latest  reports  fix  10.35,  not   10.50  P.M.  [or  3.35  A.M.
English  time]  as  the  exact  time  of  death.


956A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  599

956  A.  Reports  and  discussions  on  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper  have
been  published  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  436-659  ;  vol.  viii.
pp,  1-167  ;  vol.  xiii.  pp.  284-582  ;  vol.  xiv.  pp.  6-78 ;  vol.  xv.  pp.  16-52  ;
vol.  xvi.  pp.  1—649.

The  following  passages  are  quoted  from  the  report  by  Professor
William  James,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  651-59  :—

I  made  Mrs.  Piper's  acquaintance  in  the  autumn  of  1885.  My  wife's
mother,  Mrs.  Gibbens,  had  been  told  of  her  by  a  friend,  during  the  previous

f  summer,  and  never  having  seen  a  medium  before,  had  paid  her  a  visit  out  of
curiosity.  She  returned  with  the  statement  that  Mrs.  P.  had  given  her  a  long
string  of  names  of  members  of  the  family,  mostly  Christian  names,  together
with  facts  about  the  persons  mentioned  and  their  relations  to  each  other,  the
knowledge  of  which  on  her  part  was  incomprehensible  without  supernormal
powers.  My  sister-in-law  went  the  next  day,  with  still  better  results,  as  she
related  them.  Amongst  other  things,  the  medium  had  accurately  described
the  circumstances  of  the  writer  of  a  letter  which  she  held  against  her  forehead,
after  Miss  G.  had  given  it  to  her.  The  letter  was  in  Italian,  and  its  writer  was
known  to  but  two  persons  in  this  country.

[I  may  add  that  on  a  later  occasion  my  wife  and  I  took  another  letter  from
this  same  person  to  Mrs.  P.,  who  went  on  to  speak  of  him  in  a  way  which
identified  him  unmistakably  again.  On  a  third  occasion,  two  years  later,  my
sister-in-law  and  I  being  again  with  Mrs.  P.,  she  reverted  in  her  trance  to

,  these  letters,  and  then  gave  us  the  writer's  name,  which  she  said  she  had  not
been  able  to  get  on  the  former  occasion.]

But  to  revert  to  the  beginning.  I  remember  playing  the  esprit  fort  on  that
occasion  before  my  feminine  relatives,  and  seeking  to  explain  by  simple  con-
siderations the  marvellous  character  of  the  facts  which  they  brought  back.

1  This  did  not,  however,  prevent  me  from  going  myself  a  few  days  later,  in
company  with  my  wife,  to  get  a  direct  personal  impression.  The  names  of
none  of  us  up  to  this  meeting  had  been  announced  to  Mrs.  P.,  and  Mrs.  J.  and
I  were,  of  course,  careful  to  make  no  reference  to  our  relatives  who  had
preceded.  The  medium,  however,  when  entranced,  repeated  most  of  the  names
of  "  spirits  "  whom  she  had  announced  on  the  two  former  occasions  and  added
others.  The  names  came  with  difficulty,  and  were  only  gradually  made  perfect.
My  wife's  father's  name  of  Gibbens  was  announced  first  as  Niblin,  then  as
Giblin.  A  child  Herman  (whom  we  had  lost  the  previous  year)  had  his  name
spelt  out  as  Herrin.  I  think  that  in  no  case  were  both  Christian  and  surnames
given  on  this  visit.  But  the  facts  predicated  of  the  persons  named  made  it  in
many  instances  impossible  not  to  recognise  the  particular  individuals  who  were
talked  about.  We  took  particular  pains  on  this  occasion  to  give  the  Phinuit
control  no  help  over  his  difficulties  and  to  ask  no  leading  questions.  In  the
light  of  subsequent  experience  I  believe  this  not  to  be  the  best  policy.  For  it
often  happens,  if  you  give  this  trance-personage  a  name  or  some  small  fact  for

1  the  lack  of  which  he  is  brought  to  a  standstill,  that  he  will  then  start  off  with
a  copious  flow  of  additional  talk,  containing  in  itself  an  abundance  of  "  tests."
My  impression  after  this  first  visit  was,  that  Mrs.  P.  was  either  possessed  of
supernormal  powers,  or  knew  the  members  of  my  wife's  family  by  sight  and  had
by  some  lucky  coincidence  become  acquainted  with  such  a  multitude  of  their
domestic  circumstances  as  to  produce  the  startling  impression  which  she  did.


600  APPENDICES  [956  A

My  later  knowledge  of  her  sittings  and  personal  acquaintance  with  her  has  led
me  absolutely  to  reject  the  latter  explanation,  and  to  believe  that  she  has
supernormal  powers.

I  visited  her  a  dozen  times  that  winter,  sometimes  alone,  sometimes  with
my  wife,  once  in  company  with  the  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage.  I  sent  a  large  num-
ber of  persons  to  her,  wishing  to  get  the  result  of  as  mxny  first  sittings  as
possible.  I  made  appointments  myself  for  most  of  these  people,  whose  names
were  in  no  instance  announced  to  the  medium.  In  the  spring  of  1886  I
published  a  brief  "  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena  "  in
the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  of  which  the
following  is  an  extract : —

"  I  have  myself  witnessed  a  dozen  of  her  trances,  and  have  testimony  at  first
hand  from  twenty-five  sitters,  all  but  one  of  whom  were  virtually  introduced  to
Mrs.  P.  by  myself.  Of  five  of  the  sittings  we  have  verbatim  stenographic
reports.  Twelve  of  the  sitters,  who  in  most  cases  sat  singly,  got  nothing  from
the  medium  but  unknown  names  or  trivial  talk.  Four  of  these  were  members
of  the  Society,  and  of  their  sittings  verbatim  reports  were  taken.  Fifteen  of
the  sitters  were  surprised  at  the  communications  they  received,  names  and  facts
being  mentioned  at  the  first  interview  which  it  seemed  improbable  should  have
been  known  to  the  medium  in  a  normal  way.  The  probability  that  she  pos-
sessed no  clue  to  the  sitter's  identity  was,  I  believe,  in  each  and  all  of  these
fifteen  cases,  sufficient.  But  of  only  one  of  them  is  there  a  stenographic
report ;  so  that,  unfortunately  for  the  medium,  the  evidence  in  her  favour  is,
although  more  abundant,  less  exact  in  quality  than  some  of  that  which  will  be
counted  against  her.  Of  these  fifteen  sitters,  five,  all  ladies,  were  blood  relatives,
and  two  (I  myself  being  one)  were  men  connected  by  marriage  with  the  family
to  which  they  belonged.  Two  other  connections  of  this  family  are  included  in
the  twelve  who  got  nothing.  The  medium  showed  a  most  startling  intimacy
with  this  family's  affairs,  talking  of  many  matters  known  to  no  one  outside,  and
which  gossip  could  not  possibly  have  conveyed  to  her  ears.  The  details  would
prove  nothing  to  the  reader,  unless  printed  in  extenso,  with  full  notes  by  the
sitters.  It  reverts,  after  all,  to  personal  conviction.  My  own  conviction  is  not
evidence,  but  it  seems  fitting  to  record  it.  I  am  persuaded  of  the  medium's
honesty,  and  of  the  genuineness  of  her  trance ;  and  although  at  first  disposed
to  think  that  the  'hits'  she  made  were  either  lucky  coincidences,  or  the  result
of  knowledge  on  her  part  of  who  the  sitter  was  and  of  his  or  her  family  affairs,
I  now  believe  her  to  be  in  possession  of  a  power  as  yet  unexplained."

...  As  for  the  explanation  of  her  trance-phenomena,  I  have  none  to
offer.  The  primd  facie  theory,  which  is  that  of  spirit-control,  is  hard  to
reconcile  with  the  extreme  triviality  of  most  of  the  communications.  What
real  spirit,  at  last  able  to  revisit  his  wife  on  this  earth,  but  would  find  some-
thing better  to  say  than  that  she  had  changed  the  place  of  his  photograph  ?
And  yet  that  is  the  sort  of  remark  to  which  the  spirits  introduced  by  the  .
mysterious  Phinuit  are  apt  to  confine  themselves.  I  must  admit,  however,
that  Phinuit  has  other  moods.  He  has  several  times,  when  my  wife  and  myself
were  sitting  together  with  him,  suddenly  started  off  on  long  lectures  to  us
about  our  inward  defects  and  outward  shortcomings,  which  were  very  earnest,
as  well  as  subtile  morally  and  psychologically,  and  impressive  in  a  high
degree.  These  discourses,  though  given  in  Phinuit's  own  person,  were  very
different  in  style  from  his  more  usual  talk,  and  probably  superior  to  anything


!


956A]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  601

that  the  medium  could  produce  in  the  same  line  in  her  natural  state.
Phinuit  himself,  however,  bears  every  appearance  of  being  a  fictitious  being.
His  French,  so  far  as  he  has  been  able  to  display  it  to  me,  has  been  limited
to  a  few  phrases  of  salutation,  which  may  easily  have  had  their  rise  in  the
medium's  "  unconscious "  memory ;  he  has  never  been  able  to  understand
my  French ;  and  the  crumbs  of  information  which  he  gives  about  his  earthly
career  are,  as  you  know,  so  few,  vague,  and  unlikely  sounding,  as  to  suggest
the  romancing  of  one  whose  stock  of  materials  for  invention  is  excessively
reduced.  He  is,  however,  as  he  actually  shows  himself,  a  definite  human
individual,  with  immense  tact  and  patience,  and  great  desire  to  please  and
be  regarded  as  infallible.  With  respect  to  the  rough  and  slangy  style  which
he  so  often  affects,  it  should  be  said  that  the  Spiritualistic  tradition  here  in
America  is  all  in  favour  of  the  "  spirit-control "  being  a  grotesque  and  some-
what saucy  personage.  The  Zeitgeist  has  always  much  to  do  with  shaping
trance-phenomena,  so  that  a  "  control "  of  that  temperament  is  what  one
would  naturally  expect.  Mr.  Hodgson  will  already  have  informed  you  of
the  similarity  between  Phinuit's  name  and  that  of  the  "control"  of  the
medium  at  whose  house  Mrs.  Piper  was  first  entranced.  The  most  remark-
able thing  about  the  Phinuit  personality  seems  to  me  the  extraordinary
tenacity  and  minuteness  of  his  memory.  The  medium  has  been  visited
by  many  hundreds  of  sitters,  half  of  them,  perhaps,  being  strangers  who
have  come  but  once.  To  each  Phinuit  gives  an  hourful  of  disconnected
fragments  of  talk  about  persons  living,  dead,  or  imaginary,  and  events  past,
future,  or  unreal.  What  normal  waking  memory  could  keep  this  chaotic  mass
of  stuff  together  ?  Yet  Phinuit  does  so ;  for  the  chances  seem  to  be,  that  if  a
sitter  should  go  back  after  years  of  interval,  the  medium,  when  once  entranced,
would  recall  the  minutest  incidents  of  the  earlier  interview,  and  begin  by
recapitulating  much  of  what  had  then  been  said.  So  far  as  I  can  discover,
Mrs.  Piper's  waking  memory  is  not  remarkable,  and  the  whole  constitution  of
her  trance-memory  is  something  which  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand.  But  I
will  say  nothing  more  of  Phinuit,  because,  aided  by  our  friends  in  France,  you
are  already  systematically  seeking  to  establish  or  disprove  him  as  a  former
native  of  this  world.

Phinuit  is  generally  the  medium  of  communication  between  other  spirits
and  the  sitter.  But  two  other  soi-disant  spirits  have,  in  my  presence,  assumed
direct  "  control "  of  Mrs.  Piper.  One  purported  to  be  the  late  Mr.  E.  The
other  was  an  aunt  of  mine  who  died  last  year  in  New  York.  I  have  already
sent  you  the  only  account  I  can  give  of  my  earliest  experiences  with  the
"  E.  control."  The  first  messages  came  through  Phinuit,  about  a  year  ago,
when,  after  two  years  of  non-intercourse  with  Mrs.  Piper,  she  lunched  one  day
at  our  house  and  gave  my  wife  and  myself  a  sitting  afterwards.  It  was  bad
enough ;  and  I  confess  that  the  human  being  in  me  was  so  much  stronger
than  the  man  of  science  that  I  was  too  disgusted  with  Phinuit's  tiresome
twaddle  even  to  note  it  down.  When  later  the  phenomenon  developed  into
pretended  direct  speech  from  E.  himself  I  regretted  this,  for  a  complete  record
would  have  been  useful.  I  can  now  merely  say  that  neither  then,  nor  at  any
other  time,  was  there  to  my  mind  the  slightest  inner  verisimilitude  in  the  per-
sonation. But  the  failure  to  produce  a  more  plausible  E.  speaks  directly  in
favour  of  the  non-participation  of  the  medium's  conscious  mind  in  the  perform-
ance. She  could  so  easily  have  coached  herself  to  be  more  effective.  .  .  .


602  APPENDICES  [956  B

The  aunt  who  purported  to  "  take  control "  directly  was  a  much  better
personation,  having  a  good  deal  of  the  cheery  strenuousness  of  speech  of  the
original.  She  spoke,  by  the  way,  on  this  occasion,  of  the  condition  of  health
of  two  members  of  the  family  in  New  York,  of  which  we  knew  nothing  at  the
time,  and  which  was  afterwards  corroborated  by  letter.  We  have  repeatedly
heard  from  Mrs.  Piper  in  trance  things  of  which  we  were  not  at  the  moment
aware.  If  the  supernormal  element  in  the  phenomenon  be  thought-transfer-
ence it  is  certainly  not  that  of  the  sitter's  conscious  thought.  It  is  rather  the
reservoir  of  his  potential  knowledge  which  is  tapped  ;  and  not  always  that,  but
the  knowledge  of  some  distant  living  person,  as  in  the  incident  last  quoted.
It  has  sometimes  even  seemed  to  me  that  too  much  intentness  on  the  sitter's
part  to  have  Phinuit  say  a  certain  thing  acts  as  a  hindrance.  .  .  .

956  B.  The  next  passage  I  quote  from  the  Introduction  by  myself—
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  436-442, — to  the  records  of  sittings  given
by  Mrs.  Piper  in  England,  1889-90  : —

Mrs.  Piper's  case  has  been  more  or  less  continuously  observed  by  Professor
James  and  others  almost  from  the  date  of  the  first  sudden  inception  of  the
trance,  some  five  years  ago.  Mr.  Hodgson  has  been  in  the  habit  of  bringing
acquaintances  of  his  own  to  Mrs.  Piper,  without  giving  their  names  ;  and  many
of  these  have  heard  from  the  trance-utterance  facts  about  their  dead  relations,
&c.,  which  they  feel  sure  that  Mrs.  Piper  could  not  have  known.  Mr.  Hodgson
also  had  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Piper  watched  or  "  shadowed  "  by  private  detectives  for
some  weeks,  with  the  view  of  discovering  whether  Mr.  Piper  (who  is  employed
in  a  large  store  in  Boston,  U.S.A.)  went  about  inquiring  into  the  affairs  of
possible  "  sitters,"  or  whether  Mrs.  Piper  received  letters  from  friends  or
agents  conveying  information.  This  inquiry  was  pushed  pretty  closely,  but
absolutely  nothing  was  discovered  which  could  throw  suspicion  on  Mrs.  Piper,
— who  is  now  aware  of  the  procedure,  but  has  the  good  sense  to  recognise
the  legitimacy — I  may  say  the  scientific  necessity — of  this  kind  of  probation.

It  was  thus  shown  that  Mrs.  Piper  made  no  discoverable  attempt  to  acquire
knowledge  even  about  persons  whose  coming  she  had  reason  to  expect.  Still
less  could  she  have  been  aware  of  the  private  concerns  of  persons  brought
anonymously  to  her  house  at  Mr.  Hodgson's  choice.  And  a  yet  further  obstacle
to  such  clandestine  knowledge  was  introduced  by  her  removal  to  England — at
our  request — in  November  1889.  Professor  Lodge  met  her  on  the  Liverpool
landing-stage,  November  igth,  and  conducted  her  to  a  hotel,  where  I  joined
her  on  November  2oth,  and  escorted  her  and  her  children  to  Cambridge.  She
stayed  first  in  my  house ;  and  I  am  convinced  that  she  brought  with  her  a  very
slender  knowledge  of  English  affairs  or  English  people.  The  servant  who
attended  on  her  and  on  her  two  young  children  was  chosen  by  myself,  and  was
a  young  woman  from  a  country  village  whom  I  had  full  reason  to  believe  to  be
both  trustworthy  and  also  quite  ignorant  of  my  own  or  my  friends'  affairs.
For  the  most  part  I  had  myself  not  determined  upon  the  persons  whom  I
would  invite  to  sit  with  her.  I  chose  these  sitters  in  great  measure  by  chance;
several  of  them  were  not  resident  in  Cambridge ;  and  (except  in  one  or  two
cases  where  anonymity  would  have  been  hard  to  preserve)  I  brought  them
to  her  under  false  names,— sometimes  introducing  them  only  when  the  trance
had  already  begun.

In  one  sitting,  for  instance,  which  will  be  cited  below,  I  learnt  by  accident


956B]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  603

that  a  certain  lady,  here  styled  Mrs.  A.,  was  in  Cambridge; — a  private  lady,  not
a  member  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  who  had  never  before  visited
my  house,  and  whose  name  had  certainly  never  been  mentioned  before  Mrs.
Piper.  I  introduced  this  lady  as  Mrs.  Smith; — and  I  think  that  when  the
reader  is  estimating  the  correct  facts  which  were  told  to  her,  he  may  at  any
rate  dismiss  from  his  mind  the  notion  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  been  able  either  to
divine  that  these  facts  would  be  wanted, — or  to  get  at  them  even  if  she  had
known  that  her  success  depended  on  their  production  on  that  day.

Mrs.  Piper  while  in  England  was  twice  in  Cambridge,  twice  in  London,  and
twice  in  Liverpool,  at  dates  arranged  by  ourselves ;  her  sitters  (almost  always
introduced  under  false  names)  belonged  to  several  quite  different  social  groups,
and  were  frequently  unacquainted  with  each  other.  Her  correspondence  was
addressed  to  my  care,  and  I  believe  that  almost  every  letter  which  she  received
was  shown  to  one  or  other  of  us.  When  in  London  she  stayed  in  lodgings
which  we  selected ;  when  at  Liverpool,  in  Professor  Lodge's  house ;  and  when
at  Cambridge,  in  Professor  Sidgwick's  or  my  own.  No  one  of  her  hosts,  or  of
her  hosts'  wives,  detected  any  suspicious  act  or  word.

We  took  great  pains  to  avoid  giving  information  in  talk  ;  and  a  more  com-
plete security  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  we  were  ourselves  ignorant  of  many
of  the  facts  given  as  to  our  friends'  relations,  &c.  In  the  case  of  Mrs.Verrall,
for  instance  [cited  in  the  Report,  p.  584],  no  one  in  Cambridge  except  Mrs.
Verrall  herself  could  have  supplied  the  bulk  of  the  information  given;  and
some  of  the  facts  given  (as  will  be  seen)  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  did  not  know.
As  regards  my  own  affairs,  I  have  not  thought  it  worth  while  to  cite  in  extenso
such  statements  as  might  possibly  have  been  got  up  beforehand ;  since  Mrs.
Piper  of  course  knew  that  I  should  be  one  of  her  sitters.  Such  facts  as  that
I  once  had  an  aunt,  "  Cordelia  Marshall,  more  commonly  called  Corrie,"
might  have  been  learnt, — though  I  do  not  think  that  they  were  learnt, — from
printed  or  other  sources.  But  I  do  not  think  that  any  larger  proportion  of
such  accessible  facts  was  given  to  me  than  to  an  average  sitter,  previously
unknown;  nor  were  there  any  of  those  subtler  points  which  could  so  easily
have  been  made  by  dint  of  scrutiny  of  my  books  or  papers.  On  the  other
hand,  in  my  case,  as  in  the  case  of  several  other  sitters,  there  were  messages
purporting  to  come  from  a  friend  who  had  been  dead  many  years,  and  men-
tioning circumstances  which  I  believe  that  it  would  have  been  quite  impossible
for  Mrs.  Piper  to  have  discovered.

I  am  also  acquainted  with  some  of  the  facts  given  to  other  sitters,  and
suppressed  as  too  intimate,  or  as  involving  secrets  not  the  property  of  the  sitter
alone.  I  may  say  that,  so  far  as  my  own  personal  conviction  goes,  the  utterance
of  one  or  two  of  these  facts  is  even  more  conclusive  of  supernormal  knowledge
than  the  correct  statement  of  dozens  of  names  of  relations,  &c.,  which  the  sitter
had  no  personal  motive  for  concealing.

On  the  whole,  I  believe  that  all  observers,  both  in  America  and  in  England,
who  have  seen  enough  of  Mrs.  Piper  in  both  states  to  be  able  to  form  a  judg-
ment, will  agree  in  affirming  (i)  that  many  of  the  facts  given  could  not  have
been  learnt  even  by  a  skilled  detective;  (2)  that  to  learn  others  of  them,
although  possible,  would  have  needed  an  expenditure  of  money  as  well  as  of
time  which  it  seems  impossible  to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Piper  could  have  met ;
and  (3)  that  her  conduct  has  never  given  any  ground  whatever  for  supposing
her  capable  of  fraud  or  trickery.  Few  persons  have  been  so  long  and  so


604  APPENDICES  [957  A

carefully  observed;    and    she  has   left  on   all   observers   the    impression  of
thorough  uprightness,  candour,  and  honesty.

On  the  question  of  fraud,  see  also  the  statements  of  Professor  Lodge,
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  443-7  ;  of  Dr.  Walter  Leaf,  pp.  558-9  of
the  same  Proceedings;  pp.  1-9  of  the  report  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  viii. ;  pp.  6-1 1  of  the  report  by  Professor  Newbold
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiv. ;  and  pp.  5-9  of  the  report  by  Professor
Hyslop  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xvi.

957  A.  From  the  report  by  Professor  Lodge,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  vi.  pp.  448-53.

The  personality  active  and  speaking  in  the  trance  is  apparently  so  distinct
from  the  personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  that  it  is  permissible  and  convenient  to  call
it  by  another  name.  It  does  not  differ  from  her  as  Hyde  did  from  Jekyll,  by
being  a  personification  of  the  vicious  portion  of  the  same  individual.  There  is
no  special  contrast,  any  more  than  there  is  any  special  similarity.  It  strikes
one  as  a  different  personality  altogether,  and  the  name  by  which  it  introduces
itself  when  asked,  viz.,  "  Dr.  Phinuit,"  is  as  convenient  as  any  other,  and  can  be
used  wholly  irrespective  of  hypothesis.

I  would  not  in  using  this  name  be  understood  as  thereby  committing  myself
to  any  hypothesis  regarding  the  nature  of  this  apparently  distinct  and  individual
mind.  At  the  same  time  the  name  is  useful  as  expressing  compactly  what  is
naturally  prominent  to  the  feeling  of  any  sitter,  that  he  is  not  talking  to  Mrs.
Piper  at  all.  The  manner,  mode  of  thought,  tone,  trains  of  idea,  are  all
different.  You  are  speaking  no  longer  to  a  lady,  but  to  a  man,  an  old  man,  a
medical  man.  All  this  cannot  but  be  vividly  felt  even  by  one  who  considered
the  impersonation  a  consummate  piece  of  acting.

Whether  such  a  man  as  Dr.  Phinuit  ever  existed  I  do  not  know,  nor  from
the  evidential  point  of  view  do  I  greatly  care.  It  will  be  interesting  to  have
the  fact  ascertained  if  possible ;  but  I  cannot  see  that  it  will  much  affect  the
question  of  genuineness.  For  that  he  did  not  ever  exist  is  a  thing  practically
impossible  to  prove.  While,  if  he  did  exist,  it  can  be  easily  supposed  that  Mrs.
Piper  took  care  enough  that  her  impersonation  should  have  so  much  rational
basis.

It  can  be  objected,  why,  if  he  was  a  French  doctor,  has  he  so  entirely  for-
gotten his  French  ?  For  though  he  speaks  in  a  Frenchified  manner,  I  am  told
that  he  cannot  sustain  a  conversation  in  that  language.  I  am  unable  to  meet
this  objection  by  anything  beyond  the  obvious  suggestion  that  Mrs.  Piper's
brain  is  the  medium  utilised,  and  that  she  is  likewise  ignorant.  But  one  would
think  that  it  would  be  a  sufficiently  patent  objection  to  deter  an  impersonator
from  assuming  a  rdle  of  purely  unnecessary  difficulty,  and  one  which  it  was
impossible  satisfactorily  to  maintain.

Admitting,  however,  that  "  Dr.  Phinuit  "  is  probably  a  mere  name  for  Mrs.
Piper's  secondary  consciousness,  one  cannot  help  being  struck  by  the  singular
correctness  of  his  medical  diagnoses.  In  fact,  the  medical  statements,  coincid-
ing as  they  do  with  truth  just  as  well  as  those  of  a  regular  physician,  but  given
without  any  'ordinary  examination  and  sometimes  without  even  seeing  the
patient,  must  be  held  as  part  of  the  evidence  establishing  a  strong  primd  facie
case  for  the  existence  of  some  abnormal  means  of  acquiring  information.  Not


957A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  605

that  it  is  to  be  supposed  that  he  is  more  infallible  than  another.     I  have  one
definite  case  of  distinct  error  in  a  diagnosis  {Report,  p.  547).

Proceeding  now  on  the  assumption  that  I  may  speak  henceforth  of  Dr.
Phinuit  as  of  a  genuine  individual  intelligence,  whether  it  be  a  usually  latent
portion  of  Mrs.  Piper's  intelligence,  or  whether  it  be  something  distinct  from
her  mind  and  the  education  to  which  it  has  been  subjected,  I  go  on  to  consider
the  hypotheses  which  still  remain  unexamined.

And  first  we  have  the  hypothesis  of  fishery  on  the  part  of  Dr.  Phinuit,  as
distinguished  from  trickery  on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper.  I  mean  a  system  of
ingenious  fishing :  the  utilisation  of  trivial  indications,  of  every  intimation,
audible,  tactile,  muscular,  and  of  little  shades  of  manner  too  indefinable  to
name  ;  all  these  excited  in  the  sitter  by  skilful  guesses  and  well-directed  shots,
and  their  nutriment  extracted  with  superhuman  cunning.

Now  this  hypothesis  is  not  one  to  be  lightly  regarded,  or  ever  wholly  set
aside.  I  regard  it  as,  to  a  certain  extent,  a  vera  causa.  At  times  Dr.  Phinuit
does  fish.  Occasionally  he  guesses  ;  and  sometimes  he  ekes  out  the  scantiness
of  his  information  from  the  resources  of  a  lively  imagination.

Whenever  his  supply  of  information  is  abundant  there  is  no  sign  of  the  fish-
ing process.

At  other  times  it  is  as  if  he  were  in  a  difficult  position — only  able  to  gain
information  from  very  indistinct  or  inaudible  sources,  and  yet  wishful  to  convey
as  much  information  as  possible.  The  attitude  is  then  as  of  one  straining  after
every  clue,  and  making  use  of  the  slightest  indication,  whether  received  in
normal  or  abnormal  ways  :  not  indeed  obviously  distinguishing  between  in-
formation received  from  the  sitter  and  information  received  from  other
sources.

The  fishing  process  is  most  marked  when  Mrs.  Piper  herself  either  is  not
feeling  well  or  is  tired.  Dr.  Phinuit  seems  to  experience  more  difficulty  then
in  obtaining  information ;  and  when  he  does  not  fish  he  simply  draws  upon  his
memory  and  retails  old  facts  which  he  has  told  before,  occasionally  with  addi-
tions of  his  own  which  do  not  improve  them.  His  memory  seems  to  be  one  of
extraordinary  tenacity  and  exactness,  but  not  of  infallibility ;  and  its  lapses  do
introduce  error,  both  of  defect  and  excess.

He  seems  to  be  under  some  compulsion  not  to  be  silent.  Possibly  the
trance  would  cease  if  he  did  not  exert  himself.  At  any  rate  he  chatters  on,
and  one  has  to  discount  a  good  deal  of  conversation  which  is  obviously,  and
sometimes  confessedly,  introduced  as  a  stop-gap.

He  is  rather  proud  of  his  skill,  and  does  not  like  to  be  told  he  is  wrong;
but  when  he  waxes  confidential  he  admits  that  he  is  not  infallible :  "  he  does
the  best  he  can,"  he  says,  but  sometimes  "everything  seems  dark  to  him,"  and
then  he  flounders  and  gropes,  and  makes  mistakes.

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  this  floundering  is  always  most  conspicuous  in
presence  of  a  stranger.  On  the  contrary,  if  he  is  in  good  form  he  will  rattle  off
a  stranger's  connections  pretty  glibly,  being  indeed  sometimes  oppressed  with
the  rush  and  volume  of  the  information  available ;  while,  if  he  is  in  bad  trim,
he  will  fish  and  retail  stale  news  (especially  the  latter)  to  quite  an  old  hand,
and  one  who  does  not  scruple  to  accuse  him  of  his  delinquencies  when  they
become  conspicuous.

This  fallibility  is  unfortunate,  but  I  don't  know  that  we  should  expect  any-
thing else ;  anyhow  it  is  not  a  question  of  what  we  expect,  but  of  what  we  get.


606  APPENDICES  [957  A

If  it  were  a  question  of  what  I  for  one  had  expected,  the  statement  of  it  would
not  be  worth  the  writing.

Personally  I  feel  sure  that  Phinuit  can  hardly  help  this  fishing  process  at
times.  He  does  the  best  he  can,  but  it  would  be  a  great  improvement  if,  when
he  realises  that  conditions  are  unfavourable,  he  would  say  so  and  hold  his
peace.  I  have  tried  to  impress  this  upon  him,  with  the  effect  that  he  is  some-
times confidential,  and  says  that  he  is  having  a  bad  time ;  but  after  all  he
probably  knows  his  own  business  best,  because  it  has  several  times  happened
that  after  half-an-hour  of  more  or  less  worthless  padding,  a  few  minutes  of
valuable  lucidity  have  been  attained.

I  have  laid  much  stress  upon  this  fishery  hypothesis  because  it  is  a  fact  to
be  taken  into  consideration,  because  it  is  occasionally  an  unfortunately  con-
spicuous fact,  and  because  of  its  deterrent  effect  on  a  novice  to  whom  that
aspect  is  first  exposed.

But  in  thus  laying  stress  I  feel  that  I  am  producing  an  erroneous  and  mis-
leading impression  of  proportion.  I  have  spoken  of  a  few  minutes'  lucidity  to
an  intolerable  deal  of  padding  as  an  occasional  experience,  but  in  the  majority
of  the  sittings  held  in  my  presence  the  converse  proportion  better  represents
the  facts.

I  am  familiar  with  muscle-reading  and  other  simulated  "  thought-trans-
ference "  methods,  and  prefer  to  avoid  contact  whenever  it  is  possible  to  get
rid  of  it  without  too  much  fuss.  Although  Mrs.  Piper  always  held  somebody's
hand  while  preparing  to  go  into  the  trance,  she  did  not  always  continue  to  hold
it  when  speaking  as  Phinuit.  She  did  usually  hold  the  hand  of  the  person  she
was  speaking  to,  but  was  often  satisfied  for  a  time  with  some  other  person's,
sometimes  talking  right  across  a  room  to  and  about  a  stranger,  but  preferring
them  to  come  near.  On  several  occasions  she  let  go  of  everybody,  for  half-
hours  together,  especially  when  fluent  and  kept  well  supplied  with  "  relics."

I  have  now  to  assert  with  entire  confidence  that,  pressing  the  ingenious-
guessing  and  unconscious-indication  hypothesis  to  its  utmost  limit,  it  can  only
be  held  to  account  for  a  very  few  of  Dr.  Phinuit's  statements.

It  cannot  in  all  cases  be  held  to  account  for  medical  diagnoses,  afterwards
confirmed  by  the  regular  practitioner.

It  cannot  account  for  minute  and  full  details  of  names,  circumstances,  and
events,  given  to  a  cautious  and  almost  silent  sitter,  sometimes  without  contact.
And,  to  take  the  strongest  case  at  once,  it  cannot  account  for  the  narration  of
facts  outside  the  conscious  knowledge  of  the  sitter  or  of  any  person  present.

Rejecting  the  fishery  hypothesis,  then,  as  insufficient  to  account  for  many
of  the  facts,  we  are  driven  to  the  only  remaining  known  cause  in  order  to
account  for  them: — viz.,  thought-transference,  or  the  action  of  mind  on  mind
independently  of  the  ordinary  channels  of  communication.  Whether  "  thought-
transference  "  be  a  correct  term  to  apply  to  the  process  I  do  not  pretend  to
decide.  That  is  a  question  for  psychologists.

It  may  be  within  the  reader's  knowledge  that  I  regard  the  fact  of  genuine
"  thought-transference  "  between  persons  in  immediate  proximity  (not  neces-
sarily in  contact)  as  having  been  established  by  direct  and  simple  experiment;
and,  except  by  reason  of  paucity  of  instance,  I  consider  it  as  firmly  grounded
as  any  of  the  less  familiar  facts  of  nature  such  as  one  deals  with  in  a  laboratory.
(Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  p.  189.)

I  speak  of  it  therefore  as  a  known  cause,  i.e.,  one  to  which  there  need  be


957  A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  607

no  hesitation  in  appealing  in  order  to  explain  facts  which  without  it  would  be
inexplicable.

The  Phinuit  facts  are  most  of  them  of  this  nature,  and  I  do  not  hesitate  to
assert  confidently  that  thought-transference  is  the  most  commonplace  explana-
tion to  which  it  is  possible  to  appeal.

I  regard  it  as  having  been  rigorously  proved  before,  and  as  therefore  re-
quiring no  fresh  bolstering  up ;  but  to  the  many  who  have  not  made  experi-
ments on  the  subject,  and  are  therefore  naturally  sceptical  concerning  even
thought-transference,  the  record  of  the  Phinuit  sittings  will  afford,  I  think,  a
secure  basis  for  faith  in  this  immaterial  mode  of  communication, — this  appa-
rently direct  action  of  mind  on  mind.

But,  whereas  the  kind  of  thought-transference  which  had  been  to  my  own
knowledge  experimentally  proved  was  a  hazy  and  difficult  recognition  by  one
person  of  objects  kept  as  vividly  as  possible  in  the  consciousness  of  another
person,  the  kind  of  thought-transference  necessary  to  explain  these  sittings
is  of  an  altogether  freer  and  higher  order,— a  kind  which  has  not  yet  been
experimentally  proved  at  all.  Facts  are  related  which  are  not  in  the  least
present  to  the  consciousness  of  the  sitter,  and  they  are  often  detailed  glibly
and  vividly  without  delay ;  in  very  different  style  from  the  tedious  and
hesitating  dimness  of  the  percipients  in  the  old  thought-transference  ex-
periments.

But  that  is  natural  enough,  when  we  consider  that  the  percipient  in  those
experiments  had  to  preserve  a  mind  as  vacant  as  possible.  For  no  process  of
inducing  mental  vacancy  can  be  so  perfect  as  that  of  going  into  a  trance,
whether  hypnotic  or  other.

Moreover,  although  it  was  considered  desirable  to  maintain  the  object
contemptated  in  the  consciousness  of  the  agent,  a  shrewd  suspicion  was  even
then  entertained  that  the  unconscious  part  of  the  agent's  brain  might  be
perhaps  equally  effective.

Hence  one  is  at  liberty  to  apply  to  these  Phinuit  records  the  hypothesis  of
thought-transference  in  its  most  developed  state :  absolute  vacuity  on  the  part
of  the  percipient,  acted  on  by  an  entirely  sub-conscious  or  unconscious  portion
of  the  sitter's  brain.

In  this  form  one  feels  that  much  can  be  explained.  If  Dr.  Phinuit  tells
one  how  many  children,  or  brothers,  or  sisters  one  has,  and  their  names ;  the
names  of  father  and  mother  and  grandmother,  of  cousins  and  of  aunts  ;  if
he  brings  appropriate  and  characteristic  messages  from  well-known  relatives
deceased  ;  all  this  is  explicable  on  the  hypothesis  of  free  and  easy  thought-
transference  from  the  sub-consciousness  of  the  sitter  to  the  sensitive  medium
of  the  trance  personality.1

So  strongly  was  I  impressed  with  this  view,  that  after  some  half-dozen
sittings  I  ceased  to  feel  much  interest  in  being  told  things,  however  minute,
obscure,  and  inaccessible  they  might  be,  so  long  as  they  were,  or  had  been,
within  the  knowledge  either  of  myself  or  of  the  sitter  for  the  time  being.

1  For  instance,  in  the  course  of  my  interviews,  all  my  six  brothers  (adult  and  scat-
tered) and  one  sister  living  were  correctly  named  (two  with  some  help),  and  the  existence
of  the  one  deceased  was  mentioned.  My  father  and  his  father  were  likewise  named,
with  several  uncles  and  aunts.  My  wife's  father  and  stepfather  were  named  in  full,  both
Christian  and  surname,  with  full  identifying  detail.  I  only  quote  these  as  examples  ;  it
is  quite  unnecessary  as  well  as  unwise  to  attach  any  evidential  weight  to  statements  of
this  sort  made  during  a  sojourn  in  one's  house.


6o8  APPENDICES  [959  A

At  the  same  time  it  ought  to  be  constantly  borne  in  mind  that  this  kind  of
thought-transference  without  consciously  active  agency  has  never  been  experi-
mentally proved.  Certain  facts  not  otherwise  apparently  explicable,  such  as
those  chronicled  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  have  suggested  it,  but  it  is  really
only  a  possible  hypothesis  to  which  appeal  has  been  made  whenever  any  other
explanation  seems  out  of  the  question.  But  until  it  is  actually  established  by
experiment  in  the  same  way  that  conscious  mind  action  has  been  established,
it  cannot  be  regarded  as  either  safe  or  satisfactory ;  and  in  pursuing  it  we  may
be  turning  our  backs  on  some  truer  but  as  yet  perhaps  unsuggested  clue.  I
feel  as  if  this  caution  were  necessary  for  myself  as  well  as  for  other  members
of  the  Society.

On  reading  the  record  it  will  be  apparent  that  while  "  Phinuit  "  frequently
speaks  in  his  own  person,  relating  things  which  he  himself  discovers  by  what  I
suppose  we  must  call  ostensible  clairvoyance,  sometimes  he  represents  himself
as  in  communication — not  always  quite  easy  and  distinct  communication,
especially  at  first,  but  in  communication — with  one's  relatives  and  friends  who
have  departed  this  life.

The  messages  and  communications  from  these  persons  are  usually  given
through  Phinuit  as  a  reporter.  And  he  reports  sometimes  in  the  third  person,
sometimes  in  the  first.  Occasionally,  but  very  seldom,  Phinuit  seems  to  give
up  his  place  altogether  to  the  other  personality,  friend  or  relative,  who  then
communicates  with  something  of  his  old  manner  and  individuality ;  becoming
often  impressive  and  realistic.

This  last,  I  say,  is  rare,  but  with  one  or  two  personages  it  occurs,  subject  to
reservations  to  be  mentioned  directly;  and  when  it  does,  Phinuit  does  not
appear  to  know  what  has  been  said.  It  is  quite  as  if  he  in  his  turn  eva-
cuated the  body,  just  as  Mrs.  Piper  had  done,  while  a  third  personality
utilises  it  for  a  time.  The  voice  and  mode  of  address  are  once  more  changed,
and  more  or  less  recall  the  voice  and  manner  of  the  person  represented  as
communicating.

The  communications  thus  obtained,  though  they  show  traces  of  the  indi-
viduality of  the  person  represented  as  speaking,  are  frequently  vulgarised  ;  and
the  speeches  are  more  commonplace,  and  so  to  say  cheaper,  than  what  one
would  suppose  likely  from  the  person  himself.  It  can,  of  course,  be  suggested
that  the  necessity  of  working  through  the  brain  of  a  person  not  highly  educated
may  easily  be  supposed  capable  of  dulling  the  edge  of  refinement,  and  of
rendering  messages  on  abstruse  subjects  impossible.

See  also  the  report  by  Dr.  Walter  Leaf  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.
pp.  559-68  ;  and  the  report  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.
pp.  46-58.

959  A.  [The  following  account  is  quoted  from  the  beginning  of  the
"History  of  the  G.  P.  Communications,"  given  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  295-335.]

G.  P.  met  his  death  accidentally,  and  probably  instantaneously,  by  a  fall
in  New  York  in  February  1892,  at  the  age  of  thirty-two  years.  He  was
a  lawyer  by  training,  but  had  devoted  himself  chiefly  to  literature  and
philosophy,  and  had  published  two  books  which  received  the  highest
praise  from  competent  authorities.  He  had  resided  for  many  years  in


959A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  609

Boston  or  its  vicinity,  but  for  three  years  preceding  his  death  had  been
living  in  New  York  in  bachelor  apartments.  He  was  an  Associate  of
our  Society,  his  interest  in  which  was  explicable  rather  by  an  intellectual
openness  and  fearlessness  characteristic  of  him  than  by  any  tendency
to  believe  in  supernormal  phenomena.  He  was  in  a  sense  well  known
to  me  personally,  but  chiefly  on  this  intellectual  side ;  the  bond  between
us  was  not  that  of  an  old,  intimate,  and  if  I  may  so  speak,  emotional
friendship.  We  had  several  long  talks  together  on  philosophic  subjects,
and  one  very  long  discussion,  probably  at  least  two  years  before  his
,  death,  on  the  possibility  of  a  "  future  life."  In  this  he  maintained  that
in  accordance  with  a  fundamental  philosophic  theory  which  we  both
accepted,  a  "  future  life  "  was  not  only  incredible,  but  inconceivable  ;  and
I  maintained  that  it  was  at  least  conceivable.  At  the  conclusion  of  the
discussion  he  admitted  that  a  future  life  was  conceivable,  but  he  did  not
accept  its  credibility,  and  vowed  that  if  he  should  die  before  I  did,  and
found  himself  "still  existing,"  he  would  "make  things  lively"  in  the
effort  to  reveal  the  fact  of  his  continued  existence.

On  March  yth,  1888,  he  had  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  one  of  a  series
arranged  by  the  Committee  on  Mediumistic  Phenomena  connected  with
the  American  S.P.R.  (See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  2.)  The  names
of  the  sitters  in  this  series  were  very  carefully  guarded  by  the  Committee,
and  I  may  add  my  own  opinion  that  Mrs.  Piper  never  knew  until  re-
cently that  she  had  ever  seen  G.  P.  At  the  sitting  which  G.  P.  attended,
the  Rev.  Minot  J.  Savage  acted  as  the  supervising  member  of  the  Com-
mittee, and  G.  P.  was  a  stranger  to  him.  (See  vol.  xiii.  p.  326.)

G.  P.'s  conclusion  was,  briefly,  that  the  results  of  this  sitting  did  not
establish  any  more  than  hypersesthesia  on  the  part  of  the  medium.

I  knew  of  G.  P.'s  death  within  a  day  or  two  of  its  occurrence,  and  was
present  at  several  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  course  of  the  following
few  weeks,  but  no  allusion  was  made  to  G.  P.  On  March  22nd,  1892,
between  four  and  five  weeks  after  G.  P.'s  death,  I  accompanied  Mr.  John
Hart  [not  the  real  name],  who  had  been  an  old  intimate  friend  of  his,  to
a  sitting.1  I  understood  from  Mr.  Hart  that  he  had  some  articles  with
him  to  be  used  as  tests,  but  he  gave  me  no  further  information  than  this,
though  I  surmised  that  the  articles  might  have  belonged  to  G.  P.  The

1  I  must  mention  here  that  towards  the  end  of  1887,  at  a  time  when  Mrs.  Piper's
!  sittings  were  given  in  a  very  much  more  haphazard  way  than  at  present,  I  had  taken
Mr.  Hart  to  Mrs.  Piper  on  the  chance  of  getting  a  sitting.     Mrs.  Piper  was  just  about
to  give  a  sitting  to  a  lady,  so  that  our  visit  was  futile.    In  my  own  opinion  this  circum-
stance is  irrelevant,  but  as  Mrs.  Piper  saw   Mr.  Hart  at  that  time  for  a  few  minutes,
'  although  his  name  was  not  mentioned,  it  might  be  regarded  by  some  persons  as  im-
:  portant.     Further,  Mrs.  Piper  was  staying  in  New  York  with  one  of  our  members,  Dr.
Anna  Lukens  (who  knew  nothing  of  G.  P.),  at  the  time  when  G.  P.  met  his  death.    She
went  to  New  York  February  8th,  1892,  and  returned  to  Boston  February  2oth,  1892,  as
I  learned  from  Dr.  Lukens,  staying  with  Dr.  Lukens  all  the  time,  and  giving  a  series  of
'  sittings.     Mrs.  Piper  independently  gave  me  a  concordant  account.

VOL.   II.  2  Q


6io  APPENDICES  [959  A

appointment  for  the  sitting  was  made  by  myself,  and  of  course  Mr.  Hart's
real  name  was  not  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Piper.  I  abridge  from  the  notes
of  the  sitting  made  by  myself  at  the  time,  and  substitute,  in  part,  other
names  for  those  actually  used.1

The  sitting  began  by  some  remarks  of  Phinuit  concerning  the  sitter,
followed  by  an  incorrect  statement  about  au  cousin  said  to  have  died
some  years  before  with  some  heart  trouble.  Mr.  Hart  presented  a.  pencil?

Phinuit :  Cousin.  Heart,  through  here  [clutches  throat  and  about  breast
and  lower]  something  like  pneumonia.  Do  you  know  that's  a  brother?
(Sometimes  he  used  to  call  me  brother.)  He's  very  close  to  you.  (He  isn't
my  brother,  though  we  used  to  say  it  of  each  other.)  [The  pencil  had  been
worn  by  an  uncle  of  mine  who  died  of  inflammation  of  the  bladder.— J.  H.]
[Phinuit  here  calls  out  a  name  that  suggests  an  attempt  at  Howards.  See
later. — R.  H.]  (I  don't  know  any  one  of  that  name.)

[Sitter  gives  locket,  saying,  "  He  also  wore  this."]

Phinuit  [fingering  locket  hard]:  It  has  hair  in  it.  It  is  the  hair  of  his
father  .  .  .  George  .  .  .  and  of  another,  his  mother,  too.  (Yes,  that's  right.)
The  influences  are  confusing.  (I  have  something  else  here)  [giving  watch].
Yes.  George.  Ha  .  .  .  Har  .  .  .  Hart.  [All  correct.  The  name  of  my
uncle  George  is  in  the  back  of  the  watch.  When  he  died,  my  uncle  Albert
wore  it.  I  did  not  remember  that  the  name  was  engraved  on  the  inner  case  of
the  watch.— J.  H.]

Lai  ...  lal  ...  Albert  ...  is  that  the  way  you  pronounce  it?  He
is  very  fond  of  you.  He  says  he  is  notded  .  .  .  dead.  He  will  see  you
again.  He  is  glad  to  see  you.  He  is  very  fond  of  you.  [Lal  was  a  pet  name
my  father  sometimes  called  my  uncle  Albert. — J.  H.]

Who  is  James  .  .  .  Jim?     (Yes,  I  know,  but  he  is  not  dead.)     There  is

1  Owing  to  the  personal  character  of  many  of  the  incidents  referred  to  in  the  G.  P.
communications,  I  have  in  nearly  all  cases  substituted  other  names  for  the  real  ones.
It  has  been  suggested  that  the  important  witnesses  in  connection  with  the  G.  P.
evidence  may  have  been  in  collusion  with  Mrs.  Piper.  The  absurdity  of  this  suggestion
would  be  at  once  apparent  if  their  real  names  were  given,  but  since  the  only  real  full
names  given  of  actual  sitters  with  G.  P.  are  those  of  Professors  C.  Eliot  Norton  and  James
M.  Peirce,  of  Harvard  University,  who  are  referred  to  chiefly  as  cases  of  being  recog-
nised by  the  communicating  G.  P.  as  personally  known  to  him,  I  state  concerning  the
others  that  I  know  personally  all  but  two  of  the  G.  P.  sitters,  and  most  of  them
intimately,  that  they  belong  to  the  most  cultivated  and  responsible  class  in  the  United
States,  and  that  it  would  be  as  absurd  to  suppose  any  collusion  between  them  and  Mrs.
Piper  as  to  suppose  that  the  members  of  the  Council  of  the  S.P.R.  were  in  collusion
with  her.  Many  of  them  are  also  known  personally  to  Mr.  Myers,  who  adds  the
following  statement. — R.  H.

1  am  well  acquainted  with  fourteen  of  the  principal  persons  cited  in  the  sittings
recorded  in  connection  with  "  George  Pelham."     Several  of  these,  indeed,  are  among
my  most  valued  friends.     Not  only  would  the  idea  of  their  deliberate  collusion  with
Mrs.  Piper  be  absurd,  but  I  also  regard  them  as  very  unlikely,  from  their  previous
opinions  and  their  character,  to  supply  the  unconscious  collusion — if  I  may  so  term  it —
of  prepossessed  credulity. — FREDERIC  W.  H.  MYERS.

2  In  the  accounts  of  sittings,  the  sitter's  remarks  are  throughout  given  in  round
brackets,  and  explanatory  notes  in  square  brackets.


959A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  6n

another  George  who  wants  to  speak  to  you.     How  many  Georges  are  there
about  you  any  way  ?

The  rest  of  the  sitting,  until  almost  the  close,  was  occupied  by  state-
ments from  G.  P.,  Phinuit  acting  as  intermediary.  George  Pelham's  real
name  was  given  in  full,  also  the  names,  both  Christian  and  surname,  of
several  of  his  most  intimate  friends,  including  the  name  of  the  sitter.

Moreover,  incidents  were  referred  to  which  were  unknown  to  the  sitter
or  myself.

One  of  the  pair  of  studs  which  J.  H.  was  wearing  was  given  to  Phinuit.
.  .  .  "  (Who  gave  them  to  me?)  That's  mine.  I  gave  you  that  part  of
it.  I  sent  that  to  you.  (When?)  Before  I  came  here.  That's  mine.
Mother  gave  you  that.  (No.)  Well,  father  then,  father  and  mother
together.  You  got  those  after  I  passed  out.  Mother  took  them.  Gave
them  to  father,  and  father  gave  them  to  you.  I  want  you  to  keep  them.
I  will  them  to  you."  Mr.  Hart  notes :  "  The  studs  were  sent  to  me  by
Mr.  Pelham  as  a  remembrance  of  his  son.  I  knew  at  the  time  that  they
had  been  taken  from  G.'s  body,  and  afterwards  ascertained  that  his  step-
mother had  taken  them  from  the  body  and  suggested  that  they  would  do
to  send  to  me,  I  having  previously  written  to  ask  that  some  little  memento
be  sent  to  me."

James  and  Mary  [Mr.  and  Mrs.]  Howard  were  mentioned  with  strongly
personal  specific  references,  and  in  connection  with  Mrs.  Howard  came
the  name  Katharine.  "  Tell  her,  she'll  know.  I  will  solve  the  problems,
Katharine."  Mr.  Hart  notes  :  "  This  had  no  special  significance  for  me
at  the  time,  though  I  was  aware  that  Katharine,  the  daughter  of  Jim
Howard,  was  known  to  George,  who  used  to  live  with  the  Howards.  On
the  day  following  the  sitting  I  gave  Mr.  Howard  a  detailed  account  of  the
sitting.  These  words,  '  I  will  solve  the  problems,  Katharine,'  impressed
him  more  than  anything  else,  and  at  the  close  of  my  account  he  related
that  George,  when  he  had  last  stayed  with  them,  had  talked  frequently
with  Katharine  (a  girl  of  fifteen  years  of  age)  upon  such  subjects  as
Time,  Space,  God,  Eternity,  and  pointed  out  to  her  how  unsatisfactory
the  commonly  accepted  solutions  were.  He  added  that  some  time  he
would  solve  the  problems,  and  let  her  know,  using  almost  the  very  words
of  the  communication  made  at  the  sitting."  Mr.  Hart  added  that  he  was
entirely  unaware  of  these  circumstances.  I  was  myself  unaware  of  them,
and  was  not  at  that  time  acquainted  with  the  Howards,  and  in  fact  nearly
every  statement  made  at  the  sitting,  during  which  I  was  the  note-taker,
concerned  matters  of  which  I  was  absolutely  ignorant.

Meredith,  an  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Hart  and  G.  P.,  was  mentioned.
"Lent  a  book  to  Meredith.  Tell  him  to  keep  it  for  me.  Go  to  my  room
where  my  desk  is."  In  reply  to  inquiries  (April  1892),  Meredith  stated
that  the  last  time  he  saw  Pelham  was  in  Pelham's  own  room  several  months
before  the  latter's  death.  They  had  spent  the  greater  part  of  the  day
together,  and  Pelham  had  pressed  Meredith  to  take  away  some  of  his


612  APPENDICES  [959  A

manuscripts  and  books.  Thus  far  the  reference  to  Meredith  seems  to  have
been  correct.  But  Meredith  was  unable  to  remember  definitely  that  he
took  any  manuscript  or  book  away.

The  only  references  coming  from  G.  P.  that  were  apparently  confused
or  without  special  significance  were  the  remarks  towards  the  end  of  the
sitting  :  "  Give  me  a  powder ;  my  tongue  is  wet  " — which  had  no  meaning
for  the  sitter  (but  which  the  Howards  thought  might  have  reference  to  a
time  when  G.  P.  was  ill  in  their  house) — and  the  statements  below  about
the  handkerchief  and  perhaps  the  "  Uncle  Will."  He  did  leave  his  papers,
letters,  &c.,  "  mixed  up."

John,  if  that  is  you,  speak  to  me.  Tell  Jim  I  want  to  see  him.  He  will
hardly  believe  me,  believe  that  I  am  here.  I  want  him  to  know  where  I  am.
.  .  .  O  good  fellow.  All  got  dark,  then  it  grew  light.  Where  is  Uncle  Will  ?
I  met  Uncle  Willie,  William.  (I  don't  know  what  you  mean.)  Ask  Mother.
She'll  know.  [G.  P.  had  no  Uncle  William  deceased.  He  had  a  deceased
great-uncle  William,  on  his  mother's  side,  who  was  thus  the  uncle  of  his
mother  deceased  and  his  stepmother  living,  who  are  sisters.]

Go  up  to  my  room.  (Which  room  ?)  Up  to  my  room,  where  I  write.  I'll
come.  Speak  to  me,  John.  (What  room  ?)  Study.  (You  said  something  about
a  desk  just  now.)  I  left  things  all  mixed  up.  I  wish  you'd  go  up  and  straighten
them  out  for  me.  Lot  of  names.  Lot  of  letters.  I  left  things  mixed  up.  You
answer  them  for  me.  Wish  I  could  remember  more,  but  I'm  confused.
CLUB.  Went  to  the  Club.  Two  things  at  the  Club  to  make  right.  (What
Club?)  His  hand-er— (handkerchief).  Handkerchief.  (What  does  he  want
with  his  handkerchief?)  I  left  it  at  the  Club.  (What  Club?)  OUR  .  .
did  you  find  it  ?  (Yes,  no,  you  haven't  told  me  at  what  Club.)  I  saw  you  there.
It  isn't  like  you,  John.  [The  last  time  I  saw  G.  was  at  the  Players'  Club  in
New  York.— J.  H.]

Who's  Rogets?  [Phinuit  tries  to  spell  the  real  name.]  (Spell  that  again.)
[At  the  first  attempt  afterwards  Phinuit  leaves  out  a  letter,  then  spells  it
correctly.]  Rogers.  (What  do  you  want  Rogers  to  get?)  I  want  you  to  tell
Rogers  to  get  my  handkerchief.  I  left  it.  He  found  it.  Rogers  has  got  a
book  of  mine.  (What  is  he  going  to  do  with  it  ?)

[Both  Hart  and  G.  P.  knew  Rogers,  who  at  that  time  had  a  certain  MS.
book  of  G.  P.  in  his  possession.  The  book  was  found  after  G.  P.'s  death  and
given  to  Rogers  to  be  edited.  G.  P.  had  promised  during  his  lifetime  that  a
particular  disposition  should  be  made  of  this  book  after  his  death.  This  action
which  G.  P.  living  had  contemplated  with  regard  to  the  book  was  here,  and  in
subsequent  utterances  which  from  their  private  nature  I  cannot  quote,  enjoined
emphatically  and  repeatedly,  and  had  it  been  at  once  carried  out,  as  desired  by
G.  P.,  much  subsequent  unhappiness  and  confusion  might  have  been  avoided.
Neither  Hart  nor  Rogers  knows  anything  of  the  handkerchief  incident.]

During  the  latter  part  of  the  sitting,  and  without  any  relevance  to  the
remarks  immediately  before  and  after,  which  were  quite  clear  as  expressions
from  G.  P.,  came  the  words,  "  Who's  James  ?  Will— William."  [It  must
be  remembered  that  Phinuit  was  talking  throughout.]  This  was  apparently
explained  by  Phinuit's  further  remarks  at  the  close  of  the  sitting.


959B]  TO     CHAPTER    IX  613

Phinuit:  Who's  Alice?  (What  do  you  want  me  to  say  to  her  ?)  [To  R.  H.]
Alice  in  spirit.  Alice  in  spirit  says  it's  all  over  now,  and  tell  Alice  in  the
body  all  is  well.  Tell  Will  I'll  explain  things  later  on.  He  [George]  calls
Alice,  too,  in  the  body.  I  want  her  to  know  me,  too,  Alice  and  Katharine.
.  .  .  Speak  to  him.  He  won't  go  till  you  say  good-bye.  [The  hand  then
wrote  :  George  Pelham.  Good  day  (?)  John.]

[Phinuit's  reference  seemed  to  be  quite  clear  at  the  time  to  Professor
William  James,  and  the  three  Alices  were  discriminated.  It  seemed  as  though
Phinuit's  mention  of  the  other  Alices  had  reminded  G.  P.  of  the  one  well
known  to  him.  Alice  James,  the  sister  of  Professor  William  James,  had
recently  died  in  England.  The  first  name  of  Mrs.  James  is  also  Alice.
Alice,  the  sister  of  Katharine,  is  the  youngest  daughter  of  Mr.  Howard  and
was  very  fond  of  G.  P.]

As  I  have  already  said,  the  most  personal  references  made  at  the
sitting  cannot  be  quoted;  they  were  regarded  by  J.  H.  as  profoundly
characteristic  of  Pelham,  and  in  minor  matters,  where  my  notes  were
specially  inadequate,  such  as  in  the  words  of  greeting  and  occasional
remarks  to  the  sitter,  the  manner  of  reference  to  his  mother  with  him
"  spiritually,"  and  to  his  father  and  [step]  mother  living,  &c.,  the  sitter
was  strongly  impressed  with  the  vraisemblance  of  the  personality  of
Pelham.

959  B.     [Dr.  Hodgson's  Report  continues  as  follows  : — ]

It  so  happened  that  appointments  had  been  made  for  other  sitters,  and
it  was  nearly  three  weeks  before  a  special  opportunity  was  given  for  further
communication  from  G.  P.,  at  a  sitting  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  James  Howard
were  present  alone.  In  the  interim  I  accompanied  several  different
persons  to  their  sittings,  and  at  each  of  these  Phinuit  represented  G.  P.  as
anxious  to  see  his  friends,  using  some  remark  as  "  George  says,  when  are
you  going  to  bring  Jim?"  or  "  George  says  he  wants  to  tell  you  about  the
philosophy  of  this  life."  One  only  of  these  sitters,  Mr.  Vance,  had  been
known  to  G.  P.,  and  at  the  beginning  of  his  sitting,  which  was  on  March
3Oth,  1892,  G.  P.  first  wrote  a  few  words  to  myself  expressing  a  wish  to  see
his  father  (Mr.  P.)  about  some  private  matters;  then  Phinuit  spoke  for
him,  saying,  "  I  want  to  tell  you  where  I  am  and  what  I  am  doing  and
what  this  life  consists  of."  Then  references  were  made  to  two  other
friends  of  G.  P.,  who  had  also  been  mentioned  at  John  Hart's  sitting,  and
then  for  the  first  time  the  sitter  was  noticed.  "  How  is  your  son  ?  I  want
I  to  see  him  some  time."  "  Where  did  he  know  my  son?  "  "  In  studies,
;  in  college."  This  was  correct :  Mr.  Vance  had  a  son  who  was  class-mate
of  G.  P.  Mr.  Vance  then  asked  :  "  Where  did  George  stay  with  us  ?  "  and
\  received  a  correct  answer,  a  description  of  his  country  house  being  given.
(See  Report,  pp.  457-8.)

At  the  Howards'  first  sitting,  on  April  nth,  1892,  for  which  I  made

the  appointment,  of  course  without  giving  names,  Phinuit  said  very  little.

,  After  a  few  words  at  the  beginning  he  gave  way  for  what  purported  to  be

G.  P.  using  the  voice,  and  during  nearly  the  whole  of  the  time  of  trance


614  APPENDICES  [959  B

apparently  G.  P.  controlled  the  voice  directly.  The  statements  made  were
intimately  personal  and  characteristic.  Common  friends  were  referred  to
by  name,  inquiries  were  made  about  private  matters,  and  the  Howards,
who  were  not  predisposed  to  take  any  interest  in  psychical  research,  but
who  had  been  induced  by  the  account  of  Mr.  Hart  to  have  a  sitting  with
Mrs.  Piper,  were  profoundly  impressed  with  the  feeling  that  they  were  in
truth  holding  a  conversation  with  the  personality  of  the  friend  whom  they
had  known  so  many  years.  The  following  passages  are  from  Mr.  Howard's
notes  taken  during  the  sitting,  and  may  serve  to  suggest  to  some  extent
the  freedom  with  which  the  conversation  was  carried  on.  All  the  refer-
ences to  persons  and  [incidents]  are  correct.

G.  P, :  Jim,  is  that  you  ?  Speak  to  me  quick.  I  am  not  dead.  Don't  think
me  dead.  I'm  awfully  glad  to  see  you.  Can't  you  see  me  ?  Don't  you  hear
me  ?  Give  my  love  to  my  father  and  tell  him  I  want  to  see  him.  I  am  happy
here,  and  more  so  since  I  find  I  can  communicate  with  you.  I  pity  those  people
who  can't  speak  ...  I  want  you  to  know  I  think  of  you  still.  I  spoke  to  John
about  some  letters.  I  left  things  terribly  mixed,  my  books  and  my  papers ;  you
will  forgive  me  for  this,  won't  you  ?  .  .  .

(What  do  you  do,  George,  where  you  are  ?)

I  am  scarcely  able  to  do  anything  yet ;  I  am  just  awakened  to  the  reality  of
life  after  death.  It  was  like  darkness,  I  could  not  distinguish  anything  at  first.
Darkest  hours  just  before  dawn,  you  know  that,  Jim.  I  was  puzzled,  confused.
Shall  have  an  occupation  soon.  Now  I  can  see  you,  my  friends.  I  can  hear
you  speak.  Your  voice,  Jim,  I  can  distinguish  with  your  accent  and  articula-
tion, but  it  sounds  like  a  big  bass  drum.  Mine  would  sound  to  you  like  the
faintest  whisper.

(Our  conversation  then  is  something  like  telephoning?)

Yes.

(By  long  distance  telephone.)

[G.  P.  laughs.]

(Were  you  not  surprised  to  find  yourself  living  ?)

Perfectly  so.  Greatly  surprised.  I  did  not  believe  in  a  future  life.  It  was
beyond  my  reasoning  powers.  Now  it  is  as  clear  to  me  as  daylight.  We
have  an  astral  fac-simile  of  the  material  body.  .  .  .  Jim,  what  are  you  writing
now?

[G.  P.  when  living  would  probably  have  jeered  at  the  associations  of  the
word  "astral."— R.  H.]

(Nothing  of  any  importance.)

Why  don't  you  write  about  this  ?

(I  should  like  to,  but  the  expression  of  my  opinions  would  be  nothing,
must  have  facts.)

These  I  will  give  to  you  and  to  Hodgson  if  he  is  still  interested  in  thes<
things.

(Will  people  know  about  this  possibility  of  communication  ?)

They  are  sure  to  in  the  end.     It  is  only  a  question  of  time  when  people  ii
the  material  body  will  know  all  about  it,  and  every  one  will  be  able  to  cor
municate.  ...  I  want  all  the  fellows  to  know  about  me.  ...  What  is  Rogen
writing  ?

(A  novel.)


959B]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  615

No,  not  that.     Is  he  not  writing  something  about  me  ?

(Yes,  he  is  preparing  a  memorial  of  you.)

That  is  nice  ;  it  is  pleasant  to  be  remembered.  It  is  very  kind  of  him.  He
was  always  kind  to  me  when  I  was  alive.  Martha  Rogers  [deceased  daughter]
is  here.  I  have  talked  with  her  several  times.  She  reflects  too  much  on  her
last  illness,  on  being  fed  with  a  tube.  We  tell  her  she  ought  to  forget  it,  and
she  has  done  so  in  good  measure,  but  she  was  ill  a  long  time.  She  is  a  dear
little  creature  when  you  know  her,  but  she  is  hard  to  know.  She  is  a  beautiful
little  soul.  She  sends  her  love  to  her  father.  .  .  .

Berwick,  how  is  he  ?  Give  him  my  love.  He  is  a  good  fellow ;  he  is  what
I  always  thought  him  in  life,  trustworthy  and  honourable.  How  is  Orenberg  ?
He  has  some  of  my  letters.  Give  him  my  warmest  love.  He  was  always  very
fond  of  me,  though  he  understood  me  least  of  all  my  friends.  We  fellows
who  are  eccentric  are  always  misunderstood  in  life.  I  used  to  have  fits  of
depression.  I  have  none  now.  I  am  happy  now.  I  want  my  father  to  know
about  this.  We  used  to  talk  about  spiritual  things,  but  he  will  be  hard  to
convince.  My  mother  will  be  easier.  .  .  .

[As  stated  above,  all  the  references  to  persons,  incidents,  characters,  &c.,  so
far  as  they  are  known  to  living  persons,  are  correct.]

Among  the  private  matters  referred  to  was  the  disposition  of  the  book,
concerning  which  G.  P.  expressed  orally  the  same  desire  as  before.  (See
above,  p.  612.)  The  only  writing  produced  at  this  sitting  moreover  was
confined  to  this  matter,  and  was  a  message  to  his  father  repeating  his
wish.

He  referred  to  a  tin  box  of  German  manufacture  which  he  said  was

either  in  New  York  or  Z [giving  the  name,  a  very  peculiar  one,  of  the

locality  of  his  father's  country  residence] .  He  said  that  it  contained  letters
from  three  persons  whom  he  specified/  He  wished  the  Howards  to  have
this  box.  They  replied  that  the  letters  were  all  burned.

G.  P. :  I  think  not.  I  want  you  to  have  them.  I  want  you  to  tell  my
father  about  this.

(Can't  you  give  us  something  that  will  convince  him  ?  something  we  don't
know  and  he  does  ?)

I  understand,  a  test.  You  can  tell  him  about  this  tin  box  that  I  left  in  my
room.  I  know  they  have  taken  the  chest,  but  this  tin  box  they  have  not.
[The  box  was  found  at  Z ,  but  there  were  no  letters  in  it. — R.  H.]

[Mr.  Vance,  the  sitter  of  March  3oth,  1892,  had  sent  me  two  questions  for
G.  P.,  which  I  requested  the  Howards  to  put  at  their  sitting.  The  questions
were — "  i.  What  was  the  purpose  of  the  association  you  formed  two  years  ago
with  Miss  Helen  Vance  and  two  other  ladies?  2.  Give  the  names  of  the  two
other  ladies."  My  impression  is  that  I  gave  Mr.  Howard  my  recollection  of
these  questions  without  having  the  original  letter  of  Mr.  Vance  at  hand,  and
probably  Mr.  Howard  put  the  questions  as  I  gave  them  to  him.  His  account
is  as  follows : — ]

Then  we  put  two  test  questions,  by  request  of  Mr.  Hodgson :  ist.  What  was
the  nature  of  the  Society  formed  by  you  and  some  other  young  people?  He
was  obviously  confused,  and  in  trying  to  answer  said  "  development."  We  told
him  not  to  bother  about  it  now,  but  to  tell  us  at  next  sitting,  a  proposal  which


616  APPENDICES  [959  C

Phinuit  recommended,  but  he  himself  in  his  gruff  voice  suggested  "Theo-
sophic."  I  told  him  no.  He  made  a  try  at  question  2nd.  Names  of  members
of  Society,  "  Helen  Bering — Derrich,  or  Herrick."  [The  questions  were  ar>
parently  not  asked  until  towards  the  end  of  the  sitting,  and  Phinuit  haa
evidently  taken  control  of  the  voice  and  was  acting  as  intermediary.  The
answer  must  be  called  wrong,  although  Helen  was  the  first  name  of  one  of  the
members. — R.  H.]

959  C.  [The  following  is  from  Dr.  Hodgson's  report  in  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  353-57-]

I  close  this  section  of  my  Report  by  a  brief  account  of  the  case  of  the
friend  whom  I  have  called  Mr.  Hart,  to  whom  in  the  first  instance  G.  P,
manifested  (see  959  A),  and  who  himself  died  in  Naples  on  May  2nd,  1895.
As  in  G.  P.'s  case,  I  substitute  other  names  for  the  real  ones.  I  had  not
been  having  regular  series  of  sittings  at  this  time,  and  heard  incidentally
on  May  3rd  that  a  cablegram  had  been  received  by  a  relative  announcing
the  death  of  Hart.  My  assistant,  Miss  Edmunds,  went  out  to  Mrs.  Piper
at  my  request  to  arrange  a  sitting  for  me  for  the  next  day,  May  4th,  and
to  say  that  it  was  extremely  important  that  I  must  have  the  sitting.  I
did  not  tell  Miss  Edmunds  the  reason,  and  she  made  a  totally  erroneous
conjecture  concerning  it.  The  announcement  of  the  death,  however,
with  the  place  and  cause  of  death  (inflammation  of  the  heart),  appeared
in  a  Boston  evening  paper  on  May  3rd.  At  the  sitting  on  May  4th,  after
a  few  words  from  Phinuit,  G.  P.  wrote  and  gave  several  messages  from
friends,  and  then  asked  what  he  could  do  for  me.  I  replied  that  I  had
something  for  him  to  do,  but  could  not  tell  him  what  it  was.  He  made  a
brief  reference  to  his  father  and  mother,  and  then  to  a  friend  of  my  own,
and  then  came  the  following  : —

Hold,  H.  See  all  of  these  people  bringing  a  gentleman.  [R.  H.  thinks  this
is  unintentionally  written,  and  doesn't  repeat  the  words  aloud.]

Read  ...  do  you  see  them,  H.  ?  (No.)  He  is  coming  here.  I  think  I
knew  him.  [R.  H.  can't  decipher  after  think.'}  That  I  knew  him.  Come  here
and  listen,  H.  He  has  been  here  before  and  I  have  seen  him  since  I  passed
out.  (Who  is  it?)  John.  "  Do  you  see  me,  H.  ?  "  He  says  this.  (No.)  "What
about  my  health  ?  Oh,  George,  I  am  here,  do  not  go  away  from  me,"  .  .  .  not
to  you,  H.,  to  me.  (Yes,  I  understand.)  "I  thought  I  should  see  you  once
more  before  I  came  here."  (What  is  the  full  name?)  John  H.  (Give  me  the
second  name  in  full.)  Did  you  speak  ?  (Write  the  second  name  in  full.)  Hart.
(That's  right,  Hart,  old  fellow.)  "Will  you  listen  to  me,  Hodg  .  .  .  [Much
excitement  in  hand,  and  letters  jumbled  over.  G.  P.  writing  throughout,  but
at  times  apparently  much  perturbation  introduced.]  George  knew  I  was  here
and  met  me,  but  I  was  too  weak  to  come  here  and  talk,  H ."  .  .  .  Yes,  H.,
but  the  dear  old  fellow  is  short-breathed.  ..."  I  expected  to  see  you  before
I  came  here,  H.  (Yes,  I  hoped  to  have  met  you  in  the  body  again)  but  you
see  I  was  failing.  How  are  you  ? "

What  [apparently  from  G.  P.  to  Hart.]

"  I  brought  Ge here  first."    (Yes,  you  did.)

Yes,  I  do  [from  G.  P.  to  Hart.]     [More  probably  from  Hart  to  G.  P.,  in


959C]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  617

answer  to  some  such  question  as  "  Do  you  mean  me  ?  "  from  G.  P.  to  Hart.
1898.]

Oh,  what  about  me,  H.  ?

(He  means  your  first  messages  came  to  him.)

Oh,  I  see !  but  I  was  .  .  .  but  (you  were  out  of  the  body)  yes.  ..."  I  am
a  little  dull,  H.,  in  my  head."  (Isn't  the  light  good,  to-day?)  Yes,  but  it  is  I,
H.,  my  (you  mean  yoti  are  not  in  good  trim,  George?)  No  no  I  Hart  no,
H.  I  Hart  (I  see,  Hart  is  dull,  Hart  can't  do  so  well.)  [H.  is  the  initial  of
Hart's  real  name.  1898.]  [Thump  with  fist.  Much  thumping  with  fist  during
sitting,  indicative  of  assent  at  different  times.]

The  above  is  transcribed  from  the  type-written  copy  of  the  record  of
the  sitting,  and  the  quotation  marks  were  doubtless  inserted  by  myself  to
make  the  record  clearer.  There  was  much  confusion  in  the  rest  of  the
sitting.  The  cause  of  death  he  stated  to  be  inflammation  of  the  stomach,
which  was  not  correct,  though  he  had  suffered  much  from  this  for  a  year
before  his  death.  I  may  have  known  of  this,  but  was  not  consciously
aware  of  it.  I  knew  that  he  had  been  ill  in  Europe,  but  when  I  last  heard
from  him  several  months  previously,  I  understood  that  he  had  recovered.
There  were  confused  references  to  the  Howards.  He  referred  to  two
other  friends  in  Europe  (whose  names  had  been  given  in  previous  sittings
by  G.  P.),  mentioned  several  names  unknown  to  me,  and  referred  to
incidents  in  connection  with  them,  as  well  as  other  matters,  none  of
which,  for  family  reasons,  I  have  yet  been  able  to  verify.  I  think  it
probable  that  they  will  be  partially,  but  only  partially  correct.  There
seemed  to  be  glimpses  here  and  there  of  a  clear  consciousness.  He
wanted  to  know  if  it  was  Paris  (where  he  had  stayed  some  time  while  in
<  Europe).  I  said  it  was  Arlington  Heights.

"  Arlington,  I  remember  Arlington — did  you  not  take  me  here?  (Yes,  this
is  the  very  room  where  George  came  to  you.)  Oh  yes,  I  had  his  [article  of
G.  P.  specifically  mentioned]  and  my  watch.  .  .  .  Will  they  send  my  body  on
to  New  York?  (I  don't  know.)  I  hope  they  will.  They  are  now  talking
about  it."  [I  learned  later  that  the  desirability  of  taking  the  body  to  America
was  discussed.]

When  I  asked,  "Why  didn't  George  tell  me  to  begin  with?"  he
replied,  "  Because  I  told  him  to  let  me  come  and  tell  myself."  This  was
like  Hart,  and  so  was  the  statement  quoted  above  that  it  was  he  who
brought  G.  P.  first.

At  this  sitting,  and  several  also  in  the  following  week,  during  which
the  confusion  continued,  a  knowledge  was  shown  of  various  matters  known
to  me  which  were  specially  suggestive  of  Hart,  references  to  friends  and

I  relatives,  presents  which  he  had  given  to  me,  jokes  about  cigars,  magazines
which  he  had  entrusted  to  me  just  before  he  went  to  Europe  three  years
previously,  &c.,  but  of  course  I  was  anxious  to  obtain  information  con-
cerning events  in  Europe  of  which  I  was  entirely  ignorant,  especially  any

i  that  occurred  just  before  his  death ;  and  I  have  such  on  record,  but  have


618  APPENDICES  [959  C

not  yet  succeeded  in  discovering  how  much  correct  statement  they
include.  Between  the  first  and  second  sitting  it  occurred  to  me  that  the
announcement  of  his  being  there  to  communicate  was  "  led  up  to  "  by
G.  P.,  and  at  the  second  sitting,  when  Hart  wrote  part  of  the  time
himself,  I  said,  "  I  suppose  last  time  you  thought  I  took  your  coming  very
coolly."  The  hand  wrote  excitedly:  "You  seemed  very  inconsiderate  to
what  you  used  to  do."  I  explained  that  I  had  heard  of  his  death  by  a
cablegram  which  had  been  received  by  his  "  brother-in-law."  He  then
wrote  the  name  of  the  brother  of  his  sister  s  husband.  I  said  no,  "  your
wife's  brother."

Another  incident  at  the  same  sitting  showed  a  curious  remembrance.

.  .  .  Ask  for  my  cigar  case  .  .  .  am  I  dreaming  ...  I  think  I  know
that  once  I  sat  in  this  corner  [hand  points  to  other  side  of  the  room,
to  place  where  Mrs.  Piper  sat  at  time  when  Hart  attended  his  sitting  on
March  22nd,  1892.]  (You  mean  you  sat  there  ?)  Yes  I  did  (yes,  I  remember)
I  know  where  I  am  now.

As  I  recall  this  incident,  I  did  not  understand  what  was  meant  at
first  when  the  hand  pointed,  as  it  was  more  than  three  years  since
Mrs.  Piper  had  sat  there.  That  position  in  the  room  was  not  associated
specially  in  my  mind  with  Hart,  as  various  other  persons  whom  I  had
accompanied  to  sittings  had  sat  in  the  same  position,  both  before  and
after  Hart's  sitting,  and  it  was  only  after  April  2Qth,  1892  (see  Report,
p.  292),  when  I  succeeded  in  getting  the  hand  to  write  with  the  block-
book  on  the  table  instead  of  on  the  top  of  Mrs.  Piper's  head,  that
I  requested  Mrs.  Piper  to  change  her  position,  so  that  there  might  be
plenty  of  room  for  the  table  and  for  a  sitter  on  the  other  side  of  it.
But  the  occasion  was  a  very  memorable  one  to  Hart,  and  if  he  was
communicating  and  waking  to  a  consciousness  of  his  surroundings,  it
was  a  natural  observation  for  him  to  make.

In  June  and  July  a  friend  of  mine  was  having  a  series  of  sittings,
and  Hart  sent  a  message  to  me  through  him ;  he  was  becoming  clearer,
and  wished  to  communicate.  There  were  no  opportunities  for  any
further  series  of  sittings,  however,  and  Mrs.  Piper  stopped  sitting  for
her  summer  rest,  and  I  visited  England  later.  Few  sittings  were  given
in  the  winter  of  1895—6  owing  to  Mrs.  Piper's  ill-health.  Hart  gave
brief  messages  on  several  occasions;  said  that  he  wanted  to  follow  in
"  G.  P.'s  tracks,"  and  seemed  somewhat  aggrieved,  so  to  speak,  because
he  did  not  have  the  same  opportunity  as  had  been  afforded  to  G.  P.
Thus,  on  January  22nd,  1896  : —

.  .  .  What  in  the  world  is  the  reason  you  never  call  for  me?  I  am
not  sleeping.  I  wish  to  help  you  in  identifying  myself,  ...  I  am  a
good  deal  better  now.  (You  were  confused  at  first.)  Very,  but  I  did  not
really  understand  how  confused  I  was.  It  is  more  so,  I  am  more  so  when  I
try  to  speak  to  you.  I  understand  now  why  George  spelled  his  words  to


959C]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  619

me.     [Several  sentences,  even  of  ordinary  words,  were  spelt  out  by  Phinuit
from  G.  P.  at  his  first  appearance,  to  Hart.]

He  became  clearer  later  on,  and  purported  to  take  part  in  an  inquiry
I  was  making  concerning  a  person's  whereabouts  in  Mexico.  It  was
during  this  time  that  Miss  Warner  {Report,  p.  324)  had  her  two  sittings,
January  6th  and  7th,  1897.  She  remarked  to  me  during  the  sitting  of
January  7th,  1897,  that  Hart  knew  one  of  her  brothers,  Charlie,  and
that  they  went  to  the  Azores  together.  I  asked  Phinuit  if  he  or  G.  P.
could  get  Hart.  Shortly  afterwards  G.  P.  wrote,  and  after  a  short  con-
versation with  the  sitter  came  the  following : —

Did  you  have  a  brother  Jack,  Hart  asks.     (Yes.)

[For  Hart.]  I  am  here.  George,  tell  her  I  see  her  and  I  long  to  ask  her
brother  if  he  recalls  the  storm  we  experienced.

(I  know  he  does.     I've  heard  him  speak  of  it.)

Good,  and  ask  him  if  he  still  has  the  stick  like  mine.  Take  the  pipe,  old
chap,  I  do  not  wish  it.  Hear  you?  (R.  H. :  Yes,  it  may  be  the  one  he
gave  me)  and  I  have  it  in  my  mind.  A  memento.  He  ought  to  have  it.
[Hart  gave  me  a  pipe.  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  reference  is  to  this,  or
to  one  connected  with  sitter's  brother. — R.  H.]

We  went  to  a  queer  little  hotel,  at  a  little  hotel  together.  Charlie  had
a  headache  from  hunger.  We  were  almost  starved  when  we  got  there,  the
food  was  bad,  the  food  was  so  bad,  poor.  I  am  content  here,  quite.  Do  you
ever  see  me  as  I  really  am  ?  (No.  I  don't  see  you  at  all.)  Not  at  all.  I  do,
H.  Hear  Hart  say  have  a  smoke,  anything  for  relief.  Ask  him  [Charlie]
about  this  for  me.  Hungry.  (R.  H. :  He's  still  talking  about  Charlie  and
their  experiences  together  ?)  Yes,  H.  He  is.

(Tell  some  more.)  We  went  up  to  the  hotel  and  ask  him  if  he  recalls
the  laugh  we  had  after  we  got  to  our  room.  Give  him  my  love.

(What  did  you  laugh  about  ?)  because  of  the  dirt,  &c.  .  .  .  very  amusing.
He  has  not  been  well  but  he  is  going  to  be.  [Disturbance  in  hand.]  Hold
on,  old  man,  I  cannot  hear  if  you  grab  me  in  this  way.

Did  you  ever  have  a  fever  ?

(R.  H. :  Who  says  that?)     I,  J.  H.

(Do  you  mean  me?)  Yes.  (Yes.  I  had  a  fever.  Pneumonia,  and  typhoid
fever.)  Never  have  another.  Going  to  be  well  now.  I  said  it.  (Do  you
mean  me?)  Yes,  Charles  too.  Give  him  my  love  and  do  not  forget  about
the  stick.  ...  \

Miss  Warner  wrote  : —

I  had  known  that  Charley  and  Hart  took  a  trip  in  a  sailing  vessel  to  the
Azores,  but  absolutely  no  details,  except  that  the  boat  was  driven  on  the  rocks
and  they  watched  her  break  up.

This  was  all  she  could  recollect  in  connection  with  the  statements
made  by  Hart  about  her  brother.  I  remembered  also  about  the  ship-
wreck at  the  Azores,  but  had  no  recollections  of  any  sort  connecting
Hart  with  Charley  Warner,  or  about  any  of  the  other  incidents  referred
to.  I  think,  however,  that  as  Hart  himself  told  me  of  the  shipwreck


620  APPENDICES  [960  A

at  the  Azores,  he  probably  mentioned  Warner  in  connection  with  it.
He  may  possibly  also  have  spoken  of  some  of  the  other  incidents.  But
I  am  unable  to  recall  the  vaguest  memory  of  any  sort  about  them.
Charley  Warner  was  then  in  California,  and  in  reply  to  inquiries  he
wrote  on  February  2nd,  1897  : —

J.  H.  and  myself  once  were  hove  to  on  the  North  Atlantic  for  about  three
days  during  a  severe  storm.  At  another  time  we  were  at  Horta,  Fayal
Island,  and  watched  our  vessel  drag  ashore  and  break  up  on  account  of
a  very  bad  storm,  or  hurricane.  J.  H.  had  a  very  serviceable  stick.  As  I
remember  it,  a  stout  little  blade  dropped  out  of  the  ferrule.  I  never  had  one
like  it  that  I  can  remember.  He  thought  highly  of  it  and  advised  me  to  get
one  like  it.  I  don't  remember  anything  about  a  pipe.  What  he  says  about
the  queer  little  hotel  is  all  true ;  I  don't  remember  that  I  had  a  headache,
but  we  were  hungry.  J.  H.  was  extremely  amused  about  something  at  that
hotel  and  we  had  a  hearty  laugh.  It  was  connected  with  dirt.

960  A.  From  Dr.  Hodgson's  Report  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.
PP-  335-6.

I  pass  on  now  to  consider  briefly  the  results  obtained  from  some  other
communicators,  and  begin  with  the  case  of  the  lady  whom  I  have  called
Madame  Elisa  Mannors.  Other  names  are  substituted  for  the  real  ones.
She  was  known  to  G.  P.,  and  her  first  appearance  was  to  her  sister,
Madame  Frederica,  on  May  i;th,  1892  (Report,  p.  471).  She  had  died  the
previous  summer.  The  cause  of  her  death  was  designated  by  Phinuit,  who
also  described  correctly,  purporting  to  repeat  what  she  was  telling  him,  some
incidents  which  had  occurred  at  her  death-bed.  The  sitter  inquired  about
a  watch  which  had  belonged  to  Madame  Elisa,  but  the  statements  made
at  this  sitting,  and  to  myself  at  subsequent  sittings,  did  not  lead  to  its  recovery.
Some  Italian  was  written  by  request,  the  lady  being  as  familiar  with  Italian
as  with  English,  but  only  two  or  three  common  words  were  decipherable.
The  first  names  of  sitter  and  communicator  were  given,  and  the  last  name  was
both  written  and  afterwards  given  by  G.  P.  to  Phinuit.  Some  of  the  writing
was  of  a  personal  character,  and  some  about  the  watch,  and  G.  P.  stated
correctly,  inter  alia,  that  the  sitter's  mother  was  present  (in  "spirit")  with  the
communicator,  and  that  he  himself  did  not  know  her.  The  real  names  are
very  uncommon.  The  Italian  for  "  It  is  well.  Patience,"  was  whispered  at  the
end  of  the  sitting  as  though  by  direct  control  of  the  voice  by  Madame  Elisa.
Both  the  sitter  and  her  sister  were  well  known  to  me,  and  also  to  the  Howards,
and  Madame  Elisa  made  several  personal  communications  in  the  course  of  the
sittings  recorded  in  Appendix  I.  (see  Report,^.  417-19,  423),  where  further
attempts,  only  partially  successful,  were  made  to  write  Italian  clearly,  and  also
to  speak  it,  but  not  much  was  said.

She  communicated  by  writing  later  to  three  or  four  other  friends  or  rela-
tives, always  in  a  strongly  personal  way,  and  very  clearly.  In  her  statements
to  one  very  personal  friend,  at  sittings  when  I  was  present,  she  showed  on
several  occasions  an  intimate  private  knowledge  of  her  sister  and  her  sister's
family  in  connection  with  events  that  were  occurring,  and  also  of  other  relatives
to  whom  she  was  deeply  attached.  She  also  had  several  "  written  talks  "  with
myself  alone,  referred  to  incidents  with  which  we  were  both  familiar  when


962A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  621

guests  at  the  same  house  in  another  part  of  the  country,  and  appreciated
properly  other  references  which  I  made  myself.  It  always  seemed  like  the
woman  I  knew.

As  I  have  mentioned  elsewhere  (Report,  pp.  293,  332),  the  intelligence
communicating  by  writing  is  not  conscious  of  the  act  of  writing.  The  chief
difficulty  apparently  in  getting  another  language  written  by  the  hand  is  that
strange  words  tend  to  be  written  phonetically  unless  they  are  thought  out
slowly  letter  by  letter.  The  writing  is  usually  much  more  legible  now  than
it  was  during  the  period  of  the  records  from  which  I  am  quoting,  when  there
was  frequently  much  difficulty  in  deciphering  even  the  simplest  English
words.  It  was  therefore  not  surprising  that  so  little  of  the  "  Italian  "  written
by  Madame  Elisa  was  decipherable.

962  A.  From  Dr.  Hodgson's  report  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.
pp.  384-5.

There  are  various  references  in  the  records  given  in  Appendix  IV.  to  the
twin  children  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  A.  B.  Thaw.  One  of  these,  Margaret,  died  a
year  before  their  first  sitting  at  the  age  of  six  months,  and  the  other,  Ruthie,
died  three  months  before  their  first  sitting  at  the  age  of  fifteen  months.  The
communications  concerning  these  children  were  given  almost  entirely  by
Phinuit,  who  had,  however,  some  difficulty  with  the  names.  At  the  first  sitting
several  attempts  were  made  before  the  name  Margaret  was  given  clearly.
Trouble  with  teeth  was  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  children,  apparently
as  the  first  impression  on  the  appearance  of  Margaret,  but  not  actually  specified
as  Margaret's.  Margaret  was  teething  when  she  died.  Phinuit  also  said  that
one  of  the  children  wanted  baby's  beads.  Margaret  used  to  play  with  a  neck-
lace of  beads  belonging  to  her  older  sister  living.  And  referring  to  Margaret,
Phinuit  said  that  she  had  some  flowers  in  her  hand,  that  "  she  liked  them  and
took  them  with  her."  Mrs.  Thaw  had  placed  three  little  flowers  in  Margaret's
hand  after  her  death.  Phinuit  got  much  more  in  connection  with  Ruthie,
whose  first  appearance  seemed  to  be  accompanied  by  a  recurrence  of  associa-
tions connected  with  the  trouble  that  caused  her  death,  dysentery  and  sore
throat.  Phinuit  indicated  the  locality  and  the  distress,  and  Ruthie's  dislike  of
"  the  powder."  Bismuth  was  given  through  the  entire  illness  of  two  weeks  and
was  always  given  with  trouble.  Phinuit  spoke  of  Ruthie  as  having  light  golden
hair,  afterwards  adding  curly; — correct — but  called  her  a  boy.  The  living
Ruthie  was  very  generally  mistaken  for  a  boy,  but  not,  of  course,  by  the  Thaws.
Yet  Phinuit  had  much  difficulty  in  getting  the  name,  and  failed  to  get  nearer
than  Ethie,  and  the  sitters  told  him  it  began  with  R.  Phinuit  said  that
she  had  not  learned  to  talk,  but  later  on  he  got  the  name  Ruth-ie  correctly.
He  remarked  that  she  only  said  papa  and  mamma.  Other  words  that  the
living  Ruthie  said  were  given  in  later  sittings.  Phinuit  described  her  as
wanting  to  see  the  stars.  For  two  or  three  months  before  her  death  Ruthie
was  fond  of  pointing  at  the  stars  through  the  window.  At  the  beginning
of  the  sitting  Phinuit  said  she  put  her  hand  on  Dr.  Thaw's  head,  and
afterwards  described  her  as  wanting  to  pat  his  face,  actions  which  were
characteristic  of  the  living  Ruthie  towards  Dr.  Thaw.  Similarly  she  wanted
to  hear  the  tick  tick  (watch)  in  connection  with  her  uncle  Aleck,  and  it
was  he  who  chiefly  used  to  hold  the  watch  for  her  to  hear  it.  And  another
characteristic  action  was  reproduced  in  connection  with  Mr.  Melvin  W. ;


622  APPENDICES  [963  A

Phinuit  said  she  wanted  him  to  wave  the  hand  in  a  certain  way  to  Mr.
W.,  and  the  living  Ruthie  waved  her  hand  in  that  way  to  Mr.  W.,  and
to  him  only.  Reference  was  also  made  to  her  picture,  and  Mrs.  Thaw  was
painting  a  picture  of  Ruthie  when  she  was  taken  ill.  In  later  sittings  Phinuit
described  her  as  saying  other  words,  baby,  pretty,  Bettie,  and  pussie,  with  the
accent  used  by  Ruthie  when  living.  These  were  the  only  words  besides  the
papa  and  mamma  mentioned  before,  used  by  Ruthie  when  living.  The  first
time  Mrs.  Thaw  wore  fur  at  a  sitting,  the  hand  stroked  it,  and  Phinuit  whispered
"  pussie  "  as  Ruthie  living  used  to  do.  But  Ruthie  had  whispered  "  pussie"  at
a  previous  sitting.  Two  or  three  times  there  seemed  to  be  a  direct  control  of
the  voice  by  Ruthie  who  took  the  place  of  Phinuit  (Report,  pp.  564,  576,  578).
The  first  time  she  whispered  pttee  and  pssee  (pretty  and  pussie)  and  the  second
time ///<?<?  only,  the  words  being  many  times  repeated.  This  second  occasion
was  connected  with  rather  a  striking  incident.  Mrs.  Piper  was  visiting  the
Thaws  in  New  York,  and  they  took  her  up  the  river  Hudson  to  their  country
house  and  had  a  sitting  on  the  afternoon  of  the  day  of  their  arrival.  I  was
taking  notes,  sitting  slightly  to  one  side  and  partly  behind  Mrs.  Piper,  while  Dr.
and  Mrs.  Thaw  were  sitting  in  front  of  her,  with  their  heads  somewhat  bowed.
Phinuit  apparently  "left"  and  his  place  was  taken  by  Ruthie,  who  began
whispering  pttee  pttee.  The  hand  rose  and  turned  somewhat  diagonally  and
extended  the  forefinger  and  pointed  towards  a  picture  on  the  far  side  of  the
room.  The  Thaws  did  not  see  this  action  until  I  drew  their  attention  to  it,
when  they  looked  up,  and  followed  the  direction  of  the  pointing.  The  hand
then  trembled  and  sank.  Dr.  Thaw  noted:  "During  the  last  month  of
Ruthie's  life  it  was  a  regular  morning  custom  to  bring  her  to  the  room  in
which  this  sitting  was  held — our  bedroom — and  she  would  always  point,  as
hand  did  in  sitting,  with  one  finger  (unusual  with  a  baby)  and  say  '  pt-tee,
pt-tee,'  just  as  in  sitting.  This  little  incident  had  not  been  in  either  sitter's
conscious  mind  since  baby's  death  six  months  before.  Mrs.  Piper  had  never
been  in  that  room  until  the  actual  time  of  sitting.  Many  other  pictures  in  the
room,  two  of  which  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  could  have  pointed  at  more  easily
than  the  particular  one  always  noticed  by  the  baby."

963  A.     I  now  cite  a  few  instances  of  prophecies  given  through  Mrs.
Piper.

(a)  The  following  account  is  from  Miss  W.'s  report  (made  from  con-
temporary notes)  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viiL
P-  34-

In  the  spring  of  1888,  an  acquaintance,  S.,  was  suffering  torturing  disease.
There  was  no  hope  of  relief,  and  only  distant  prospect  of  release.  A  consulta-
tion of  physicians  predicted  continued  physical  suffering  and  probably  mental
decay,  continuing  perhaps  through  a  series  of  years.  S.'s  daughter,  worn  with
anxiety  and  care,  was  in  danger  of  breaking  in  health.  "  How  can  I  get  her
away  for  a  little  rest?"  I  asked  Dr.  Phinuit,  May  24,  1888.  "  She  will  not
leave  her  father,"  was  his  reply,  "  but  his  suffering  is  not  for  long.  The  doctor
are  wrong  about  that.  There  will  be  a  change  soon,  and  he  will  pass  out  of  the
body  before  the  summer  is  over."  His  death  occurred  in  June  1888.

E.  G.  W.

(b)  The  next  incident  is  from  Mr.  «  M.  N.'s  "  account  of  Mrs.  Piper  in


963  A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  623

Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.    viii.  p.  120,  which  was   corroborated  by  Mrs.
"M.  N."

April  $th  [1889.].

.  .  .  About  end  March  of  last  year  I  made  her  a  visit  (having  been  in  the
habit  of  doing  so,  since  early  in  February,  about  once  a  fortnight).  She  told
me  that  a  death  of  a  near  relative  of  mine  would  occur  in  about  six  weeks,
from  which  I  should  realise  some  pecuniary  advantages.  I  naturally  thought
of  my  father,  who  was  advanced  in  years,  and  whose  description  Mrs.  Piper
had  given  me  very  accurately  some  week  or  two  previously.  She  had  not
spoken  of  him  as  my  father,  but  merely  as  a  person  nearly  connected  with
me.  I  asked  her  at  that  sitting  whether  this  person  was  the  one  who  would
die,  but  she  declined  to  state  anything  more  clearly  to  me.  My  wife,  to  whom
I  was  then  engaged,  went  to  see  Mrs.  Piper  a  few  days  afterwards,  and  she
told  her  (my  wife)  that  my  father  would  die  in  a  few  weeks.

About  the  middle  of  May  my  father  died  very  suddenly  in  London  from
heart  failure,  when  he  was  recovering  from  a  very  slight  attack  of  bronchitis,
and  the  very  day  that  his  doctor  had  pronounced  him  out  of  danger.  Previous
to  this  Mrs.  Piper  (as  Dr.  Phinuit)  had  told  me  that  she  would  endeavour  to
influence  my  father  about  certain  matters  connected  with  his  will  before  he
died.  Two  days  after  I  received  the  cable  announcing  his  death  my  wife  and
I  went  to  see  Mrs.  Piper,  and  she  [Phinuit]  spoke  of  his  presence,  and  his
sudden  arrival  in  the  spirit-world,  and  said  that  he  (Dr.  Phinuit)  had  en-
deavoured to  persuade  him  in  those  matters  while  my  father  was  sick.  Dr.
Phinuit  told  me  the  state  of  the  will,  and  described  the  principal  executor,  and
said  that  he  (the  executor)  would  make  a  certain  disposition  in  my  favour,
subject  to  the  consent  of  the  two  other  executors,  when  I  got  to  London,
England.  Three  weeks  afterwards  I  arrived  in  London ;  found  the  principal
executor  to  be  the  man  Dr.  Phinuit  had  described.  The  will  went  materially
as  he  had  stated.  The  disposition  was  made  in  my  favour,  and  my  sister,  who
was  chiefly  at  my  father's  bedside  the  last  three  days  of  his  life,  told  me  that
he  had  repeatedly  complained  of  the  presence  of  an  old  man  at  the  foot  of
his  bed,  who  annoyed  him  by  discussing  his  private  affairs.  .  .  .

["M.  N."]

(c)  See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  447-449.

At  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  March  7,  1892,  the  death  of  her  uncle
David  was  foretold  to  Miss  Macleod.  Her  contemporary  note  of  the
statement  was :  "  David  will  die  soon."

She  wrote  on  March  27,  1893  :

"My  uncle  David,  whose  death  Mrs.  Piper  predicted  at  the  sitting
which  I  had  with  her  on  March  7,  1892,  died  at  Chicago  on  last  Tuesday,
the  2ist  of  March.  As  far  as  I  know,  his  health  was  perfectly  good  at
the  time  of  the  sitting."

(d)  From  Dr.  Hodgson's  account  of  the  sittings  of  Dr.  A.  B.  Thaw  with
Mrs.  Piper,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiii.  p.  352.

Several  minor  prophecies  proved  correct ;  one  important  prophecy  concern-
ing the  success  of  certain  machines  was  wrong  as  to  time,  as  well  as  other
circumstances  connected  with  them  ;  but  another  concerning  the  death  of  a
brother,  who  was  never  present  at  a  sitting,  was  right.  This  brother  was  a


624  APPENDICES  [980  A

chronic  invalid  with  asthma.  At  the  sitting  of  May  loth,  1892,  Phinuit  said
that  his  kidneys  were  out  of  order,  and  it  was  discovered  for  the  first  time  that
he  had  kidney  disease  on  a  careful  medical  examination  made  two  weeks  later.
At  the  same  sitting  Phinuit  said  that  he  would  die  "  within  six  months  or  a
year,"  and,  in  reply  to  the  question  how,  said,  "  He's  going  to  sleep,  and  when
he  wakes  he'll  be  in  the  spirit.  Heart  will  stop."  On  May  22nd,  the  time  was
given  as  "  six  months  or  a  little  less."  He  died  in  sleep,'  of  heart  failure,  on  the
3rd  of  the  following  September.

980  A.  I  cited  in  858  A  a  case,  communicated  by  Dr.  Ermacora,
of  Padua,  of  foreknowledge  of  a  letter's  arrival  on  the  part  of  a  sensitive
well  known  to  him,  Signorina  Maria  Manzini,  the  knowledge  purporting
to  come  from  her  control,  "Elvira."  An  article  by  Dr.  Ermacora  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  235,  records  a  long  series  of  observations
made  by  him  with  the  same  sensitive,  and  two  other  precognitive  cases  of
hers — of  which  I  quote  one  below — are  given  in  vol.  xi.  pp.  466-476.
Dr.  Ermacora  was  not  able  to  decide  whether  "Elvira"  is  a  separate
entity,  or  merely  a  modification  of  the  medium's  own  mind.  There  is,
in  fact,  much  the  same  perplexity  as  in  the  case  of  Phinuit  and  Mrs.
Piper.

Whatever  Elvira  may  be,  she  possesses  certain  supernormal  powers
which  for  us  are  perhaps  the  more  instructive  in  that  their  scope  is  some-
what narrowly  limited.  Among  these  powers  Elvira  claims  precognition  ;
admittedly  on  what  may  be  termed  a  puny  scale,  and  dealing  with  trivial
matters,  but  nevertheless  involving  some  real  knowledge  of  the  coming
course  of  events,  and  of  the  part  which  human  actions,  apparently  free,
will  play  therein.  The  question  now  before  us  is  whether  Elvira's  ap-
parent foreknowledge  may  not  be  explained  as  inference  from  a  slightly
wider  knowledge  of  the  present,  combined  with  a  power  of  suggestion
exercised  not  only  upon  Maria  Manzini  herself  (which  on  any  hypothesis
is  obviously  probable),  but  even  upon  strangers.1  Dr.  Ermacora,  as  may
be  seen  from  his  full  report,  kept  these  points  in  mind;  and  his  con-
clusion was  that  Elvira  had  shown  some  foreknowledge  of  events,  paltry
indeed  in  themselves,  but  yet  such  as  suggestion  can  hardly  be  pressed
to  cover.  (See  the  incident  of  sale  of  pawn-tickets,  and  others,  in  Rivista
di  Studi  Psichid,  1895.)  The  question  will  then  be, — and  these  trivial
incidents  may  help  us  quite  as  well  as  more  important  ones  towards
its  solution, — whether  that  supernormal  knowledge  of  actually  existing
thoughts  and  things  with  which  Elvira  must  at  any  rate  be  credited  (see
858  A)  may  be  enough  to  suggest  by  mere  forward-looking  inference,—
itself  perhaps  supernormally  acute, — the  events  foretold  in  the  following
and  some  similar  cases.

1  Dr.  Ermacora  once  informed  me  that  Elvira  had  made  a  prediction  involving  a
mistake  to  be  made  by  Maria  in  cutting  out  some  garments,  and  then  withdrew  it,  as
not  wishing  that  Maria  should  thus  waste  the  stuff,  and  resolving  to  influence  her  not  to
make  the  mistake.  Elvira  herself,  therefore,  admits  that  she  can  influence  the  so-called
predictions  by  suggestions  of  her  own.


980A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  625

Dr.  Ermacora  writes  : —

Signorina  Maria  Manzini,  at  my  request,  kept  an  account  of  the  dreams
which  occurred  in  her  ordinary  sleep.  Some  were  remembered  spontaneously
in  the  morning  and  some  in  her  next  somnambulic  state.  In  the  latter  case  I
suggested  to  her  that  she  should  remember  and  record  them  after  waking.

I  think  the  following  case  was  remembered  in  somnambulism,  but  this  is
of  no  consequence,  because  Signorina  Maria,  following  my  advice,  recorded  not
only  the  date  of  dreams,  but  also  the  date  and  the  hour  when  she  wrote
them  down.  In  any  case  the  present  dream  was  recorded  before  its  fulfil-
ment.

This  is  what  I  find  in  the  record  of  Signorina  Maria's  dreams  : —

March  2"jth,  1894,  n  P.M.
"  Night  of  March  26th-2;th,  1894.

"  I  dreamt  that  the  door  bell  rang  on  the  S.  Pietro  side  of  the  house.1  I
went  to  open  and  found  a  tall  man  about  forty  years  old,  with  greyish
trousers  and  a  darker  overcoat.  He  was  very  polite,  and  asked  if  I  would
subscribe  to  the  issue  of  a  novel,  saying  that  afterwards  I  should  have  a
pair  of  earrings  as  a  prize.  I  said  no,  because  I  thought  it  was  an  impos-
ture."

I  did  not  read  the  account  of  this  dream  till  after  its  realisation,  but  am
perfectly  certain  that  Signorina  Maria  told  it  to  me  directly,  and  I  also  distinctly
recollect  that  when  Signorina  Maria  related  the  realisation  a  few  days  later, she
'said  I  ought  to  remember  her  preceding  dream ;  and  I  remember  also  that  I
not  only  recalled  it,  but  that  I  looked  at  once  at  the  record  to  see  if  it  had  been
written  down  according  to  rule.  I  found  that  it  was  correct,  and  that  it  agreed
with  the  viva  voce  story.  Besides,  though  Signorina  Maria  may  not  always  be
diligent  in  recording  dreams  she  hardly  remembers,  she  is  very  careful  to  put
the  exact  date,  and  is  therefore  quite  certain  that  the  dream  occurred  either  in
ihe  night  of  March  26th-27th,  or  at  most  (supposing  the  case  to  have  been
implicated  by  a  paramnesia  which  displaced  the  dream  in  time)  on  March
E7th,  at  9  P.M.  ;  about  which  time,  as  can  be  seen  from  my  journal  of  the
jomnambulic  experiments,  Signorina  Maria  was  in  somnambulism  in  my
presence.

On  the  evening  of  March  3ist,  i.e.  four  days  after  the  dream,  Signorina  M.
:old  me  that  on  that  day  about  3  P.M.  the  visit  of  which  she  had  dreamed  had
aken  place.  Everything  coincided;  the  entrance  of  the  person  by  the  door
Awards  S.  Pietro,  his  age,  his  insinuating  manners,  the  colour  of  his  trousers
ind  overcoat,  and  the  object  of  his  visit.

I  called  her  mother,  and  asked  her  to  describe  the  visit  with  all  possible
letails ;  meanwhile  I  took  the  following  notes :  "  The  person  came  twice ;  the
irst  time  about  n  A.M.,  when  Maria  was  out.  Signora  Annetta  (her  mother)
vas  alone  in  the  house.  The  visitor  had  very  pleasant  manners,  and  was  about
hirty-five  years  old  (Signorina  Maria  thought  forty).  He  had  a  box  covered
nth  black  cloth  with  him,  such  as  is  used  by  commercial  travellers.  He  said
te  came  to  show  them  a  novelty.  In  order  to  get  rid  of  him,  Signora  Annetta
aid  that  Signorina  Maria  was  not  at  home ;  he  replied  that  he  would  return,

,    l  Signorina  Maria's  house  has  two  doors,  one  in  the  Via  S.  Pietro,  and  the  other
urned  towards  the  river  Bacchiglione.
VOL.   H.  2  R


626  APPENDICES  [98<U

and  Signora  Annetta  told  him  to  come  at  2  P.M.  At  2  P.M.  he  returned  and
rang  at  the  door  on  the  S.  Pietro  side.  Signora  Annetta  opened  to  him,  and
says  that  when  he  entered  the  room  Maria  seemed  much  astonished  (Maria
said  at  once  that  she  was  astonished  at  recognising  him).  He  proposed  thai
they  should  subscribe  to  the  issue  of  a  novel ;  there  were  to  be  prizes  when  the
issue  was  finished  ;  two  pictures,  or  a  small  organ,  or  a  pair  of  earrings.  In
his  box  were  the  organ  and  an  alarum,  as  samples,  and  he  had  with  him,  but
not  in  the  box,  samples  of  the  earrings,  of  the  frames,  and  two  oleographs
between  pasteboards.

Luigia  Monti  and  Linda  Bigoni  were  also  present.  Maria  refused  the
offers.  When  they  and  the  man  were  gone,  Maria  remarked  with  surprise
that  she  had  already  dreamt  of  the  scene  with  all  its  details,  i.e.  as  far  as  the
man  was  concerned.  Signora  Annetta  added  that  from  girlhood  she  also  had
frequently  dreamed  of  coming  events.

March  $ist,  1894,9.30  P.M.  (written  in  the  presence  of  Annetta  and  Maria).
It  was  necessary  to  prove  two  things,  before  the  case  could  be  supposed  to  be
evidential.  First,  that  the  visit  was  real,  and  not  an  odd  hallucination  of  the
senses  or  memory,  and  secondly,  that  the  man  had  not  made  the  tour  of  Padua
offering  his  merchandise,  many  days  before  the  dream ;  in  which  case  Signorina
Maria  might  have  become  aware  of  it  in  some  way  or  other,  and  thus  have
originated  the  dream  herself.

In  order  to  clear  up  the  first  point,  I  went  on  the  following  day  (April  ist
about  6.30)  to  see  Signorina  Linda  Bigoni,  and  asked  her  to  tell  me  all  aboir
the  visit  at  which  she  had  been  present.  She  replied  that  she  had  gone  to  set
Maria  the  day  before,  about  2.30,  while  the  man  was  there,  and  she  confirmee
all  the  details  about  the  object  of  his  visit,  his  remarks,  the  things  he  had  wit!
him,  his  politeness,  his  age,  and  the  colour  of  his  clothes.  He  had  made  th<
same  proposition  to  her  as  to  Maria.  As  she  had  arrived  after  him,  she  coulc
not  say  by  which  door  he  had  entered  ;  but  she  said  he  had  left  before  her,  am
had  gone  out  by  the  kitchen  door,  towards  the  river.  On  being  questioned
she  replied  that  she  had  not  seen  Signorina  Maria  since  the  visit.  Before  leaving
her,  I  requested  her,  if  the  man  should  come  to  her  house,  or  if  she  shouh
meet  him  in  the  street,  to  ask  him  on  what  day  he  had  come  to  Padua;  whicl
she  promised  to  do.

The  same  evening  I  went  back  to  Signorina  Maria,  and  before  telling  he
of  my  talk  with  Signorina  Linda,  I  questioned  her  and  her  mother  again
Signorina  Maria  said  she  did  not  remember  by  which  door  the  man  ha<
gone  out,  or  rather,  she  had  paid  no  attention ;  but  her  mother  said  she  wa
certain  that  he  had  gone  out  by  the  kitchen  door,  because  he  had  seen  som
one  enter  that  way,  and  on  leaving  had  said  that  as  there  was  a  door  ther
also  he  would  go  out  by  it.  The  mother  did  not  know,  however,  whether  h
or  Signorina  Linda  B.  had  left  first,  but  Signorina  Maria  was  sure  he  ha
gone  away  first,  because  afterwards  she  had  continued  her  conversation  wit
Signorina  Linda  about  their  own  affairs,  and  this  conversation,  begun  befor
he  left,  had  prevented  her  noticing  by  which  door  he  quitted  the  house.

Both  then  said  they  remembered  Signorina  Linda  B.'s  coming  at  abou
2.30  while  the  man  was  there,  and  that  he  had  come  before  2  and  stayed  near!
an  hour.

Thus  all  the  testimony  is  in  accordance,  and  no  doubt  remains  that  th
event  with  all  its  details  really  happened.


)80A]  TO    CHAPTER    IX  627

On  the  evening  of  April  i8th,  Signorina  Maria  told  me  that  her  friend,
Mgnorina  Linda  B.,  had  something  to  tell  me,  but  in  order  to  keep  her  promise
,he  would  tell  it  only  to  me.  Signorina  Maria  said  that  Linda  B.  was  coming
o  see  her  on  the  morrow,  when  I  could  meet  her.

The  following  day  (April  iQth)  I  went  to  see  Signorina  Maria  at  the  time
ixed,  and  found  Linda  B.  at  the  house.  The  latter  told  me  she  had  met  the
nan  in  the  street ;  that  he  had  recognised  her  and  had  renewed  his  offer.  She
ook  advantage  of  this  to  ask  him  when  he  had  arrived  in  Padua,  and  he  said
ie  had  come  on  March  2pth,  and  that  he  had  not  visited  Padua  before  for
everal  years.

This  proves  that  the  dream  occurred  two  days  before  the  arrival  of  the
icrson  implicated,  and  that  consequently  it  could  not  have  resulted  from  a
icre  sensorial  impression  of  Signorina  Maria's.

Of  such  a  type  as  this — gradually  evolved,  slightly  inexact,  and
Itogether  trivial — are  all  the  predictions  given  through  Elvira.  I  do
ot  think,  however,  that  their  triviality  affords  in  itself  any  clear  in-
ication  as  to  their  origin.  They  are  the  attempts  of  an  intelligence
'hich,  whether  embodied  or  unembodied,  is  not  much  above  a  child's
ivel,  to  prove  a  fact  of  the  highest  importance — namely,  the  possibility
f  foreseeing  future  events.  In  comparison  with  the  value  of  the  result
lus  aimed  at,  the  actual  incidents  by  which  it  may  be  attained  matter
ttle.  It  is  of  greater  interest  to  have  a  pedlar's  visit  foretold,  if  only
lat  visit  could  not  have  been  foreseen  by  any  ordinary  intelligence,  than
)  have,  say,  a  death  foretold,  if  we  suspect  that  that  more  impressive
rophecy  may  have  helped  to  work  its  own  fulfilment.


INDEX


INDEX


BY  Miss  E.   M.   SAMSON


A.,  Miss,  automatic  writing  of,  ii.  160-1,  447-
457;  crystal-visions  of,  i.  237,  588-95,
ii.  210,  262  note,  449;  raps  in  presence
of,  ii.  160,  208.

— ,  Miss  (Dr.  Bramwell's  patient),  case  of,
i.  506-9,  513.

— ,  Miss  (Prof.  H.'s  case),  automatic  writing
by,  ii.  445.

— ,  Miss  (Rev.  J.  Feed's  patient),  clairvoy-
ance of,  i.  558-9.

— ,  Mr.,  automatic  writing  by,  ii.  122,  416-18.

— ,  Jeanne,  case  of,  i.  460.

Abdominal  pains,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  470.

"  Abercromby,  Blanche,"  case  of,  ii.  115  note,
231-4.

Abnormal  and  supernormal  contrasted,  ii.  85.

Aboulia,  i.  345,  347,  350.    _

Accident,  apparitions  at  time  of,   i.   253,  n.

Accouchement,  see  Childbirth.

Achille,  case  of,  i.  303-5.

"Across  the  Plains,"    quoted,  i.    91;    cited,

i.  126.
Adams,  Prof.,  experiments  by,  i.  532-3;  case

sent  to,  ii.  45-8.
Adare,  Lord  (Lord  Dunraven),  cited,  ii.  221,

533-4.  579,  581  note  l.
Adie,  Miss  C.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  323-5.

— ,  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  324-5.
"  Adrienne  "  (Lucie  3),  case  of,  i.  328-30.
"/Edoeology,"  cited,  ii.  576  note.
Aeschylus,  works  of,  i.  98.
After-images —

Ghosts  possibly  explicable  as,  ii.  4.
Memory-images       distinguished       from,

i.  567-9.
Nature  of,  i.  225.

Recall  of,  by  tuning-fork,  i.  587  note  z.
Veridical,  ii.  384.
Agassiz,  case  of,  i.  134.
Agnosticism  regarding  survival,  i.  i ;  ii.  296-7,

3°7-

Agoraphobia,  i.  42,  177,  466.
Aid6,  Hamilton,  cited,  ii.  579.
Akhurst,  W.  J.,  phantasm  of,  ii.  371-2.
Aksakoff,  Hon.  Alexander  N.,  cases  reported

by,    ii.     25,     170-1,    466-73,    493-5  ;

quoted,  ii.  178-82  ;  cited,  ii.  205,  555.
Albert,  case  of,  i.  129-30,  370.
Alcoholism,  see  Dipsomania.
Alexander,  Helen,  case  of,  i.  266-8.
,  Prof.  Alfred,  cases  reported  by,  i.  393-

394?  ii-  i56-9.  346-7»  353-4  <*nd  notes.


Alger,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  248  note.
Alice,  clairvoyant  diagnosis  by,  i.  486-7.
Allbright,  Mr.,  planchette  experiments  by,

ii.  146.

''  Alma,"  case  of,  i.  296.
"  Alt6rations    de    la    Personalite, "     quoted,

i-  333-
Alternating  personalities —

Change  of  faculty  in,  ii.  201.

Corporeal    and    incorporeal    state  of,   ii.

272.

Memory  in,  ii.  201.

Ambidexterity  in  relation  to  subliminal  men-
tation, i.  82,  84-5.

"  American  Journal  of  Psychology,"  cited,
i.  79  note,  576  and  note ;  ii.  95  note,
1 06.

Amnesia,  i.  61.
Ampere,  case  of,  i.  80.
Anaesthesia —

Hypnotic,  i.  470-1,  533-9 ;  systematised

(negative  hallucinations),  i.  190.
Hysteric, — unperceived  by  patient,  i.  44,
299  ;  injury  not  resultant  from,  i.  44,  47  ;
fanciful  areas  of,  i.  45-6,  164;  organic
disease  unnoticed  in,  i.  48;  nature  of,
i.  65 ;  in  a  case  of  "fugues,"  i.  299.
Self-suggested,  i.  533.
Subliminal  control  of,  i.  46;  ii.  516.
Anaesthetic  spots  in  witchcraft,  occurrence  of,

i.  4.
Anaesthetics —

Hypnotism  contrasted  with,  i.  179.

Pain     suppressed     by,    afterwards    felt,

i.  472-3.

Anagrams  by  table-tilting,  ii.  93-4.
Analgesia —

Hypnotic,  i.  179-82,  470-4.
Hysteric,  i.  65.
Subliminal  control  of,  ii.  516.
"  Anatomy  of  Sleep,"  cited,  ii.  348.
Andrew,  Mr.,  case  of,  ii.  556-8.
Ang61ique,  Soeur,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  199.
Angstneurose,  i.  465.

Angus,  Miss,  crystal-visions  of,  i.  237,  595-8.
Animals —

Apparition  perhaps  seen  by,  ii.  214  note.
Hypnotic  experiments  on,  i.  163,  441-3.
Phantasm  of,  i.  635.
Proximity  of,  sensibility  to,  i.  483-4.
Sense-organs  of,  i.  479-80.
Telepathy  between,  possibility  of,  i.  246
note.


631


632


INDEX


127  note3',


"  Animismus    und    Spiritismus,"    cited,     ii.

"  Annales    des    Sciences   Psychiques,"   cited,

ii.  136,  533,  671 ;  quoted,  ii.  411-13.
"  Annales      Medico- Pyschologiques,"      cited,

i.  339  note,  518  note.

"  Ann6e  Psychologique,  L',"  cited,  i.  106.
Anthropomorphism,  ii.  265.
Aphasia,  i.  53,  65.
Apparitions,  see  Hallucinations.
"  Apparitions     and    Thought- Transference,"

cited,    i.   224  note,   619  note;    quoted,

i.  619-22,  688-90.

"  Apparitions  de  Lourdes,  Les,"  cited,  i.  564.
Arago,  quoted,  i.  89.
"  Arcanes  de  la  vie  future  devoi!6s,"  cited,

"•  573-
"  Archives  de  M6decine,"  cited,

quoted,  i.  369-70.
"  Archives  de  Nevrologie,"  cited,  i.  339  note.
"  Archives  des  Sciences   Physiques  et   Natur-

elles,"  cited,  i.  565  note.
"  Archiv     fiir     Kriminal-Anthropologie     und

Kriminalistik,  cited,  i.  513.
"  Archiv  fur  Psychiatric,"  cited",  i.  645.
Arithmetical  prodigies,  i.  79-85,  116,  227.
Arnold,  J.  N.,  cited,  i.  313.
Arrival,    hallucinations    regarding,    i.    255-7,

272-4.
Art-
Emotional     memory     desirable    for,     ii.

138-9.

Symbolic  communication  by,  i.  101.
Artigalas,  Prof.,  case  reported  by,  i.  498.
Ascetism,  ii.  291,  309.
Ashburner,  Dr.,  quoted,  i.  557-8.
Assier,  M.  D',  cited,  ii.  ii.
Atkinson,   Miss   F.,  apparitions  seen  by,   ii.


Maj.    John,    apparition    seen  by,
ii.  336-8.
Attention —

Central    organic    perceptivity    stimulated

by  concentration  of,  i.  480.
Deafness  affected  by,  i.  474.
Hypnotic    influence    on,    i.    179,


469-70,  513.
Life


192-6,


>ife  maintained  by  subliminal,  i.  217-18.
Training  of,  i.  174,  183.
Aubrey,  A.,  case  of,  i.  474.
Audition —

Coloured,  i.  225,  566-7 ;  ii.  270.
Hallucinations    involving    visual    faculty
stronger    evidentially    than    those    in-
volving auditory,  i.  254  note.
Hyperaesthesia  of,  ii.  106.
Hypnotic  influence  on,  i.  184,  474-6.
Inward,  motor  element  in,  i.  102.
Non-acoustical,  i.  223,  274.
Shell-hearing,  i.  275.
Stimulation  of,  by  lights,  i.  587  note  2.
Transportation  of  sense  of,  i.  500.
Auguez,  Paul,  cited,  ii.  440.
Aura,  i.  485;  ii.  589.

"  Australian   Medical    Gazet.e,    The,"   cited,
i.  514.


Authority,  claims  of,  ii.  309.
"  Automatic  or  Spirit  Writing,
note  2.


cited,  ii.  461


Automatic  writing.     See   under   Motor  Auto-
matism.
"  Automatisme  Psychologique,  L',"  cited,    i.

322  and  note;  quoted,  i.  496-7.
Automatisms—

Highest-level  and  other  centres  active  in,

i.  74.

Motor,  see  Motor  Automatisms.
Sensory,  see  Sensory  Automatisms.
Aylesbury,  Com.  T.  W.,  apparition   seen  by,

i.  291,  687-8.

Ayre,  Capt.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  17.
Azam,  Dr.,  case  of  patient  of,  i.  333.

B,  case  of,  i.  501-2.

— ,  Mme.,  case  of,  see  LSonie.

— ,  Mile.,  case  of,  i.  510-11;  ii.  169-70.

— ,  Major  Lucius,  alleged  communications
from,  ii.  496-9.

— ,  Miss,  planchette  experiments  by,  ii.  146-7.

— ,  Miss  (Dr.  Bramwell's  patient),  case  of,
L  491.

— ,  Miss  (Mr.  Rawson's  subject),  experiments
with,  i.  614  seq.

— ,  Miss  (Mrs.  Sidgwick's  subject),  experi-
ments with,  i.  499,  538-9,  547,  549-52-

— ,  Mrs.,  apparitions  seen  oy,  n.  355-6.

— .  Mrs.,  phantasm  of,  ii.  61,  330-1.

— ,  Mrs.  (Mr.  Rawson's  subject),  experiments
by,  i.  614  seq.

— ,  A.,  clairvoyance  of,  i.  556-8.

— ,  S.  H.,  apparition  of,  i.  292-6.

Babylonian    inscription,    dream    regarding,  i.

375-9-

Bacchus,  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  34-6.
Backman,   Dr.   Alfred,  cases  recorded  by,  i.

197   and  note,    296,    497    and    note*,

554-5-

Bacon,  cited,  ii.  279.

"  Bad  tricks,"  cure  of,  i.  173,  175.

Badaire,  M.,  case  reported  by,  i.  521-3.

Bagot,  Mrs.,  dog  vision  of,  i.  635.

Baillarger,  cited,  i.  124,  569.

Baker,  Rachel,  case  of,  i.  204,  519  and  notes,

,  Wingfield,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  18.

Banshees,  i.  405-6.

Barcellos,  Dr.  Alfredo,  case  of,  ii.  156-9.

Bard,  Alfred,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  19,  66-7.

Barmby,  Rev.  J.,  case  sent  by,  ii.  343.

Barnby,  Sir  Joseph,  crystal-vision  cases  re-
ported by,  i.  590-1.

Baron,  Mr.  le,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  137.

Barrett,  Prof.  W.  F.,  cited,  i.  237,  480,  483,
600;  ii.  554,  579;  experiments  by,  i.
539;  case  sent  to,  ii.  156;  founder  of
s.P.R.,  ii.  224.

Barrington,    Hon.   Eric,  case  reported  by,  i.

594-
Barrows,  C.  M.,  cited,  i.  471.

,  Dr.  Ira,  quoted,  i.  354-60.

Earth,  E.  H.,  case  reported  by,  i.  546.
Beauchamp,  Miss,  case  of,  i.  62-3,  341,  344-

352;  ii.  140,  199.
Beaunis,   Prof.,  cited,  i.  476,  491  and  note1,

497>  5°2  an(t  note  2.
Beaumont,   Mrs.,  apparition   of,   i.  263,  640-

651.
Becher,  Gen.  Sir  Arthur,  apparition  seen  by,

ii.  68,  381-2.


I:


INDEX


633


"  Bedeutung     narcotischer     Mittel     fiir     den

Hypnotismus,  Die,"  cited,  i.  441.
Beetles,  hypnotic  experiments  on,  i.  163.
Belden,  L.  W.,  cited,  i.  524.
Bellamy,   Rev.  Arthur,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.

350-1-

Benedikt,  Prof.,  i.  490;  cited,  i.  514.
Bentivegni,  V.,  cited,  i.  514.
Bentley,  A.  J.,  case  recorded  by,  ii.  567.
Berchtold  case,  i.  514.
Beresford,  J.  H.  de  la  Poer,  apparition  of,  i.

268-9.

Bergson,  M.,  case  reported  by,  i.  477-9.
B6rillon,    Dr.    Edgar,    hypnotic    results    ob-

tained by,  i.  439,  459;  quoted,  i.  458;

cited,  i.  459,46o,  465  note  1,472,  513;

ii.  114.

Berjon,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  339  note.
Bernadette,  case  of,  i.  561-4.
Bernheim,    Dr.,  hypnotic  results  obtained  by,

i.  156,   161-2,  206,    438,  491  ;  cited,  i.

161-2,  170,    207,    439,   443,   459,   460,

462,  465,468,  514,  516,  540;  quoted,  i.

218.
Bertha,  Sister  (Bertha  Foertsch),   apparition

seen  by,  ii.  18,  376-7.
Bertrand,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  159,  486.

-  ,   Rev.  L.    J.,   trance   vision    of,    ii.    21,

322-3,  525.

"  Bibliotheca  Zoologica,"  cited,  i.  479  note.
Bickford-Smith,  Mrs.,  dreams  of,  i.  370-1.

—  ,   R.  A.  H.,  planchette  experiments  wit-

nessed by,  ii.  121-2.
Bidder,  case  of,  i.  80-  1,  84,  117.
Bigge,  Col.,  case  of,  i.  255-7.
Biggs,  Dr.,  experiments  by,  i.  193,  493-6.
Bilocation,  i.  230,  251,  263,  276.
Binet,    Prof.,   cited,     i.  79   note,    106—7,   477,

569  note  i  ;  quoted,  i.  329-30.
Binns,  Dr.,  case  reported  by,  ii.  348.
Biology,  experimental,  analogy  from,  i.  36.
Birchall,  James,   experiments  by,  i.  602  seq.,

613.
Bird,  Miss  (Mrs.  Bishop),  apparition  seen  by,

ii.  44.
Birth,  as  physiological   individuation,  ii.  511;

as  spiritual  individuation,  ii.  523.
Bishop,  Mrs.  (Miss  Bird),  apparition  seen  by,

ii.  44.
Blake,  Gorham,  case  of,  cited,  i.  260.

-  ,  William,  work  of,  criticised,  i.  73.
Blaney,  John,  apparition  of,  ii.  64-5.
Blavatsky,   Mme.,  ii.  302;  letters  to,  ii.  231;

inquiry  regarding,  ii.  501-2.
Blisters,  hypnotic  production  of,  i.  188,  193-4,

49",  493-9-  .

Blue  oedema  experiment,  i.  188,  498.
Blyth,  Benjamin  Hall,  case  of,  i.  81,  117.

—  ,  Edward  L.  J.,  case  of,  i.  81-3,  117.
Boeteau,  M.,  case  reported  by,  i.  61,  318-9.
Boissarie,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  562-4.

Bonatti,    Signer,    automatic  writing    by,    ii.

Booth,   Mordaunt   Gore,   apparition   seen   by,

ii.  63-5.
"  Borderland,"  cited,  i.  578.


Botanical  student,  case  of,   .  277.
"  Bottom   Facts    concerning    the    Science
Spiritualism,  The,"  cited,  ii.  503.


of


Bouffe",  cited,  i.  459.

Bourdon,    Dr.,   cited,  i.  459,    460,  472;  case

reported  by,  i.  518.
Bourne,  Ansel,  case  of,  i.  60,  309-17.

,  Canon,  apparition  of,  i.  260,  264.

,  Miss    Louisa,    apparition    seen    by,    i.

651-3.
,  Miss   Nina  M.,   apparition  seen  by,  i.

65 i-3-
Bourru,   Prof.,   cited,   i.   339    note,   341,   491,

497  note  2.
Boyle,  Miss,  case  reported  by,  i.  546.

,  R.  Vicary,  case  of,  i.  138-40.

Braid,  work  of,  i.  160  and  note*,  165,  488-90;
cited,   i.  438,  468,    471,    515  'and  note,
540.
Brain —

Concurrent   streams   of  intelligence  func-
tioning through,  i.  250-1.
Dextro-cerebral  capacity,  i.  84-5.
Highest-level    centres    in,    i.    74,    193-4,

198  ;  ii.  511.
Possession,   function  in  cases  of,  ii.  201,

254.

Spirit's  action  on,  ii.  522.
Substitution  of  functions  of,  i.  105.
Telepathic  communication  not  necessarily

transmitted  by,  ii.  195-6.
Unconscious    cerebration,    ii.    519    note;
Pierce's  explanation  of  subliminal  self
theory  by,  i.  12  note2.
Waves,  theory  of,  i.  245-6.
"Brain,"  cited,  i.  127    note*,  171  note,  440,

467;  quoted,  i.  506-9,  513.
Brainerd,  David,  alleged  communication  from,

ii.  457-8.

Bramwell,   Dr.  J.   Milne,   quoted,  i.  56,  166,
437-40,    441-2,     444~5>     463,    467-70,
473-6,488-9,  511,  512-13,  515-17,  540;
cited,  i.  160  note2,  171  note,   178,  196,
198,  338  note,  440,  462,  471;   ii.  541;
work  of,  i.  165,  194-5,  5°6-io.
Breuer,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  40,  50,  53-5,  299.
Brian,    Duppa,    vision     of    induction     of,    i.

592-3-
Briggs,    L.   Vernon,    communications    to,    ii.

244-5.

Brighten,  William  E.,  case  of,  i.  386-7.
"British    Medical    Journal,"    cited,    i.   472;

quoted,  i.  491.

Brook,  Lady,  cases  recorded  by,  ii.  454-6.
Brooke,  Sir  James,  cited,  i.  426.
Brooks,  Christopher,  case  of,  i.  402.
Brougham,  Lord,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  43.
Brown,  A.  J.,  case  of,  i.  309,  311-16.

,  D.,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  655.

Browne,  Miss,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  137.

,  Mrs.,  case  sent  by,  ii.  356-8.

,  Hugh  Junor,  case  reported  by,  ii.  172,

482-5.

Browning,  Robert,  cited,  ii.  579-80.
Buttemer,  R.  H.,  experiments  of,  ii.  432-4.
Bruce,  Dr.  Walter,  dream  of,   i.  143-4,  413-

4*5  5  ii-  55-

Buckley,  Major,  experiments  by,  i.  210,
556-8.

Buddhism,  ii.  286,  289-91.

"  Bulletin  de  1'Institut  Psychologique  Inter-
national," cited,  i.  474.


634


INDEX


"  Bulletins  de  la  Societe  de  Psychologic  Phy-

siologique,"  quoted,  i.  524-5;  cited,  i.

529.

Bundy,  Col.  J.  C.,  cited,  i.  360,  382-3.
Burguet,  Agnes,  case  of,  i.  485.
Burnier,   M.  Andr6,  alleged    communications

from,  ii.  143.

Burns,  hypnotic  effect  on,  i.  470.
Burot,  Prof.,  cited,  i.  339  and  note,  341,  491,

497  note2.
Burq,  i.  490.
Buxton,  case  of,  i.  80,  83.

C.  Mme.,  case  of,  i.  531-2.

—  Miss,  case  of,  ii.  210-11.

—  Mr.,  case  reported  by,  ii.  329-31.

—  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  692-3.

—  Mrs.   (Dr.    Bramwell's  subject),   case  of,

i.  463.

—  Mother,  case  attested  by,  i.  686.

—  Charlotte,    auditory    hallucination    of,    ii.

70-1.


Emily,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  230.

....    J      I.7    halluch
353-5-


Cabral,    Ulysses    J.   C.,    hallucination  of,  ii.


Caedmon,  work  of,  cited,  i.  135  note.

Cafe  au  lait,  dipsomania  of,  i.  461-2.

Cagliostro,  ii.  133.

Cahagnet,  case  of  subjects  of,  i.  278;  ii.
191,  220,  573-8.

Calculating  boys,  i.  79-85,  116,  227.

Calculations  involved  in  post-hypnotic  sug-
gestions, i.  502-10.

Campbell,  General,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  65.

,  Hon.  Dr.,  case  of,  i.  543-6.

,  Miss  Catherine  M.,  apparition  seen  by,

ii.  396;  experiments  by,  i.  632-4;  ii.

63-

Camuset,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  339  note.
Cancer,  phobic  of,  i.  467.
Capua,  Arturo  de,    communications  from,  ii.

481-2.
Carlisle,    Bishop    of,    case    reported    by,    ii.

56-7.

Carpenter,  Dr.,  cited,  ii.  519  note,  581  note1.
Carroll,  James,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  272-3.
Carzetti,  Isabella,  ii.  459.
Cass    Davis     House,    visions    regarding,     i.

668-71.
Catalepsy-
Secondary  personality  in  connection  with,

'•  33§-

Shock  inducing,  i.  163.
"  Cataplexie  und  der  thierische  Hypnotismus,

Die,"  cited,  i.  442.

Cavalli,  V.,  communications  to,  ii.  482.
Celestine,  case  of,  i.  49.
Cellular  focus,  i.  35  and  note.
Central  organs  of  perception —
Education  of,  i.  188-92.
Potential  sensibility  of,  i.  482.
Cerebration,  see  under  Brain.
Cervello,  Dr.   Niccolo,  case  of  patient  of,   i.

500  and  note,  520.
Cevennes,  martyrs  of  the,  ii.  200.
Chabaneix,  Dr.  Paul,  cited,  i.  89  and  note.
Chambers,  Dr.  Robert,  cited,  ii.  579.
Character,    hypnotic     influence    on,     i.    192,
198-202.


Charcot,  Prof.,  case  of  patient  of,  i.  130-1
331;  three  stages  theory  of,  i.  161,  197,
437,  439>  4.47-8;  methods  of,  i.  i-j2
note,  490;  ii.  311 ;  experiment  by,  i
188,  497-8.

Charity  Organisation  Society,  analogy  from
ii.  206-7.

Charms,  i.  211,  559-61 ;  ii.  310.

Chattock,  Dr.  C.  G.,  cited,  i.  460.

Chaumontet,  Jean,  alleged  communication
from,  ii.  143.

Chemical  reactions,  sensibility  to,  i.  483.


Chess,  analogy  from,  i.  93-4,  96.
Childbirth,     hypnotism    during


472;


245-7,    593.


subsequent  recollection,  i.  181.
Childhood,  i.  119.
Children-
Communications    from,    ii.

621-2.
Hypnotic  susceptibility  of,  i.  439,  443-4,

458.

Phantasms  of,  ii.  335,  373.
Terrors  of,  i.  41.
China,    beliefs    regarding    demon

in,  ii.  198-200,  500-1.
Christian  Science,  i.  167,  212-13;  "•  3lr~12-
Christianity,  i.  2,  280-3,  286,  288,  294-7.
"  Christlichc  Mystik,"  cited,  i.  493.
Ciliary  spasm,  effects  of,  i.  133,  479.
Circles,  system  of,  ii.  570.
Clairvoyance  (see  also  Telaesthesia) —
A.,  Miss,  case  of,  ii.  451.
Automatic  messages  due  to,  ii.  235.
Cases  of  so-called,  otherwise  explained,

477-8.

Children,  in,  ii.  335-6.
Cornea-reading  versus,  i.  185.
Dixon,  Miss  Eliza,  case  of,  i.  543-6.
Dowsers,  of,  i.  481.
Dying,  of  the,  ii.  31.
Fits,  after,  i.  362.
Genius  a  kind  of,  ii.  282.
Grant,  Cameron,  case  of,  ii.  369.
Hypnotic  production  of,  i.  555-^6.
Hysteria,  in,  i.  353-4,  357-9.
Inadequacy  of  term,  i.  136.
Joan  of  Arc,  case  of,  ii.  102,  404.
Medical —
Automatic     script    communicating,    ii.

450,  454,  457.
Mode  of,  i.  484-7 ;  ii.  268.
Spirits,    by,    ii.    174-6   (premonitory),

604,  610,  622,  624.
Trance,  in,  ii.  564.
Paralysis  from  cold,  during,  ii.  323.
Socrates,  case  of,  ii.  96,  99.
Somnambulism,  during,  i.  520-4.
Telepathic,  ii.  197,  518,  525.
Travelling-
Cases  of,  i.  197,  553-9;  ii.  217,  551.
Dreams,  likeness  to,  i.  279.
Ecstasy  an  extension  of,  ii.  210,  259.
Hypnotic  suggestion  starting,  i.  278.
Nature  of,  i.  230-1,  250,  275,  278-9.
Savages,  among,  ii.  200  note,  283.
Sleep,  during,  ii.  193.
Clark,  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  371-2.
Clarke,  Dr.,  phantasm  of,  ii.  247.
,  M.  W.,  case  sent  by,  ii.  343-4.


INDEX


635


Claustrophobia,  i.  177.

"Clelia"  case,  ii.  122,  140,  416-18.

Clerke,    Mrs.,    apparition    seen    by,    i.    268,

269 ;  ii.  68,  386-7.
Clifford,  quoted,  ii.  297.
Cobbe,  Miss,  cited,  ii.  31.
Coe,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  apparition  of,  i.  656-7.
Colburn,  case  of,  i.  80,  83,  84.
Coleman,  W.  E.,  cited,  i.  632.
Coleridge,  Hartley,  genius  of,  i.  75.

,  S.  T.,  case  of,  i.  135.

Collingwood,  J.  F.,  quoted,  ii.  528  note.

Colonial  animals,  analogy  from,  i.  38.

Colt,   Capt.   G.   F.    Russell,   apparition  seen

by,  ii.  44,  348-50.

,  Lieut.  Oliver,  phantasm  of,  ii.  349-50.

Compact-cases  of  post-mortem  appearance,  i.


291;  11.  42-5,  49-51,  350.
"Comptes      Rendus      de     la      Societe


de


Biologie,"  cited,  i.  497  note'2.
Condillac,  cited,  i.  89.
"Confessions  of  a  Medium,"  cited,  ii.  503.
Confinements,  see  Childbirth.
Congenital    moral    deficiency,    hypnotic    in-
fluence on,  i.  199-200.
—  irradiations  of  sensitivity,  i.  225.
Conley,    Elizabeth,  vision  seen  by,  ii.  37-40,

210.
Consciousness —

Central,  different  from  minor  conscious-
nesses, i.  37-8.
Complexity    and    memory    characteristic

of,  i.  36-7.
Concurrent,  ii.  519.
Dogs,  of,  discussed,  i.  36-7.
Double,  see  Secondary  personality.
Ethical  and  legal  view  of,  i.  37.
Hysteria  a  contraction  of,  i.  19,  22,  44.
Mind,  relation  to,  i.  37.
Specialisation  of,  ii.  509.
Spectrum  of —
Nature  of,  ii.  509.
Sleep  an  intensifier  of,  i.  21.
Solar  spectrum,  analogous  to,  i.  17-18,

76,  78  ;  ii.  506.
Unfamiliar         cerebral          combinations

attended  by,  i.  39.
Unity  of,  i.  58.
Unreliability  of,  i.  13.
Will  in  the  making, "ii.  518.
Continuity —

Subliminal  mentation,  of,  ii.  131.
Theories,  in,  necessity  of,  ii.  2,  251,  281.
Universe,  of  tiie,  i.  231,  242;   hierarchy

of  intelligences  inferred  from,  ii.  265.
Conversions,  i.  56,  126-7,  !75»  2O2>  3IO«
Conway,  experiments  on,  i.  541.
Coomes,  Dr.  M.  F.,  cited,  i.  495.
Cooper,  Alfred,  case  reported  by,  i.  142-3.

— ,  Job,  case  of,  i.  519.
Cope,  C.  H.,  case  reported  by,  ii.  32-3.
Coppinger,  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  334.
Cornea-reading,  i.  185,  477.
Cosmic    phenomena,    continuity    in,    i.    231,
242  ;     hierarchy    of    intelligences    in-
ferred from,  ii.  265.
Cosmical,  as  distinct  from  planetary —
Evolution,  i.  94-6;  ii.  279.
Heredity,  ii.  267.


Cosmical,    as    distinct    from    planetary — con-
tinued.

Life  coexistent,  i.  151,  155.
Science,  ii.  308.
Self,  ii.  273.
Cosmical    faculties,   terrene  faculties    derived

from,  i.  488.
Cosmotheorus,     assumptions     regarding,     ii.

298,  301.

Cox,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  18.
,   Serjeant,  ii.    224 ;    cited,    i.   523  ;    ii.

Cranial  bones,  separation  of,  ii.  563,  565.
Crans.  Mrs.  N.  J.,  vision  of,  ii.  374-5.
Crawford,  Earl  of  (Lord  Lindsay),  cited,  ii.

,   533-4,579,581.
Crealock,  Col.,  case  of,  cited,  n.  67.
Creed,  Dr.  J.  M.,  cited,  i.  514.
Crewdson,     Edward,     case     reported    by,    i.

397-8-

Crimes,  hypnotic,  question  of,  i.  198,  513-17-
Crises  (other  than  death) —

Hallucinations    in     connection     with,     i.
253,    270-1,    279,    281,    287,   291;    ii.

43-4-

Subliminal  uprush  in  cases  of,  i.  77.
Crocker,    Dr.    H.    Radcliffe,    cited,    ii.    529

note.

Crookes,  Sir  William,  pioneer  work  of,  i.  6  ;
ii.  224 ;  observations  of,  i.  32 ;  cited,
i.  245;  ii.  141,  221-2,  533,  536,  541
and  note,  554-5,  579,  581.
"  Croonian  Lectures  on  Evolution  and  Dis-
solution of  the  Nervous  System,  The,"
cited,  i.  317  note.

Cryptomnesia,  ii.  124,  136,  140,  161.
Crystal  visions —

A.,  Miss,  case  of,  ii.  449.

Appropriateness  of,  ii.  517-18.

Brightness  of  light  in,  i.  589.

Content  of,  i.  241

Distortion,  reflection,  &c.,  in,  i.  576.

Extended  range  of  ordinary  sight  in,    i.

Goodrich-Freer,    Miss,    case    of,   i.    134,
576-8,  586-8.

Grant,  Cameron,  case  of,  ii.  368-9.

Haunting    phenomena    analogous   to,    ii.
76.

Hypnotism,    in,    i.     578-84 ;     post-hyp-
notic, i.  240.

Magnifying  glass   in,  results  of,   i.  576,
589.

Method    and    nature   of,   i.   230,    237-9,
276.

Precogmtive,  i.  591.

Retrocognitive,  i.  592-8.

Subliminal  memory  evinced  in,  i.  132.

Symbolic  character  of,  i.  276.

Synaesthesia  in,  i.  279.

Telaesthesia  in,  i.  275.

Time-relations  in,  i.  246.

Universality  of,  i.  574-5.

Veridicality  of,  i.  240.

Verrall,  Mrs.,  case  of,  i.  584-6.

Visualisation  in,  i.  588.
Crystals,  analogy  from,  i.  235  note.
Cullerre,  Dr.,  quoted,  i.  476.
Ctirel,  M.  de,  method  of,  cited,  i.  106-7.


636


INDEX


Cutaneous    sensibility,  hypnotic   effect  on,  i.

Cuvier,  cited,  i.  206.

Cyanosis,  hypnotic  production  of,  i.  498.

D.,  Mme.,  case  of,  i.  130  and  note2,  529-30.

— ,  Mr.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  52-5,  330-1.

— ,  Mr.,  phantasm  of,  ii.  384-5.

— ,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  17.

— ,  C.,  communications  to,  ii.  450,  454-6.

Dailey,   Judge  Abram  H.,  case  recorded  by,

i.  352.

Damodar,  letters  to,  ii.  231.
Danvers,  Miss,  apparitions  of,  i.  695-6.
Dariex,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  533.
Darkness,  visions  in,  i.  239,  281.
Dase  (Dahse),  case  of,  i.  80,  83,  117-19.
Daumer,  Prof.,  case  reported  by,  i.  524.
Dauntesey,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.

399-

Davenport,  Reuben  Briggs,  cited,  ii.  503.

Davey,  Dr.,  case  reported  by,  i.  134,  372-3.

,  S.  J.,  cited,  i.  646;  ii.  502.

Davies,   Mrs.,    auditory    hallucination    of,  ii.
365-6.

Davis,  Andrew  Jackson,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  117.

,  William  W.,  case  reported  by,  ii.  46-8.

Dawson,  Ellen,  case  of,  i.  546.

Day-dreaming  habit,  i.  106.

Dazzling,  hypnotisation  by  means  of,  i.  165.

Dead,  the,  see  Discarnate  spirits.

Deafness,  hypnotic  influence  on,  i.  184,  474.

Dear,  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  376.

Death-
Apparitions  at  or  near  time  of,  i.  252-3,
268-9,  283-6,  572-4,  643-5,  666-7,
675-8 ;  ii.  271,  283,  358 ;  statistics  of
time-relations  in,  ii.  14  and  note ;  com-
pact cases,  i.  291;  ii.  42-5,  49-51,  236,

35°-

Automatic  writing  announcing,  ii.  169-
171,  230.

Averted  by  hypnotic  change  of  person-
ality, i.  331.

Clairvoyance  at  the  time  of,  ii.  31.

Conditions  of,  taken  on  in  mediumistic
trance,  ii.  220.

Dream  of,  ii.  18.

Nature  of,  ii.  512,  524.

Phantasms  after,  see  Discarnate  spirits —
Apparitions.

Prevision  of,  i.  400-5,  410-13 ;  ii.  153,
248  and  note,  270,  33476,  441,  622-4;
by  discarnate  spirits,  ii.  26-7,  30-1,
174,  176,  489-93,  559-6o.

Telekmetic  phenomena  in  connection
with,  ii.  503.

Transitional  state  of  consciousness  im-
mediately after,  ii.  20,  51,  61.

Visions  of,  clairvoyantly  perceived  in
dream  or  waking  state,  i.  137,  139,
143,  401,  410-15,  425.

"  Death-Blow  to  Spiritualism,"  cited,  ii.  503.
"  De  la  suggestion  et  de  ses  applications  a  la

pedagogic,"  cited,  i.  459.
"  De    la  suggestion     et    du    somnambulisme
dans  leurs  Rapports  avec  la  Jurisprud-
ence et  la  M6decine  Le"gale,"  cited,  i.


"De    la  suggestion  men  tale,"   cited,    i.   339

note.
"De  1'Automatisme  de  la  M6moire,"  quoted,

i.  306-7.

"  De  1'Intelligence,"  cited,  i.  127  note2.
Dee,  Dr.  John,  shew-stone  of,  i.  237,  575.
Delboeuf,    Prof.,   dream  of,  i.   132 ;    cases  of

patients  of,  i.   182,  470-1,  506;    cited,

i.  472,  514.

"  Delire  du  toucher,"  i.  467-8.
Delirium    tremens,    suggestibility    developed

during  recovery  from,  i.  162.
"  Demon   Possession    and    Allied    Themes,"

cited,  ii.  500-1.
Demoniacal    possession,    i.   303-5  ;    Chinese,

ii.  198-200,  500  i.
Demons,    Sorting,    of    Prof.     Maxwell,     ii.

53'-4-

Dent,  Mrs.,  case  reported  by,  i.  652.
Dentistry —

Hypnotic  analgesia,  under,  i.  471.

Pain  of,  suppressed  by  gas  and  felt  later,


Deolinda,  phantasm  of,  ii.  353-4.

"  Des  Etats  Seconds,"  cited,  i.  473.

"  Des  Indes  a  la  planete  Mars,"  ii.  130  seg.  ;

cited,  ii.  95  note,
Despard,    Miss     R.    C.,    experiments  by,  i.

632-4.
Despine,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  445,  485,  500.

,  Dr.  Prosper,  case  reported  by,  i.  192.

Dessoir,  Max,  cited,  i.  601  note.

Devan,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  305.

Devils,  belief  in  possession  by,  i.  303-5;  ii.

198-200  ;  non-existence  of,  ii.  203.
Dextro-cerebral  capacity,  i.  84-5.
Diagram-transference,    cases    of,    i.    602-12,

614-18,     622-8,     633-4 ;     motor     and

sensory  elements  in,  ii.  144.
Diamanti,  case  of,  i.  79  note.
Dickens,  Miss,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  258-9.

,  Charles,  work  of,  cited,  i.  106.

Dickinson,  James,  i.  675-8.

Dignity,  demand  for,  ii.  258;   possibility  of,

in  confusion  of    discarnate  spirits,   ii.

276.
Dignowity,    Karl,    dream    and    vision    of,   i.

433-4-

Diplopia  resulting  from  ciliary  spasm,  i.  474.
Dipsomania —

Cafe  au  lait,  of,  i.  461-2.
Fraud  contrasted  with,  i.  201 .
Hallucinations  of,  i.  228,  232,  235.
Hypnotic  cures  of,  i.  176,  462-3.
Discarnate  spirits —

Activities  of,  ii.  274.
Apparitions  of —
Animals     perhaps     influenced    by,    ii.

214  note.

Cases    of,    i.    286,  424-36 ;   ii.   60-76,
323-39,      342-4,     348-56,      359-61,
375-6,  380-7,  389-99.
Collective,  ii.  62-3,  69-71.
Compact-cases,  i.  291 ;  ii.  42-5,  49-51,

350.
Continuous  series,   in,  from    those    of

the  living,  i.  9.
Evidential  tests  of,  ii.  10-13.
Local  and  personal,  ii.  60-76,  384.


INDEX


637


Discarnate  spirits — continued.
Nature  of,  ii.  197.
News    of    death,    coincident    with,     ii.

56-8.
Repeated    appearances,    ii.    17,    21-5,

61.
Attitude  towards,    suggested,    ii.    303-4,

309.

Books  accessible  to,  ii.  591-2.
Communications  from,    i.    246,    248 ;    ii.

119,  142-3,  153-84.
Confused   state  of,    following    death,    ii.

29,  51,61.

Corpse,     knowledge     of     state     of,     in-
dicated by,  ii.  27-31,  51-6.
Death    ^conditions     of,      reproduced     in

mediumistic  trance,  ii.  220.
Ghost,  definitions  of,  ii.  2-4.
Group  of,  desiring  enlightenment  of

mankind,  ii.  234-5.
Literary  impulse   possibly   displayed   by,

ii  140.

Memory  of   terrene   affairs   indicated  by,
ii.    36-42,   45-8;    continued  knowledge
of  terrene  affairs  indicated  by,  ii.  26.
Spirit-world     knowledge     indicated    by,

ii.  27-36.

Supplications  to,  11.  311-13.
Telepathy    from,    i.   25-6,    246,   248;    ii.

142-3.
Theology  and  religion,  attitude  towards,

ii.  78-9,  133,  287,  308.
"  Diseases  of  the  Skin  "  (Crocker),  cited,  ii.

539  note.
"Diseases  of    the  Skin"    (Hyde),   cited,  ii.

528  note.

Dissolution  and  Evolution  contrasted,  ii.  85.
Divining  rod,  i.  480-1.
Dixey,  W.  A.,  experiments  by,  i.  577-8.
Dixon,  Miss  Eliza,  case  of,  i.  543-6.
— ,  Miss  Martha,  case  of,  i.  543-6.
Dobbie,  A.  W.,   case  of  clairvoyant  patients

of,  i.  278,  543-6.
Dodson,    Miss    L.,    apparition    seen    by,    ii.

32-3.

Dogmatism,  decline  of,  ii.  307-9.
Dolbear,  A.  E.,  dream  of,  i.  434-6.
Dorez,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  518.

Double    consciousness,    see    Secondary    per-
sonality.

Dowsers,  i.  480-1.
Dozous,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  563-4.
Dramatic    creation,   hysterical   idee  obsidante

analogous  to,  i.  107.
Dramatic    faculty,   hypnotic  improvement  of,

i.  510-11.
Dreams  (see  also  Sleep) —

Acuteness  of  senses  in,  i.  125-6.
Apparition  seen  in,  i.  682-5.
Control  of,  i.  125,  126.
Consciousness  caused  by,  i.  126-7.
Death,  of,  ii.  18.

Hallucination  reached  by,  i.  226-7.
Hypermnesia,  i.  131-2 ;  ii.  524.
Hypnotic     suggestions     remembered    in,

i.  129-30.

Insane  fit  started  by,  i.  127.
Letters,   contents  of,   apprehended  in,  i.
392-4.


Dreams — contin  ued.

Lost  objects,  of,  i.  370-2,  379-81.
Manzini,     Signora     Maria,     case    of,    ii.

625-7.
Memory  in —

Capricious  nature  of,  ii.  201.
Circumspective,  i.  131-2.
Ecmnesic  periods,  of,  i.  130-1.
Hypnotic     memory,      relation    to,     i.

128-30.

Pain,  of,  after  operation  under  chloro-
form, i.  181,  472-3.
Primary    personality,    of,    in    cases    of

secondary,  i.  338.
Supraliminally     known    but    forgotten

facts,  of,  i.  132.
Supraliminally     unapprehended     facts,

of,  i.  132-3.

Memory  of,  under  hypnotism,  i.  37,  512.
Music,  of,  i.  369.
Nature  of,  i.  58,  66;  ii.  512,  524.
Objectivation  of  types  in,  i.  126.
Pierce's      identification     of      dream-con-
sciousness    with     primary     conscious-
ness, i.  12  note  2.
Precognitive,  i.    142-3,  400-13  ;    ii.   271,

524.

Problems  solved  in,  i.  372-5.
Request  received  in,  ii.  347.
Recriprocal,  i.  417,  419-21.
Self-suggestion  in,  i.  127-8,  369.
Somnambulisms  starting  from,  i.  203-4.
Stevenson,  R.  L.,  case  of,  i.  91,  303;  ii.

144.

Storie,  Mrs.,  case  of,  see  Storie.
Supernormal,  i.  135-50.
Surprising  answers  in,  ii.  121.
Telaesthesia  in,  i.  275,  279.
Transitional,  following  death,  it.  20.
Veridical,  ii.  356-8,  370.
Vision  of,  non-optical,  i.  223.
Visualisation  in,  i.  229.
Visualised  forms  of,  persisting,  i.  125.
Waking  (imagination  images),  i.  226.
"  Dreams  of  a  Spirit  Seer,"  cited,  ii.  569-70.
Drewry,  Dr.  William  F.,  case  of  patient  of,

i.  61,  319-21.
Driesen,    Baron    Basil    von,    apparition    seen

by,  ii.  40-2.

Drink,  case  of  incapacity  to,  1.55.
Drugs —

Sealed  tubes,  in,  effect  of,  i.  488-9.
Sensibility  to  certain  kinds  of,  i.  483.
Drunkenness,  see  Dipsomania.
"  Du  De"mon  de  Socrate,"  cited,  ii.  95  note*.
"  Du    Magnetisme    Animale,"    cited,    i.    11


159

note.

"  Du  Magnetisme  en  France,"  cited,  i.  486.
Du  Porel,  cited,  i.  58  note.
"  Du    Sommeil    et    des    Etats    Analogues,"

cited,  i.  513.
"  Du   Sommeil,   des    reves,   et    du    somnam-

bulisme,"  cited,  i.  522  note  !.
Dufay,  Dr.,   case  of  patients  of,  i.   133,  195,

476,    510-12,     531-2;     cases    reported

by,  i.  204,  521.

Dufour,  M.,  quoted,  i.  518  and  note.
Dumontpallier,  cited,  i.  472.
Dunn,  Edmund,  apparition  of,  i.  282-4.


638


INDEX


Dunraven,  Lord,  cited,  ii.  222,  579.

,  (Lord  Adare),  cited,  ii.  221,  533-4,

579,  581  note\
Dupotet,  Baron,  i.  546.
Durand,  cited,  i.  472,  500.
Dusart,  Dr.,  experiments  by,  i.  530.
Dussand,  cited,  i.  474.
Duty,  conceptions  of,  ii.  304,  308-9.
Duvanel,  M.,  case  of,  ii.  170-1,  467-71.
Dyce,  Dr.,  case  of  patients  of,  i.  305-6.
Dyne,  J.  B.,  case  reported  by,  i.  285.
Dynamogeny —

Hypnotic,  see  under  Hypnotism.

Inhibition  involving,  ii.  86.

Nature  of,  i.  587  note*.

Supernormal    faculty    following    on    sug-
gested, i.  487.
Dynamometer,  experiments  with,  i.  49;  11.  90,

205,  530.
Dysphagia,  hysterical,  i,  331-3.

"  E.,"  control  by,  ii.  240,  477,  601.

E.,  Mile.  A.,  case  of,  i.  497.

— ,  C.  J.,  case  of,  i.  372-3.

— ,  Miss    C.    J.    E.,    apparition  seen  by,   i.

261-2.

— ,  Miss  K.,  apparition  of,  i.  261-2.
— ,  Mrs.,  phantasm  of,  ii.  336-8.
— ,  Mrs.    (Dr.  Fahnestock's   subject),    clair-
voyance of,  i.  556.
Eat,  hysterical  inability  to,  i.  331-3.
Ecchympsis,  hypnotic  production  of,  i.  491.
Ecmnesia —

Dream  memory  of  periods  of,  i.  130.
Nature  of,  ii.  201,  267.
Temporary  and  permanent,  ii.  192.
Viv6,  Louis,  case  of,  i.  62-3,  338-43.
Ecstasy-
Alleged,  ii.  220.
Family  circles,  in,  ii.  209,  524.
Leonore,  case  of.  i.  326.
Nature  of,  ii.  194-5,  259-62*  524,  572.
Piper,  Mrs.,  case  of,  ii.  250.
Possession     sometimes    indistinguishable

from,  ii.  210.

Skilton,  J.  W.,  case  of,  ii.  571-2.
Socrates,  case  of,  ii.  99.
Ectoplasia,  ii.  529.  541,  544-9.
Eczema,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  470,  471.
"  Edinburgh  Medical   and  Surgical  Journal,"

cited,  i.  667  note  \
"  Edinburgh     Philosophical      Transactions "

(1882),  quoted,  i.  305-6.
Edmonds,  Judge,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  117.
Education —

Aim  of,  i.  183.

Check  and  stimulus  in,  i.  173-5.
Hypnotism  and  aid  to,  i.  183,  196,  458-9.
Edwards,  Miss,  experiments  with,  i.  542,  603

seq.
Eeden,  van,  cited,  i.  439,  459,  460,  462,  464,

465,  471.
Eglinton,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  224.

,  Mr.,  experiment  by,  i.  553-4.

"  Eimge  therapeutische  Versuche  mit  dem
Hypnotismus  bei  Geisterkranken,"
cited,  i.  462.

«Electricit6  Animate,"  cited,  i.  485,  500,
523>  539


Electricity-
Flowers  emitting  light  of  the  nature  of,

«•  539'

Raps  explained  as  produced  by,  ii.  537.
Elgee,    Mrs.,    apparition  seen  by,   i.   289-90

and  note.

Elliotson,   Dr.,  case  recorded  by,    134;  mes-
meric hospital  of,  i.  157;  cited,  i.  207,
309,  372,  477,  489,  543,  ii.  515  ;  quoted,
i.  305-6,  308,  321-2.
Ellis,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  17.
Elliott,  Mrs.  E.  K.,  case  of,  ii.  411.

,  Rev.    E.    K.,    veridical    dream    of,   ii.

370.

,  S.  B.,  cited,  ii.  516  note.

Elvira  control,  ii.  446-7,  624-7.
Emergency,  see  Crises.
Emotion,  mental  reaction  in,  ii.  511.
Energy-
Conservation  of,  ii.  301,  510,  530,  542.
Environment  of,  i.  215.
Ghost  defined  as  manifestation   of    per-
sistent personal,  ii.  4.
Mania,  in,  ii.  529.

Spirit  manipulation  of,  ii.  542,  545-9.
Supraliminal  output  of,  ii.  514.
Ultimate     source     of,     problem     of,     i.

216-18.

Entencephalic  sensitivity,  i.  124,  225.
Enthusiasts,  i.  56-7.
Enuresis  nocturna   cured    by    hypnotism,    i.

459-
Environment,    material,    etheric,    spiritual,  i.

95-6>  215-19.

Ephesus,  stone  at,  analogy  from,  ii.  307.
Epilepsy —

Automatism  likely  to  resemble  effects  of,

ii.  84.
Criminal    propensities    of    post-epileptic

states,  i.  308-9.
Hallucination  in,  i.  228.
Hystero-epilepsy,  ii.  422-3.
Multiplex  personality  in  connection  with,

i.  339.

Post-epileptic  states,  i.  60-1,  73,  308-15.
Epistaxis,  hypnotic  production  of,  i.  491.
"  Erfolge  des    therapeutischen    Hypnotismus

in  der  Landpraxis,"  cited,  i.  462,  465.
Ermacora,    Dr.   G.    B.,   cited,  i.   671  ;    cases

reported  by,  ii.  159-60.  446-7,  624-7.
Esdaile,    cited,    i.    65-6,  470,    484,   543;    ii.
515  ;  quoted,  i.  438;   work  of,  i.   160,
177,  207.

,  W.  E.,  dream  regarding,  i.  382-5.

Espie,  Mr.,  apparition  of,  i.  270-1.

"  Essay  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man,"

quoted,  i.  10.
Estelle  (Dr.    Despine's    patient),   case  of,  i.

445  ;  control,  ii.  452-3.
Estrade,  J.  B.,  cited,  i.  "564.
"  DEtat  Mental  des  Hysteriques^  quoted,  i-

43.  49-
Ether  (see  also  Light) —

Discarnate  spirits  in  relation  to,  ii.  142,

299.

Environment  of,  i.  215  ;  ii.  298.
Matter  in  relation  to,  ii.  209.
Telepathy    perhaps    transmitted    by,    i.

245-6;  ii.  141,  195.


INDEX


639


Ethical  aspect  of  post-mortem    evidence,   ii.

78-9.
"Etude  Scientifique    sur    Somnambulisme,"

cited,  i.  500.

Eugenics,  i.  235 ;  ii.  516,  543.
Eugenie,  clairvoyant  diagnosis  by,  i.  486.
Evens,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  18.
Evidence —

Falsification    of,    attributable    to  sugges-
tion, i.  514.

Telepathy,  for,  criticism  of,  i.  636-46.
Evidential  quality  of  automatic  messages,  ii.

235-6.

Evil,  ii.  287,  301.
Evolution —

By-products  of,  so-called,  i.  94-7.
Cosmical  v.  planetary,  i.  94-6.
Dissolutive     and     evolutive     contrasted,

ii.  85.

Human  and  other,  contrasted,  i.  76.
Material  and  transcendental  environment,

in  relation  to,  ii.  269.
Ordinary  view  of,  i.  118.
Perturbation   masking,   i.   21,  56,  93;   ii.

86.

Religion,  of,  ii.  306.
Spiritual,  ii.  281,  290.
Thesis  of,   drawn  from  spirit  communi-
cations, ii.  257.
Exeter,    Lady   ("Estelle"),    alleged    control

by,  ii.  452-3.
Experience,    accumulated,     a     hindrance    to

action,  i.  178.
"  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  with  Mr.  D.  D.

Home,"  cited,  ii.  221-2,  533.
Experiment —

Elementary  and  advanced,  i.  235  note.
Importance  of,  ii.  182,  185.
"Experimental  Investigation,"  cited,  i.  646.
"Experimental    Study    in    Hypnotism,  An,"
quoted,  i.  127  and  note*\  cited,  i.  460,
495  note.
Exteriorisation  of  sensibility,  i.  500-1.

F —  (Dr.  Mesnet's  patient),  case  of,  i.  306-7.
F.,  Dr.,  case  reported  by,  i.  278-9,  553-4.
— ,  Miss,  case  of,  i.  515.
Faculty,  substitutions  of,  i.  477.
Fahnestock,    Dr.,    experiments    by,    i.    278,


,  Dr.    VV.    B.,    cited     (see    also    "  Statu-

volism")   i.    160-1,    471-2,  485,    500;

quoted,  i.  444-5.

Fairman,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  17.
Faith,  i.  218-19;  ii.  280-1,  285,  312-13.
Faith-healers,  ii.  311.
"  Familiar  Lectures    on  Scientific  Subjects,"

quoted,  i.  87-8.

Fancher,  Molly,  case  of,  i.  64,  204,  352-4.
Fanton,  cited,  i.  472.
Faraday,  cited,  ii.  93.
Farez,  Paul,  cited,  i.  459.
Farler,   Archdeacon,   apparition   seen    by,  ii.

17,  61.
Farquharson,  Miss  Edith,  apparition  seen  by,

ii.  377-80.

Faure,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  127  ;  quoted,  i.  369-70.
Fenzi,    Chevalier,     apparition     seen     by,    ii.

44-5-


Fere,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  127  note\  477,  587  note*;

quoted,  i.  329-30;  ii.  90.
Feuerbach,  Anselm  Ritter  von,  cited,  i.   308

and  note.

Fielden,  Cecilia,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  230.
Fillmore,  Dr.  C.  W.,  cited,  i.  354.
Finger-sucking  cured  by  hypnotism,  i.  458.
Finney,  Mrs.  Wm.  A.,  case  of,  ii,  183-5.
Fitzgerald,  Mrs.,  communication  to,  ii.  477-8.
Fleetwood,     Mrs.,     apparitions     seen    by,    i.

695-6.
Flournoy,  Prof.,  case  reported  by,  i.  565-6,  ii.

124,   305,   503;  cited,  i.  566  notet  568,

ii.  95  note,  130  seg.
Fluorescence,  ii.  538.
Focachon,  M.,  experiments  by,  i.  491.
Foertsch,  Bertha  (Sister   Bertha),   apparition

seen  by,  ii.  18,  376-7.
Foissac,  cited,  i.  500.
Folie  du  doute,  i.  467,  468.
Fontan,  Prof.,  experiments  by,  i.  192,  501.
Food,  sensibility  to  certain  kinds  of,  i.  483.
"Footfalls,"  cited,  ii.  348.
Forel,   Prof.   Auguste,  cited,  i.  438,  445,  462,

491    and  note3,    514;    quoted,  i.   439;

case  of  warders  employed  by,  quoted,  i.

196,  512.
Forster,    Rev.    C.    T.,    case  reported  by,  ii.

66-7.
Fortes,   Donna  Anna  Ignez  Dias,  apparition

seen  by,  ii.  353-4.
Fourth  dimension,  theory  of,  i.  277.
Fowler,  Rev.  J.  T.,  case  sent  by,  ii.  343.

,  Miss  Lottie,  case  of,  ii.  560-2.

Fraud-
Dipsomania  contrasted  with,  i.  201.
Spiritualistic,  ii.  206-7  an(^  note.
Vague    charges     of,     regarding    psychic

phenomena,  ii.  239.
Free  will,  ii.  271-2.
Fremont,  General,  case  of,  i.  291.
French,  old,  automatic  writing  in,  ii.  420-1.
Freud,  Dr.,  case  of  patient  of,  cited,  i.  50-2.
Fre'ville,  Mrs.  de,  apparition  of,  ii.  19,  66-7.
Frogs,  hypnotic  experiments  on,  i.  163.
Fryer,  John  T.,  case  of,  i.  659.

,  R.,  auditory  hallucination  of,  i.  658-9.

Fuchs,  cited,  i.  ^14.
Fuller,  case  of,  i.  80.
Function —

Exercise  of,  two-fold  character  of,  i.  39.
Restitution  of,  i.  476-7.
Future-
Existence  of,   already,  theory  of,  ii.

271.
Faith,  standpoint  for,  ii.  280.

G    Dr.,  apparition  of,  i.  692-3.

—  Dr.,  auditory  hallucination  of,  ii.  69-71.

—  Miss,   apparitions   seen   by,  i.   690-2;   ex-

periments with,  i.  244,  619-22.

—  Mr.,  case  of,  i.  467-8,  515.

—  F.,  case  reported  by,  ii.  27-31.

—  Felicite,  dream  regarding,  ii.  347.
Galton,   Francis,   cited,  i.  80,    124,  565,  567  ;

case  recorded  by,  i.  177,  455-6.
Garfield,  President,  announcement  of  death  of,

ii.  230.
Garrett,  Edmund,  cited,  ii.  502.


640


INDEX


Garrison,  Thomas  B.,  case  of,  ii.  112-14.
Gas,  pain  suppressed  under,  felt  afterwards,

*•  473-

Gasparin,  le  Comte  Ag.  de,  cited,  ii.  555.
Gatty,  Miss  E..  apparition  seen  by,  i.  653-4.
Gauss,  case  of,  i.  80.  117,  175.
"  Gelalius  "  control,  ii.  161,  449.
Gelineau,  cited,  i.  465  note*,  466.
Genius  —

Daemon    of    Socrates    eicplained   as,    ii.

95-6.

Definition  of,  i.  20,  96.
Emotional  memory  in,  ii.  138-9.
Ethical  realm,  in,  i.  119.
Growth,  analogy  with,  i.  105.
Hallucinatory  vividness  of,  i.  227,  234.
Hypnotism   and    automatism    in  relation

to,  i.  22,  104.

Hysteria  in  relation  to,  i.  56,  66.
Irregularities  of,  i.  97.
Limits  of,  i.  78.

Lombroso's  view  of,  i.  71,  91-2.
Middle-level  centres  active  in,  i.  73.
Nature  of,  i.  20,  71-2,  104-5,  107  ;  ii.  81,

193,  282.

Normal  best  represented  by,  i.  72,  77,  78.
Origin  of,  four  theories  for,  i.  116-17.
Possession  theory  in  the  light  of,  ii.  192-3.
Psychological  test  of,  i.  75.
Scope  of  term,  i.  71-2.
Sleep  compared  with,  i.  135.
Somnambulism    compared    with,    i.    124,

203.

Speech  in  relation  to,  i.  98.
Telepathy  and  telaesthesia,  relation  to,  i.

108,  280.

Visual  images  of,  i.  227.
Geometrical    patterns,    subliminal    visualisa-

tion of,  i.  88.

Germ,  primal,  modifiability  of,  i.  224.
Gesture  as   means  of   communication,  i.  99;

ii.  91.

Ghosts,  see  Discarnate  spirits  and  Haunting.
Gibert,    Dr.,    experiments    by,    i.    207,   244,
524-9;   ii.  521,  524  ;   portrait  of,  pro-
ducing catalepsy,  i.  323.
Giddings,  Miss  Laura  E.,  quoted,  i.  423-4.
Glardon,    Rev.   A.,    experiments  by,   i.   244,

622-8.

Gley,  Dr.  E.,  case  reported  by,  i.  530.
Godfrey,  Rev.  Clarence,  apparition  of,  i.  296,

688-90.

Godorichze,  cited,  i.  466.
Goethe,  cited,  i.  102.
Gold,  sensitiveness  to,  i.  482.
Goodall,  Edward  A.,  case  of,  ii.  213-14,  217.
Goodrich-Freer,    Miss  A.,  crystal-  visions  of,
i.  132,  237,   576-8;   cited,  i.  237  note,
574,  629.

Goodwin,  Prof.,  cited,  i.  667  note  \
Gorres,  cited,  i.  493.
Gottschalk,  Ferdinand,  apparition  seen  by,  i.

281,  663-5.

Gourmont,  Remy  de,  quoted,  i.  89.
"Grande  Hysteric  chez  1'Homme,  La,"  cited,

i.  339.
Grant,   Cameron,  case    of,  ii.   60,    115   note,


Grasset,  cited,  i.  490.


Gravitation —

Control  over,  ii.  537.

Telepathy  analogous  to  law  of,  i.  38.

Gray,  Mrs.,  case  of,  ii.  414-15.

,  Zachary,  alleged  communications  from,

ii.  229-30.

Greek,  automatic  writing  in,  ii.  419,  556-8.

Gregory,  Prof.,  cited,  i.  543.

Green,  Mrs.,  dream  of,  i.  431-3;  ii.  55.

,  Dr.  C.  Theodore,  quoted,!.  472-3.

,  H.  T.,  planchette  writing  of,  ii.  432-4.

Greves,  Dr.  Hyla,  experiments  by,  i.  613.

Griesinger,  cited,  i.  124.

Grimbold,  Alice,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  167.

Grocyn,  communications  from,  ii.  226.

Grossmann,  cited,  i.  438.

Gruber,  Professor,  cited,  i.  566-7.

"Grundziige  der  physiologischen  Psycho-
logic," cited,  i.  667  note1.

Guebhard,  Prof.  Adrien,  case  of,  ii.  106,  411.

Gurney,  Edmund —

Appreciation  of,  ii.  293-4.

Case  investigated  by,  ii.  385.

Cited     (see     also     "  Phantasms    of    the

Living"),  i.  4,  8,  24,  124,  125,  138,
144,  164,  171,  205,  207,  228,  248,  252-
253,  266,  275,  281,  416,  469,  505,  535,
and  note,  536,  570,  636^.,  645,  685;
ii.  4,  14  note,  15,  42-4  note,  56,  84,

170,  423*  5OI»  584-

Experiments  by,  i.  240,  497,  541-2,  600.

Moses  case,  view  of,  ii.  223.

Quoted  (see  also  "  Phantasms  of  the

Living"),  i.  420  note,  425,  428,  448-52,
494,  502-5,  529,  533-5,  601,  661-2,
667  note ;  ii.  10-13,  I4°>  I4I»  J47>  T49>
285,  295.

Work  of,  i.  194,  243;  ii.  117.

Gurwood,  Col.  John,  communications  from,
ii.  163-7.

Guthrie,  M.,  experiments  by,  i.  542-3,  601-14.

H.,  Miss,  auditory  hallucination  of,  ii.  69-71.
— ,  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  659-60.
— ,  Mrs.,  case  of  young  sons  of,  ii.  335-6.
— ,  Mrs.,    phantasm  at  time  of  death  of,  ii.


345-6-
-,  W.  If.,  c


case  reported  by,  i.  682-5.
Hack,   William,    dream    regarding  death  of,

i.  139-40.

Haddock,  Dr.  Joseph  W.,  cited,  i.  556.
Hadselle,  Mrs.,  case  of,  ii.  104,  .405-9.
Hsemorrhagy,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  490,  498.
Haggard,  Mr.,  dream  of,  i.  408-10.
Hale,  Bishop,  case  reported  by,  i.  387-90.
Halin,  Prof.  G.,  cases  reported  by,  i.  671.
Hall,  Mrs.,  apparition  of,  i.  262.
,  Miss  Annie,  dream  visions  of,  ii.  55,  61,


,  Prof.  Stanley,  cited,  i.  41  and  note.

Hallucinations  (see  also  Phantasms) —
Accident,  at  time  of,  i.  686-7.
Arrival,  cases  of,  i.  255-7,  272-4.
Auditory,  cases  of,  i.  428;  ii.  16-18,  24,

58-61,  69-71,   362,   365-7,   376-7,  388

(music).

Bystander  the  percipient,  i.  266-9.
Collective,    i.     62-3,     69-71,     246,    257,

260-5,  273,  292-3,  680-2;  ii.  197,  308.


INDEX


641


Hallucinations  —  continued.

Compact   cases,  i.  219,   686-7;    ii.   42-5,

49-5  r>  35°-
Crises  other  than  death,  connection  with,

i.  253,  270-1,  279,  281,  287,  291.
Crystal-vision,  in,  i.  239.
Discarnate  spirits,  of,  ii.  15  seq.  (see  also

Discarnate  spirits  —  Apparitions  of).
Death,  at  or  near  time  of  (see  Death  —

Apparitions).
Death,  of,  i.  572-4.
Dreams  reaching,  i.  226-7.
Excursive  theory  of,  i.  232.
Genius,  vividness  of,  similar  to,  i.  227,  234.
Hearing,  of,  see  above.  Auditory.
Hyperaesthesia,  defined  as,  i.  227.
Hypnotic  production  of,  i.   189-91,  233-

235  ;  persistence  of  hypnotic,  i.  252.
Imagination-images  reaching,  i.  227.
Light,  of,  ii.  374,  381.
Living,  of  the  —

Cases  of,  ii.  323,  345-6.

Continuous  series,  in,   to  those  of  the

departed,  i.  9.
Local,  cases  of,  ii.  377-8.
Memory,  of,  i.  644-6.
Morbid,  i.  228,  232,  234-5.
Optical  laws   apparently  followed  by,  i.

578.

Premonitory,  i.  668-71.
Reciprocal,  i.  678-80,  687-8,  697-8.
Report  on  the  Census  of  —

Cited,  i.  578,  667-8,  672  ;  ii.  15.

Quoted,  i.  643-4,  653-4,  659-60,  690-2,
695-7;  ii.  21-5,  32-3.  49-5°»  344-6,

o  351-5,  369-70-

Summary  of,  i.  570-4.
Smell,  affecting  sense  of,  i.  51-2.
Solidity  of,  degrees  in,  i.  667  note^-.
Subjective,  i.  24.
Tactile,  ii.  353-4.
Time,  of,  i.  54.
Veridical-

Distinction  of,  from  falsidical,  difficulty
of,  i.  252.

Evidence  for,  i.  247-9.

Limit  of,  i.  235.

Nature  of,  i.  229-32,  240.
Visual,  i.  421-3,  426-9.


Waking,  on,  i.  373-5.
"Hallucinations   Tele


pathiques,  Les,"  cited,
i.  244  note.

Hamilton,  Duchess  of,  vision  and  dreams  of,
i.  142-3.

•  —  ,  Sir  Edward,  case  of,  i.  140-2.

-  ,  Sir  W.,  cited,  ii.  519  note.

Hands,   appearances  of,   at  seances,  ii.   541,

548-9.

Hands,  W.,  case  of  patient  of,  i.  546.
Handwriting     of     telepathic     messages,    see

Motor  automatism  —  writing.
rEanna,  Rev.  Thomas  C.,  case  of,  i.  61.
iarden,    Judge    W.    D.,    case    sent    by,   ii.

496-9.
iardwicke,    Lord    Chancellor,    alleged    com-

munications from,  ii.  451,  456.
rlare,  Dr.  Robert,  cited,  ii.  555.
iarrison,  W.  H.,  case  reported  by,  i.  654-6;

cited,  ii.  583.

i   VOL.  II.


Harriss,  Miss,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  18.
Hart,  Mr.,  communications  to,  ii.  242-3.

,  Ernest,  cited,  i.  441.

,  John,    communications    from,    ii.    616-

617.
Hauffe,  Fran  Frederica  (seeress  of  Prevost),

ii.  570-1.

Haun,  Maniphee,  apparition  of,  i.  668-70.
Haunting —

Cases  of,  ii.  67,  359,  389-99.
Cases  resembling,  ii.  56.
Collectivity  in  cases  of,  ii.  62.
Psychorrhagic  diathesis  evidenced  by,  i.

264.
Theories   as  to,   ii.  4,   72  and  note,  76;

"  Estelle's  "  explanation  of,  ii.  453.
Universality  of,  ii.  283.
Veridical  after-images,  ii.  4.
Hauser,  Caspar,  case  of,  i.  524.
Hawaiian  communications,  ii.  244-5.
Hawkins,  Mrs.,  apparitions  of,  i.  257-60.
Hawkins-Dempster,    Miss    C.   L.,   apparition

seen  by,  ii.  34,  345-6.
Hay,     Right     Hon.    Sir     John     Drummond,

dream  of,  i.  396.
Hayarth,  Dr.,  i.  489.
Haydon,  genius  of,  i.  75.
Head,  separation  of  bones  in,  ii.  563,  565.
Headache,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  470.
"Healing   of    the   Nations,    The"    cited,    ii.

117.

Hearing,  see  Audition.
Heat-
Emission  of,  ii.  514.
Sense  of,  distinguished  from  pain  sense,

i.  65-6;  hypnotic  effect  on,  i.  475.
"Theory  of  Heat,"  cited,  ii.  530  note.
Hector,  Mr.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  52.
Helena,  clairvoyant  diagnosis  by,  i.  486.
Hempstead,  A.  E.,  case  sent  by,  ii.  485-6.
Hendrickson,  Mr.,  vision  of,  i.  421-3.
Herdman,     Prof.,    experiments    by,    i.    613;

quoted,  ii.  539-40.
Heredity-
Cosmic  and  planetary,  ii.  267.
Percipience,  aptitude  for  special  forms  of,

perhaps  transmitted  by,  ii.  477.
Terror,    tendencies    to,     transmitted    by,

i.  41.

Hericourt.  Dr.  J.,  experiments  of,  i.  529-30.
Hernaman,  Mr.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  17.
Herrero,  cited,  i.  440.
Herschel,  Sir  John,  quoted,  i.  87-8.
Heteraesthesia —


Hypnotic  indication  of,  i.  233.
Indefinite  nature  of,  i.  187;  ii.


5.1?-


Organic  substances,  evoked  by,  i.  483.
Hewetson,  H.  Bendelach,  i.  471;  cited,  i.  475.
Hicks,  Dr.,  experiments  by,  i.  613.

,  Eddie,  phantom  of,  ii.  340-2.

Hierarchy   of    intelligences,   inference   regard-
ing, ii.  265.

Highest-level  nerve  centres —
Activities  of,  i.  72-4.

Hypnotism,  in,  i.  193-4;  powers  of,  in
control  of  lower  centres  if  needful,
i.  198.

Nourishment  of,  ii.  511.
Higton,  Mr.  W.,  case  of,  i.  86-7.

2  S


642


INDEX


Hill,  Dr.,  quoted,  i.  178.

,  Rev.    R.   M.,   apparition    seen    by,  ii.

16-17.
Hilprecht,  Prof.  Herman  V.,  case  of,  i.  134,

Hinsdale,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  316.
"  History  of  Rationalism,"  cited,  i.  4.
Hobday,  Alfred,  apparition  of,  i.  672-4.
Hodgson,    Frederick,    case    recorded    by,    ii.

473-7,  5°3-

,  Dr.  Richard —

Cases  under  the  notice  of — attested  by,
ii.  27,  30;  investigated  by,  i.  495;
»•  37,  59,  i°7,  *72,  190,  322>  560;
reported  by,  i.  369,  692-3;  sent  to,  i.
421-3,  434-6;  ii.  107-14,  183-5,  405-9,
445,  485-6,  491-3,  496.
Cited,  i.  238,  478,  645-6;  ii.  251,  501-2,

604,  608.

Handwritings  submitted  to,  ii.  231-2.
Motor  inhibition  of,  ii.  105-6.
Music  dream  of,  i.  126,  369.
Quoted,  i.  309-17,  360,   366-8;   ii.   238,

242-4,  253,  608-22.
Holbrook,  Dr.   M.  L.,  cases  reported  by,  i.

370,,  697-8.
Holiness,  ii.  290-1.
Holmes,  Dr.   O.   W.,  cases   reported    by,    i.

274,  660-1.

"  Holy  Truth,  The,"  quoted,  ii.  171,  482-5.
Home,  D.  D.—

Books  regarding,  ii.  578-9.

Case  of,  i.  32,  205,  563;  ii.  221-3,  527,

5.29i  533-4,  536-7,   546-50,  5555   criti-
cisms on,  u.  579-82.
Homer,  cited,  i.  124;  ii.  52^.
Hood,  H.  J.,  quoted,  ii.  584.
Horse-asthma,  i.  483.
Home,    Mrs.,   auditory    hallucination    of,    ii.

388.

Howard,   Mr.,  communications  to,  ii.  242-3,
255,  6n,  613-20.

,    Mrs.,    communications    to,    ii.    242-4,

611,  613-20.

,   Lady  Mabel,  automatic  writing  by,  ii.

178,  262  note,  435-40.
Howe,  W.  W.,  dream  of,  ii.  385-6.
Howells,  Mary,  case  of,  ii.  150-3.

,  Thomas  (Travers),  case  of,  ii.  149-53.

Hugenschmidt,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  464.

Hughes,  Mr.,  experiments  by,  i.  603  seq.

Hugo,  Victor,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  135.

Humboldt,  quoted,  ii.  540.

Hunter,   William,  dream  regarding  death  of,

i.  144-6:  ii.  42.
Husbands,   John   E.,   apparition  seen  by,  ii.

68,  384-6.

Hyde,  cited,  ii.  528  note.
Hydrozoon,  analogy  from,  i.  38.
Hyperaemia,  hypnotic  production  of,  i.  491.
Hyperaesthesia —

Auditory,  ii.  106.
Cases  of,  i.  524;  ii.  230.
Hallucination  defined  as,  i.  227.
Hypnotic  production  of,  i.  184-7.
Hysteric,  i.  66.

Peripheral  and  central,  ii.  269-70.
Sleep,  in,  i.  124-5,  369.
Smell,  of,  ii.  414.


Hyperaesthesia — continued.

Telaesthesia  an  extension  of,  i.  191-2,
275;  ii.  264,517.

Telepathy  an  extension  of,  ii.  517.

Various  uses  of  term,  i.  478.
Hyperboulia   (see   also    Telekinesis),   ii.   n6,

266,  513,  £2O,  522.

Hyperhydrosis,  i.  491.
Hyperidrosis,  ii.  541.
Hypermetropia,  i.  475-6.
Hypermnesia —

Dreams  in,  ii.  263,  516,  524.
Hypnotic,  ii.  266.
Intellectual  element  in,  ii.  517.
Scope  of,  ii.  263,  516-17.
Smith,  He"lene,  case  of,  ii.  230.
Hypnagogic  pictures,  i.  124-5.
Hypnopompic  pictures,  i.  124-5.
"  Hypnose  und    ihre    civilrechtliche    Bedeut-

ung,  Die,"  cited,  i.  514.
Hypnosis —

Analogy  from  trance  of,  for  post-mortem

communications,  ii.  7.
Automatic  writing  in,  i.  328-31.
Depth    of,    tested    by    memory,    i.    171,

450-5.

Diseases  prescribed  for  during,  i.  520.
Elective  power  displayed  in,  ii.  7.
Genius — compared    to    trance   of,   i.   22;

relation  to,  and  automatism,  i.  104.
Highest-level   centres  in,  i.  193-4;   lower
centres  under  control   of,  if  needful,  i.
198.
Memory     continuous     from     trance     to

trance  in,  i.  36.

Middle-level  centres  active  in.  i.  73,  190,
194;  under  control  of  higher  centres
if  needful,  i.  198.

Mono-ideism,  defined  as,  i.  469-70.
Poly-ideism,  defined  as,  i.  470.
Possession  and  trance  in  the  light  of,  ii.

Precognition  in,  i.  210.
Prolongation  of,  i.  464-5.
Restfulness  of,  i.  513.
Surgical  operations  under,  i.  160.
Hypnotism —

Agoraphobia  cured  by,  i.  466.
Amnesia  cured  by,  i.  61.
Anaesthesia  of,  i.  470-1.
Anaesthetics  contrasted  with,  i.  179.
Analgesia  induced  by,  i.  179-82,  470-4.
Animals  affected  by,  i.  163,  441-3.
Attention,  effect  on,  i.  192-6,  513.
Blistering  produced  by,  i.  493-9.
Burns,  effect  on,  i.  470.
Capricious  nature  of  results  in,  i.  169.
Children  susceptible  to,  i.  439,  443-4,  45'
Community  or  sensation  between  hypno

tiser  and  subject,  i.  209.
Confession  under,  i.  55.
Connection    of,    with    other    influences

i.  201.
Consciousness      evidenced      by     subject

under,  i.  13  note.
Crimes    committed    under,    no    evidenc

for,   i.   45,    198;   question   of,    513-1?

illusions     of     memory    in     connectio

with,  i.  646.


INDEX


643


H  ypnoti  sm — contin  ued.

Crystal-vision  in,  i.  238,  578-84.

Cures  effected  by,  i.  61,  174-82,  184,
199-201,  232,  330-3,  439^40,  458-6o,
462-8,  476,  490-8,  518;  ii.  311-12;
classes  of  derangements  where  pos-
sible, i.  458.

Dazzling,  by,  i.  165.

Death  averted  by  change  of  personality
under,  i.  331.

Definition  of,  as  suggestion  and  self-
suggestion,  i.  153.

Delirium  tremens.  suggestibility  deve-
loped during  recovery  from,  i.  162.

Dipsomania,  effect  on,  i.  232,  462-3.

Discoverers  and  leaders  in  the  practice  of,
i.  159-62.

Distance,  from  a,  i.  524-33.

Dramatic  faculty  improved  by,  i.  510-11.

Dreams  remembered  under,  i.  37,  512.

Dreams  reproducing  suggestions  of,
i.  129-30.

Drugs  in  relation  to,  i.  162,  440-1.

Dynamogeny  by,  i.  173-5,  179;  results
of,  on  perception,  i.  184-7;  on  imagi-
nation, i.  188-92 ;  on  attention  and
character,  i.  192-202.

Education,  effect  on,  i.  196,  458-9,  51^.

Effluence  theory  of  (see  also  below,
Passes),  i.  205-8  ;  ii.  312.

Empirical  method  of,  i.  22.

Experimental  nature  of,  realised  by
subjects,  i.  196.

Future  of,  i.  211.

Grant,  Cameron,  case  of,  ii.  368-9.

Haemorrhage  cured  by,  i.  498.

Haemorrhagy  cured  by,  i.  490.

Hallucinations  produced  by,  i.  189-91,
233-5  >  persistence  of,  i.  252.

Heteraesthesia  produced  by,  i.  185-7,
233,  482-4.

Hyperaesthesia  produced  by,  i.  184-5.

Hyperhydrosis  cured  by,  i.  491.

Hypermnesia  under,  ii.  266.

Hysteria,  effect  on,  i.  55,  330-3,  448;  by
pressure  on  hypnogenous  zones  of
hysterics,  i.  163-4,  437;  alleged  by
Salpetriere  school  to  be  induced  by,
i.  437-8 ;  hysterics  more  difficult  to
influence  by,  than  healthy  subjects,
i.  438.

Idees  fixes  cured  by,  i.  41-2,  176-9,  200,
298-9.

Imagination,  effect  on,  i.  188-92.

Improper  suggestions  under,  resisted,
i.  514-15.

Incarnation  compared  to  state  of,  ii.
272.

Inhibition  by —

Analgesia  resulting  from,  i.  179.
Choice    in    exercise    of    faculty    made

possible  by,  i.  182.
Dynamogeny  involved  in,  ii.  86.
Educative   and   reformatory    force    of,
i.  173-6,  178,  197,  517-18.

Jealousy,  influence  on,  i.  178,  200,  578.

Kleptomania  produced  by,  i.  514.

Localised  stimulus,  by,  i.  163-4.

Lunatics,  effect  on,  i.  165,  440-1,  517-18.


Hypnotism — continued.
Memory  in —

Improvement    of,    i.    196,    511-12;    ii.

266.

Purgation  of,  i.  178.
Secondary    restored,    i.    61,    196,  309,

313-15,  317-19-

Somnambulistic  a  part  of,  i.  203.
Test  by,  for  depth  of  hypnosis,  i.  171,

450-5.

Microbes,  relation  to,  i.  180.
Monotonous  stimulation  by,  i.  164-5.
Moral    reform    by,    i.    173-6,    178,    197,

517-18.
Moral    training,    some   loss  of,   in   cures

effected  by,  i.  175.
Morphinomania  cured  by,  i.  464.
Music  used  in,  ii.  90.
Nancy,  school  of,  i.  161,   166,   206,  219,

437)  439-

Nature  of,  i.  66-7 ;  h.  82.
Nervous    change    requisite    for,    i.    159,

165.
Neuro-muscular      phenomena      produced

by,  i.  187,  197.
Nicotinism  cured  by,  i.  463-4.
Objecti vation  of  types  aided  by,  i.  195.
Organic  effects  of,  i.  476-7.
Passes,  by,  i.    159,    160,    165,   171,   206,

208 ;  ii.  312.

Perceptive  faculties,  effect  on,  i.  184-7.
Phobies  cured  by,  i.  465-8.
Post-epileptic    states    treated    by,    i.  61,

3°9-
Post-hypnotic  state —

Automatic  writing  in,  ii.   89,  520.

Crystal-vision  in,  i.  240.
Post-hypnotic  suggestions —

Calculations     involved     in,    i.    194-5,
502-10.

Moral    and    intellectual    value    of,    ii.
312.

Three-fold  classification  of,  ii.  7-8.
Rapport  in,  i.  209,  540.
Rarity  of  serious  study  of,  ii.  206.
Red  light  used  in,  ii.  90.
Reintegration    of    multiplex    personality

by,  i.  352.

Resistance  to,  case  of,  i.  440.
Salpetriere  school,  i.  437-40,  489-90.
Scope  of  term,  66-7;  scope  of  treatment

of  subject,  i.  153-4.

Secondary  personality  in,  i.  322-33,  352.
Self-projection  suggested  under,  i.  296.
Self-suggestion   in    (see  also  Self-sugges-
tion)—

Braid's  discovery  of,  i.  160.

Fahnestock's  results  in,  i.  161.

Nature  of,  i.  233.

Neuro-muscular  changes  produced  by,
i.  1 68,  444-7.

Schemes  of,  i.  167-8.
Sex  immaterial  to  success  in,  i.  438-9.
Sight  affected  by,  i.  184-5,  475~9-
Sleep,   functions   of,  accomplished  by,  i.

90,    202;    natural,   contrasted  with,   i.

122,  170,  172.
Somnambulism    contrasted  with,   i.    178,

193,  198.


644


INDEX


Hypnotism — continued.

Squint  employed  in,  i.  160,  165.

Stages    of    depth   in,    i.    171-2,    450-5  ;

Charcot's    three    stages,    i.    161,    197,

437,  439,  447-8;   Gurney's  two  stages,

i.  448-50.

Stratum  affected  by,  i.  43,  45.
Suggestion  in —

Definition  of,  i.  169.

Efficacy  of,  i.  160-2,  165,  166.

Mode  of,  still  unknown,  i.  206.

Nature  of  (Bramwell  quoted),  i.  166-7.

Summarised    education,   defined  as,   i.

173-

Telaesthesia  in,   i.   275  ;   travelling  clair-
voyance in,  i.  210,  278.
Telepathic,  i.  207,  209-10,  484,  555-6.
Terrors,  forgotten,  effect  on,  i.  299.
Vaso-motor  system,    effect  on,  i.    187-8,

191,  490-5.
Waking    from     trance    induced    by    one

hypnotiser  effected  by  another,  i.  524.
Watching  of  patients  by  warders  under,

i.  196,  512.

Will-power,  effect  on,  i.  197-8.
"  Hypnotism  "  (Moll),  cited,  i.  514.
"  Hypnotisme;       Suggestion;       Psycho-th6-

rapie,"  cited,  i.  465.
"  Hypnotisme    et    les    Etats    Analogues    au

point  de  vue  me"dico-legal,    L',"  cited,

i.  514.
u  Hypnotisme    et  1' Orthopedic   morale,   L',"

i.  459.
"  Hypnotismus    und     seine    Anwendung    in

der  praktischen    Medicin,   Der,"  cited,

i.  462,  465.

Hyslop,  Prof.,  cited,  ii.  249  and  note,  604.
Hysteria —

Aboulia  of,  i.  124.
Anaesthesia  in —

Fanciful  areas  of,  i.  45-6,  164.

"  Fugues,"  in  a  case  of,  i.  299.

Injury  not  resultant  from,  i.  44,  47.

Nature  of,  i.  65.

Organic  disease  unnoticed  in,  i.  48.

Unconscious  nature  of,  i.  44,  299.

Witches,  of,  i.  4.
Aphasia  in,  i.  53,  65.
Consciousness  contracted  by,  i.  19,  22.
Crystal-vision  in,  i.  238.
Dramatic  creation  analogous  to,  i.  107.
Ecstasy  of,  so-called,  ii.  572.
Genius  in  relation  to,  i.  56,  66.
Hyperaesthesia  in,  i.  66.
Hypnogenous  zones  of,  i.  163-4.
Hypnotic  influence  on,   see  under  Hyp-
notism.

Memory  in,  ii.  200.
Metallotherapy  in,  i.  338.
Muscular  sense  absent  in,  i.  326,  330.
Nature  of,  i.  42-50.
Nightmare  compared  with,  i.  124.
Paraphasia  in,  i.  53.
Predisposition    to,    from    sensibility    not

enfeeblement,  i.  50.

Secondary  personality  in,  i.  317-19,  335.
Sight  affected  in,  i.  47 ;  totally  lost,  i.  353.
Somnambulism  compared  to,  i.  22,    123,

203.


Hysteria — continued.

Taste  and  smell    stimulated    in,  by  red
light,  i.  587  note  "2.

Terrors,   forgotten,  a  cause  of  attacks,  i.
40,  50,  298-9.

Universal,  supposed  case  of,  i.  67-8.

Value  of  observations  from,  i.  65-6.

Vomiting  in,  i.  331.

Will-power  in,  i.  197.

Witchcraft  explained  by,  i.  4.
Hystero-epilepsy,  i.  447-8;  ii.  422-3;   secon-
dary personality  in,  i.  352-60.

I.,  Miss,  auditory  hallucination  of,  ii.  70-1.
Ideation,    ii.    519;     spiritually    inspired,    ii.

552-3-
Idees fixes —

Cases  of,  i.  51,  216,  218.

Disaggregation,     first    symptom     of,     i.

40.

Enthusiasts,  of,  i.  56-7.
Epileptic,  i.  60.
Hypnotic  cure   of,    i.   41-2,    176-9,   200,

298-9.
Identity—

Discarnate  spirits,    of — test   of,   ii.   499 ;

conceptions  of,  ii.  252.
Living,   of    the,    experiments    regarding,

ii.  249  note.

Illness,   predictions  as   to,  see   Medical  clair-
voyance.

Illusions  hypnagogiques,  i.  236,  239,  568-9.
Imagination —

Hypnotic  stimulation  of,  i.  188-92.
Power  of,  i.  488-9.
Imagination-images,  i.  226-7.
Improvisation,  i.  104-5.
Inaudi,  Jacques,  case  of,  i.  79  note.
Incandescence,  ii.  538.
Incantations,  ii.  310.

Incarnation,  conditioning  forces  of,  ii.  272.
Indy,  Vincent  d',  cited,  i.  89.
Inebriety,  see  Dipsomania.
Inflammation,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  470.
Ingles,    Mary   Sophia,   case  of    death  of,  ii.

388.

Inhibition-
Hypnotic,  see  under  Hypnotism.
Modern  instances  of,  ii.  104-12.
Socrates,  case  of,  ii.  95-100,  103.
Innate  ideas,  ii.  267.
Innes,  A.  Taylor,  cited,  i.  641-2.
"  Inquiry    into    Human     Faculty,"  cited,   i.

124.
Insanity —

Drawings  made  during,  ii.  95  note.
Dreams  causing  fit  of,  i.  127.
Hypnotism  in  peases  of,   i.    165,  440-1,

517;    moral,   i.  „  199-200.
Illusion  of  predicted  events  in,  i.  645.
Moral,    hypnotic    influence    on,    i.    199-

200.

Muscular  energy  in,  ii.  514,  529.
Insensible  spots,  see  Anaesthetic  spots.
Inspiration,  "Possession  "  identical  with,  ii.

115.

Instinct,  automatism  of,  i.  195.
Integration  of  personality  the  human  object,
i.  216.


INDEX


645


"Introduction  of  Mesmerism  with  Sanction
of  Government  into  the  Public  Hos-
pitals of  India,  The,"  cited,  i.  470.

Intuition,  ii.  295-7.

Irvine,  Miss  Mary  Blamire,  apparition  seen
by,  H.  397-8-

Irving,  Edward,  ii.  571  and  note.

Isolation  of  elements  of  personality,  i.  57.

Italian  communications,  i.  620-1.

Ivey,  T.  F.,  case  of,  i.  402-5.

J.,  (Delbceuf's  subject),  i.  470,  472,  506.
— ,  Mr.  (Delbceuf's  patient),  case  of,  i.  471.
— ,  Mr.    (librarian),    apparition    seen    by,    ii.

380-1.

— (  Jules,  case  of,  i.  466.
Jackson,  Dr.  J.   Hughlings,  cited,  i.   72,  317

note,

James,  Capt.,  cited,  ii.  167.
,  Prof.  William-
Cases  under   notice   of — investigated   by,
ii.    159;    sent    to,    i.    379-81,    385-6,
402-6,  435;  ii.   58-60;   reported  by,  i.
417-18.
Cited,   i.   88  note,    313,   354,   569   note\

587  note*.

Experiments  by,  ii.  238.
Quoted,  i.  336;  ii.   119,  239,  251,   599-

602.

Jane,  case  of,  i.  279,  553-4;  ii.  524.
Janet,  Dr.   Jules,  cases  of  patients  of,  i.  44,
171,   447-8;    cited,    i.    331-3;    experi-
ments watched  by,  i.  525.

Prof.  Paul,  i.  525.

Prof.  Pierre —

Cases  of  patients   of,    cited,   i.    56,   298,

300,  303-5,  496-7,  524-9.
Cited,  i.  40,  43-4,  46,  62,  162,  298-300,

303-5,460.

Experiments  of,  \.  47.
Pioneer  work  of,  i.  62;  ii.  117.
Quoted,  i.  48-9,   112,  298,  322-30,   461,

Janicaud,  The*ophile,  case  of,  i.  521-3.
Jealousy,  hypnotic  influence  on,  i.  178,   200,

518.

Jeanne,  Sceur,  case  of,  i.  305;  ii.  422-3.
Jendrassik,  Dr.,  i.  495-6.
Joan  of  Arc,  case  of,  i.  108;  ii.  100-3,  401-4.
Johnson,  Miss  Alice —

Census  of   Hallucinations,  on  committee

of,  i.  570.

Experiments  by,  i.  453-5,  535-9,  552.
Quoted,  i.  499.

,  R.  C.,  experiments  by,  i.  613.

Johnstone,  Rev.  J.  C.,  letters  of,  quoted,  i.  146.

Joire,  cited,  i.  472,  50 1.

Jones,  F.  J.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  17.

,  Sir   Lawrence,   dream   of,   i.   274,   392 ;

ii.  161  note*-.

Jong,  de,  cited,  i.  439,  460,  490.
"  Journal  of

tion,"  quoted,  i.  63-4.
"Journal    of    Mental    Science,    The,"    cited,

i.  341.
Judd,  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  375-6.

K.,  Mr.,  case  of,  i.  319-21.
Kaffir  communications,  ii.  483-4.


the  American  Medical  Associa-


Kaigorodoff,    Mme.    (Mile.   Emma    Stramm),

communications  to,  ii.  170-1,  466-71.
Kalua,  communications  from,  ii.  244-5.
Kandinsky,  cited,  i.  667.
Kane,  Dr.,  cited,  ii.  539.
Kant,  Immanuel,  cited,  ii.  569-70.
Kapnist,  Comtesse  Eugenie,  apparition  seen

by,  ii.  49-51.

Kardec,  Allan,  cited,  ii.  117  note,  135.
Kate,  phantasm  of,  ii.  360-1.
Kearne,    Percy,   apparition    seen    by,  i.   281,

672-4.

Kelly,  case  of,  i.  575.
Kelso,   Mrs.   Colonel,  alleged   communication

from,  ii.  485.

Kelvin,  Lord,  quoted,  ii.  531-2  and  note.
Kepler,  ii.  302.

Kerner,  Justinus,  cited,  ii.  570  and  note.
Kernochan,  C.  A.,  vision  of,  ii.  375.
Keulemans,  Mr.  J.  G.,  case  of  crystal  vision

states    of,    i.    238 ;    telaesthesia    of,    i.

661-3;    apparition    seen    by,    ii.     61,


372-3-
Ling,  Ge


King,  George,  dream  vision  of,  ii.  362-5.
Kingsbury,  B.  B.,  case  sent  by,  ii.  334-^.

,  Dr.  G.  C.,  case  sent  by,  i.  472.

Kingsford,  Dr.  Anna,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  135.
Kingston,   Dr.   Henry  D.   R.,   case   sent   by,

ii.  473-7.

Kirby,  Mrs.,  case  of,  ii.  149-53,  l%7-
Kirk,  Joseph,  experiments  by,  i.  244,  619-22,

690-2.

Kirkland,  A.  P.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  230.
Kjellman,  Dr.,  experiments  by,  i.  554-5.
Kleptomania —

Hypnotic    cure    of,    i.    460 ;    production

of,  i.  514.

Nature  of,  i.  175-6.
Self,  thefts  from,  i.  461.
Knorr,    Dr.    Louis,    case    recorded    by,    ii.

496-9.

Knowledge,  communicability  of,  ii.  310.
Kobb6,  Major,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  114.
Koot  Hoomi  letters,  ii.  231,  501.
Korf,  Gen.  Paul  von,  alleged  communication

from,  ii.  494-5.

Kraepelin,  Prof.  Emil,  cited,  i.  645.
Krafft-Ebing,  Dr.,  case  of  patient  of,  i.  460;

cited,  i.  491  and  note*,  495  and  note ;

quoted,  i.  127.
"Kritische  und    klinische   Betrachtungen  im

Gebiete       der        Sinnestauschungen,"

cited,  i.  667  note*.

Krohn,  Dr.,  case  cited  by,  i.  567  note.
Kropotkin,  Prince,  quoted,  i.  479-80.
"  Kubla  Khan,"  cited,  i.  135.

L.   Earl  of,  vision  regarding,  i.  142-3.

—  Mr.,  phantasm  of,  at  death,  i.  245.

—  Mr.  (mesmerist),  apparition  of,  i.  679-80.

—  Mrs.,    auditory    hallucination     connected

with,  ii.  16,  69-71.

—  Mrs.,  experiments  by,  i.  614  seq.

—  Mrs.  (Li6beault's  patient),  case  of,  i.  455.

—  E.,  clairvoyance  of,  i.  556-8.

— ,  Mdlle.  R.,  case  of,  i.  133-4,  476.
— ,  Victor,  case  of,  i.  466.
Ladame,  cited,  i.  460,  462.
Ladd,  Prof.,  cited,  i.  88.


646


INDEX


Lamarckian  theory,  i.  116-17.

Lamartine,  quoted,  i.  89.

Lamberton,    Prof.    WUliam    A.,    case   of,  i.

134,  373-5-

Lancaster,  Rpsamira,  case  of,  cited,  11.  230.
"  Lancet,"  cited,  i.  491  note*.
Lang,    Andrew,    cited,    i.    237    note,    574-5,
645  note2;  ii.  31  note,  101  notes,  555;
quoted,  i.  595-8  ;  ii.  401-4.
Langley,  Dr.  J.  N.,  cited,  i.  442,  477.
Language —

Automatic  messages,  in,  i.  100.
Limitations  of,  i.  98,  100.
Primitive  universal,  ii.  570-1.
Lao  Tzu,  religion  of,  ii.  286.
Lapsed  intelligence,  possibility  of  increasing

range  of  action  performed  by,  i.  195.
Larva,  analogy  from,  i.  97,  201,  217.
Lateau,  Louise,  case  of,  i.  492-3.
Latency  of  perception,  ii.  12-13,  I7~I^»  346.
Laurent,  cited,  i.  473.
Lay,  Miss  J.  M.,  planchette  experiments  by,

ii.  145-6-

Le  Gros,  Durand,  quoted,  i.  516.
Leaf,   Dr.    Walter,   experiments  by,   ii.  238;

cited,  ii.  502,  604,  608.
Lebeuf,  F.,  cited,  i.  522  note  *.
Lecky,  Mr.,  cited,  i.  4.
Lefebvre,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  492-3.
Legeu,  Dr.  Gabriel,  cited,  ii.  422-3  note.
Leibnitz,  cited,  ii.  519  note.
Leigh,  Dr.   H.  G.,  case  reported  by,  i.  319

note.

Lelt,  Sara,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  62-3.
Le"lut,  L.  F.,  cited,  ii.  95  note1,  99.
Lemaitre,  Prof.,  cited,  ii.  136.
Leonie  (Mme.  B.),  case  of,  i.  322-6,  496-7,

524-9;  ii.  198-200,  521,  529.
Lepsius,  case  of,  i.  567.
Letters-
Dreams  of  contents  of,  i.  392-4.
Telaesthetic    perception    of    contents    of,

i.  274-5  >  "•  324-
Levillain,  Dr.,  quoted,  i.  497-8.
Lewin,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  68.
Lewis,  Prof.  Carvill,  cited,  ii.  502.

,  Rev.  G.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  65.

,  Herbert  T.,  quoted,  i.  133.

,  Jim,      alleged      communication      from,

ii.  474-7-    ..

,  S.,  case  of,  11.  153-4-

Librarian,  phantasm  of,  ii.  380-1.
Lie,  case  of.  i.  299-300.
LiSbeault,  Dr.  A.  A.—

Case  reported  by,  ii.  9,  169-70.
Cases  of  patients  of,  i.  474,  513.
Cited,  i.  438,  439,  459,  462,  514,  516,  540.
Quoted,  i.  455.
Work  of,  i.  161,  443-4.
Li6geois,   Dr.,  case    of    patients    of,  i.   513;

cited,  i.  514.
Life-
Aim  of,  ii.  294.
Attention,   subliminal,   the    condition  of,

i.  217-18.
Cosmic  and  planetary,  coexistent,  i.  151,

J55-

Materialistic     assumption    of     planetary
origin  of,  i.  95.


Life — continued.

Nature  of,  unknown,  i.  97,  246.
Self-adapting  power  of,  i.  216.
Supplications  for,  ii.  311-12.
Light-
Hallucinations  of,  ii.  323-5,  374,  381.
Magnetic,  i.  483.
Objective,  ii.  538-40.
Red,  stimulation    of    faculty  by,    i.   587

note  % :  ii.  90.
Subjective,  ii.  540-2.
Vital  photogeny,  ii.  540-1,  547.
"Light,"  cited,    ii.  229;  quoted,  ii.  329-30,

528  note,  551  and  note,  552.
Lightfoot,    Mrs.,  vision    seen    by,   i.    426-9;

ii.  61.

Literature,  improvisation  in,  i.  105.
Littre",  quoted,  ii.  139.

"  Livre  des  Esprits,"  cited,  ii.  117  note,  135.
"  Livre  des  Mediums,"  cited,  ii.  117  note.
Locomotor    ataxy,    motor    suggestibility    of,

ii.  114.
Lodge,  Mrs.,  hallucination  of,  i.  674-5.

Frederick    L.,     case    reported    by,    i.
674-5.

Sir  Oliver,  experiments  by,  i.  612:  ii.
238;   cited,    i.    601   note;   ii.  239,   542,
604;  quoted,  ii.  241,  604-8.
Lombroso,  Prof.,  cited,  i.  71,  91-2.
Long,  Geo.  E.,  case  of,  ii.  155-6.
Lots,    drawing    of,    premonitions,   regarding,

i.  671.
Loudun,    so-called    devils    of,    ii.     199-200,

422-3.

Loue",  C.,  case  of,  i.  184,  474.
"Louis,"    alleged    communications    from,   ii.

171.
Lourdes —

Charcot's  patients  sent  to,  ii.  311.
Legend  of,  i.  561-4.
Miracles  of,  i.  167,  212-15;  ii.  313.
Love —

Definition  of,  ii.  282.

Planetary  or    materialistic    theory  of,  i.

112-13.

Platonic,  i.  112-15.
Lowest-level  centres,  i.  72-3.
Lozada,  Senhor,  cited,  ii.  157.
Lucie,  case  of,  i.  326-31.
Luke,  Miss  Mary,  dreams  of,  i.  279,  390-2.
Luminescence,     ii.     538-9;     metetherial,    ii.

542.

Luminosity,  phenomena  of,  ii.  515.
Lunacy,  see  Insanity.

"  Lunatic  Asylum   Reports  (The  West  Rid-
ing)," cited,  i.  317  note.
Luther,  Mrs.,  case  of,  ii.  210-11,  217.
Luys,  Dr.,  i.   489-90;  cited,  i.  439.
Lyon,  Mrs.,  Home's  case  against,  ii.  580.

M.    (Delbceufs    subject),    experiments    with,

i.  506.

— ,  (Janet's  patient),  case  of,  i.  48.
— ,  Colonel,  case  of,  i.  456.
— ,  Mme.,  case  of,  i.  520-1.
— ,  Miss,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  73.
— ,  Mr.,  case  of,  ii.  404-5.
— ,  Mrs.,  experiments  by,  i.  244,  622-8.
— ,  Mrs.,  case  reported  by,  i.  546.


INDEX


647


M.,  Mrs.,  vision  of,  ii.  383-4.

— ,  Miss    E.     L.,    apparition     seen     by,     ii.

369-70.

— ,  Marie,  case  of,  i.  318-19.
Mabille,  Dr.,  i.  339,  491  ;  cited,  i.  497  note'2'.
Mabire,  Etienne,  cited,  i.  601  note.
Macalister,  Prof.,  cited,  ii.  516  note.
M' Alpine,     Mrs.,     apparitions     seen     by,     i.

270-1  ;  ii.  345.

Macario,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  522  note1.
M'Guire,    Katy,     communications     from,    ii.

215-17.
M'Kay,   Rev.   Charles,  case  reported  by,   ii.

348.

M'Kendrick,  Prof.,  criticised,  i.  164  note.
Mackenzie,  Robert,  apparition  of,  ii.  52-5.
M'P.,  Mrs.,  cited,  ii.  361-2.
Macropy,  i.  474.

Maginot,  Adele,  case  of,  ii.  220,  573-8.
Magnetic    fields,    hypnotic    perception   of,    i.

Magnetic  sense,  i.  482-3.

*'  Magnetisme  Animal,   Le, "  quoted,  1.329-

33°-
*'  Magnetismus    und    die    allgemeine    Welt-

sprache,  Der,"  cited,  i.  698  note.
Magneto-therapy,  i.  159.
Magnets,  sensibility  to,  i.  488,  490.
Maitland,  Edward,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  135.
"  Making  of   Religion,"    cited,   i.    237    note,

574-5,  645  note'2' ;  quoted,  i.  595-8.
"Maladies  de  la  Personnalite,  Les,"  quoted,

i.  10.
Malaise,  psycho-physiological,  i.  481  ;    ii.  18,

104.

Malcolm,  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  258-9.
Maloy,  phantasm  of,  ii.  348.
Mamtchitch,    Eugene,    apparitions    seen    by,

ii.  21-5,  210.
Mangiamele,     Vito,     case    of,    i.     80,    83-4,

116-17.

Mania,  see  Insanity.
Manning,  Mrs.,  dream  of,  i.  147,  417.
"Manners,  Elisa,"    control   by,   ii.    244,  248

note,  620-1.
"Manuel  Pratique  du  Magnetisme  Animal,"

quoted,  i.  520.
Manzini,    Signora    Maria,   automatic    writing

by,  ii.  446-7,  624-7.
Marguerite  case,  ii.  69-70.
Maria,  case  of,  i.  48-9,  463.
Marillier,  M.,  experiments  watched  by,  i.

525  ;  quoted,  i.  663  note.
Marot,  Dr.,  case  of  patient  of,  i.  464.
Mars,  alleged  communications  from,   ii.   130

seq.

Martian  language,  ii.  136-7.
Martin,  Mrs.,  case  sent  by,  i.  266.
Martineau,     Harriet,     case     of     cow     of,     i.

442.
Massey,    C.    C.,    case    sent    by,    ii.    561-2;

quoted,  ii.  584.
Mason,  Dr.  R.  Osgood,  cases  reported  by,  i.

63-4,  390-2.

Massive  motor  impulses,  ii.  112-15.
Maston,     Dr.    Claudius     Henry,    quoted,    i.

456-8.
Materialisation     (ectoplasy),     ii.     529,     541,

544-9-


Materialism,    view    of,    regarding    evolution,

i.     94  ;     regarding    love,     i.     112-13;    \
regarding  will-power,  i.  218.
Mathematical  prodigies,  i.  79-85.
Matter-
Conservation  of,  ii.  301.
Ether  in  relation  to,  ii.  209.
Laws  of,   an   incidental  case  of  laws  of

spirit,  i.  488.

Passage  of,  through  matter,  ii.  536.
Reality  of,  discussed,  i.  277-8.
Spirit's  influence  on,  i.  32  ;  ii.  204-5.
Maughan,    Miss    Edith    (Mrs.    G.    Rayleigh
Vicars),  apparitions  of,  i.  653-4,  693-
695.

Maury,  Alfred,  cited,  i.  124-5.
Mavroukakis,     Dr.,     case     reported     by,    i.

466.

Maxwell,  Prof.  Clerk,  cited,  ii.  530-1.
"  Mechanism  of  Man,"  cited,  i.  523.
Medical    clairvoyance,    see    under    Clairvoy-
ance.
"Medical   News,    The"    (U.S.A.),    cited,   i.

309;  quoted,  i.  456-8.
Medicine-men,  ii.  200  note,  283.
"Medico-Legal  Journal"   (U.S.A.),   quoted,

i.  319-21.
Mediumship —

Communications  affected   by    nature    of,

ii.  229,  590.

Effect  of,  on  medium,  ii.  131-2.
Physical    sufferings    reproduced    in,    ii.

220,  573-4.

Study  of,  valuable,  ii.  138.

"  Memoires  de  St.  Simon,"  cited,  i.  92.

"  Memoires  pour  servir  a  1'Histoire  et  a
1'Etablissement  du  Magnetisme  Ani-
mal," cited,  i.  159  note.

Memorability    a     test    of    consciousness,    i.

_.        36-7.
Memory —

Alternating  personalities,  in,  i.  341,  344,
346-53;  ii.  201.

Complete  conspectus  of  various  streams
of,  not  possible  to  present  conscious-
ness, i.  182.

Crystal-vision  reproducing  subliminal,  i.
132.

Definition  of,  ii.  265.

Double  (promnesia),  i.  644-5  anc^  note >'
ii.  264.

Dreams,  recovered  in,  i.  338  ;  ordinary,
in  dreams,  ii.  201.

Ecmnesia,  see  that  title.

Emotional  or  affective,  ii.  138-9.

Errors  of,  in  recounting  telepathic  im-
pressions, i.  637,  644.

Hypermnesia,  see  that  title.

Hypnotism  in  relation  to,  see  under
Hypnotism.

Hysteria,  in,  ii.  200.

Illusions  of,  i.  637,  644-6.

Multiplex  personality,  in,  i.  341,  344,
346-53;  ii.  201.

Organic,  ii.  266-7.

Pain,  of,  i.  472-4.

Paramnesia  (promnesia),  i.  644-5  an(^
note^- ;  ii.  264.

Physical  basis  of,  ii.  511.


648


INDEX


Memory — continued.

Post  -  epileptic    states,     of,    i.    61,    309,

3*3-»S'

Pre-natal,  ii.  266-7.

Promnesia    (paramnesia),    i.    644-5    and

note^--,  ii.  264.
Purgation  of,  i.  178.
Secondary  personality,    in,   nature  of,   i.

62,  128,  306 ;  ii.  192.

Secondary  personality,  of — lost   to  prim-
ary»  i-  332>  333.  336;  recalled  by  hypno-
tism, i.  61,  196,  309,  313-15,   317-19;
not  recovered,  i.  320,322.
Selective  nature  of,  i.  128.
Self -projection,  of,  i.  296.
Sleep,  in,  see  under  Dreams.
Somnambulistic,  i.  203.
Spirit  control  of,  ii.  550.
Subliminal  continuity  of,  i.  128.
Memory-images —

After-images  distinguished  from,    i.  567-

569.

Nature  of,  i.  226,  236.
Menneer,  Mrs.,  dream  of,  i.  425-6 ;  ii.  52.
Menken,  Adah,  control  by,  ii.  222.
Meredith,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  248  note.
Mesner,    work    of,   i.    5,    157,   159;   cited,   i.

698.
Mesmerism —

Effluence  theory  of,  i.  484-5  ;  ii.  515.
Objects  treated  by,  i.  484.
Rejection  of,  i.  600.
Spirits,  by,  ii.  527.
"  Mesmerism  and  the  Universal  Language,"

quoted,  i.  698-700.

"  Mesmerism  in  India,"  cited,  i.  470.
Mesnet,   Dr.,  case  recorded  by,  i.   181,   306;

cited,  i.  472.
Metallaesthesia,  i.  482.
Metallotherapy,  i.  159,  338.
Metamorphoses,  ii.  512.
"Metaphysical    Magazine,   The,"   quoted,   i.

423-

Metetherial  environment,  i.  95-6,  215-9.
Methectic,  explanation  of  term,  ii.  6  note.
Microbes,  hypnotism  in  relation  to,  i.  180.
Microscopic     perception     under     hypnotism,

case  of,  i.  478-9.
Middle-level  centres —
Functions  of,  i.  72-4.
Hypnotism,  in,  i.   157,   190,  194;  under
control  of  higher  centres  if  needful,  i.
198.

Mill,  John  Stuart,  abstraction  of,  i.  90.
Miller,  Mrs.,  vision  of,  i.  423-4.
Mind-
Habits  of,  598-600.
Nutrition  and  expenditure  of,  ii.  511.
Persisting  results  of  action  of,  ii.  60.
Phenomena  of,   not   to   be  explained  in

terms  of  physical,  i.  13  note.
Relation  of  consciousness  to,  i.  37.
Telaesthetic  vision,  evident  in,  i.  276.
"  Mind,"  cited,  i.  88  note*\  quoted,  i.  477.
"  Mind-Cure,    Faith-Cure,  and    the    Miracles

of  Lourdes,"  cited,  i.  213  note*.
Mind-healing,  i.  212.
Minot,  Prof.  C.  S.,  cited,  i.  598  note*.
Miracles  of  Lourdes,  167,  212-15;  ii.  313.


Mitchell,  Rev.  G.  W.,  cited,  ii.  562-5,  568-9.
Dr.  Weir,    cited,  i.  311-12;    quoted,   i.

336-

Mixed  sense  organs,  theory  of,  i.  186  note.

Moberley,     Mrs.     Alfred,    planchette  experi-
ments by,  ii.  144-5.

"  Modern  Priestess  of  Isis,  A,"  cited,  ii.  502.

"  Modern    Spiritualism  "    (Maskelyne),   cited,
ii-  503%

"Modern  Spiritualism"  (Podmore),  cited,  iu
207  and  note,  503.

Molecules —

Selective    guidance    of,    individually,    ii..

522.
Statistical  method    of    dealing    with,   ii..

53°-

Moll,  cited,  i.  438,  439,  514,  540.
Monasticism,  ii.  291,  309.
Moncrieff ,  Major,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  1 7.
Mondeux,  case  of,  i.  80,  83,  84.
Money,    Miss    S.,    apparition    seen    by,    iu

.  .351-2;

Monitions,  ii.  268,  272.
Mono-ideism,  i.   178,   189,  469;   dowsers,  of,.

i.  481.
Moral    character  of    automatic    messages,  ii.

J33-4-
Moral     faults,     hypnotic     influence     on,     i.

199-201.

Morin,  M.,  prediction  sent  to,  ii.  440.
Mori,  Maria,  case  of,  i.  493.
Morphinomania  cured  by  hypnotism,  i.   176,

199,  464.

Morse,  Miss,  hallucinations  of,  i.  667  note1.
Morton,  Miss  R.  C.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii»

389-96.

Moses,  Rev.  William  Stainton—
Books  by,  ii.  583.
Career  of,  ii.  585-7.

Case  of,  ii.  223-37;  cited,  i.  29,  32,  205;
ii.    115    note,  117,   189,    249,    505   and
note,    506,    513,    515,  '527-30,    533-7,
540-1,  546-9,  551-4.
Case  recorded  by,  ii.  560-1.
Letter  of,  quoted,  ii.  552.
Musicians'  messages  to,  ii.  167-8.

,  C.  W.,  case  of,  ii.  107-8.

Motor  automatism —

Dissolution     and    evolution     contrasted,.

ii.  83-4.

Dowsers,  of,  i.  481.
Drawing,  ii.  400-1,  442-3,  449.
Genius    and    hypnotism,    relation    to,  u

104.

Hyperaesthetic,  11.  104-11.
Hysterical  defects  supplied  by,  i.  48-9.
Idiognomonic  nature  of,  ii.  87.
Inhibitions,  see  that  title.
Instinctive,  i.  195.
Modes  of,  enumerated,  ii.  115.
Nature  of,  i.  222.
Possession,  see  that  title.
Scope  of  subject,  i.  27.
Sensory  automatisms,  compared  with,  u.
77,    115-16;    connected    with,  ii.    103,.
520.

Somnambulism,  in,  i.  306-7.
Speech,  as,  moral  character  of,  ii.  133-4*
Spiritually  controlled,  ii.  553.


INDEX


649


Motor  automatism—  continued,

Table-tilting,  ii.  92-4,  144,   150-3,  156-9,

207,  248  note,  423-6,  477,  489-91.
Table-turning,    ii.    92-4;     books    on,    ii.

Wnting  (hand-)—
Cases  of,  ii.  142-3,  147-8,  153,   160-1,

169-70,     172-8,     400,     416-18,    422,

435-40,  442-57,  459-71,  4.82-9,  495-
Demoniacal  possession,  in,  i.  304.
Evidential    quality     in,    stages    of,    ii.

235-6.

Hypnotic,  i.  328-31.
Hystero-epilepsy,  in,  i.  355-60.
Moses,  W.  S.,  case  of,  see  Moses.
Similarity  of,  to  hand-writing  of  alleged

agent,  ii.  168.

Somnambulism,  in,  i.  306-7.
Telekinesis  in,  ii.  207.
Test  of,  ii.  231-2,  235.
Varieties  of,  ii.  448,  460,  466,  483,  589,

596  (signatures).
Writing  (planchette-)—
Cases  of,  ii.   144-7,  154-6,  161-7,  173,

418-22,  426-34,  448,  457-82,  496.
Harmlessness  of,  ii.  423.
Post-hypnotic,  ii.  89.
Telekinesis  in,  ii.  207.
Writing  (hand-  and  planchette-)  —
Anagrams,  ii.  416-18.
Early  condition  of  subject,  ii.  116-17.
Effect    of,    on     automatic    writers,    ii.

118.
Evil  evidenced  in,  merely  mischievous,

ii.  78.
Hypnotic,  i.  328-31;    post-hypnotic,  ii.

89,  520.

Importance  of,  ii.  185.
Language  of,  i.  100.
Secondary  personality,  by,  i.  355-60.
Sources  of,  enumerated,  ii.  118-19.
Spontaneity  of,  ii.  442,  444,  591.
Motor  defects,  automatic  substitutions  for,  i.

48-9.

Mountain  Jim,  apparition  of,  ii.  44.
Mountford,   Rev.  Mr.,  apparition  seen  by,   i.

656-7.

Multiplex  personality  —  cases  of,  i.  338-54;
tendency  towards,  ii.  423;  nature  of,
ii.  512;  automatisms  with  character  of,
ii.  520.

Muscle-reading,  analogy  from,  ii.  88-9.
Muscular   sense,   hypnotic   effect    on,   i.    475;
rigidity     produced     by    suggestion,    i.


M       '

Music  —

Dream  of,  i.  369.
Hallucination  of,  ii.  388.
Hypnotic  subjects,  effect  on,  ii.  90.
Nature  of,  i.  101-3.
Musicophobia,  i.  466.
Musset,  De,  quoted,  i.  89.
Mustard  poultices,  imaginary,  i.  496-7.
Myers,   Dr.    A.    T.,  cited,  i.  213  and  note*,
391;    experiments  watched  by,  i.  525  ;
experiments  by,  i.  541  ;   on  committee
of  Census  of  Hallucinations,  i.  570.
Mysophobia,  i.  177.
Mysticism,  ii.  286.


"  Mystique   Divine,    naturelle    et   diabolique,

La,"  cited,  i.  493.
"  Myth,   Ritual,  and  Religion,"  cited,  ii.   31

note.

N.,  vision  of,  ii.  405.

— ,  Dr.,  case  of,  ii.  104.

— ,  M.,  case  recorded  by,  ii.  622-3.

Nagel,  cited,  i.  186  note,  479  and  note,
480.

Nail-biting  cured  by  hypnotism,  i.  459.

Nancy  School  of  Hypnotism,  see  under  Hyp-
notism.

Narcotics—

Impulse     to,     cured     by    hypnotism,     i.

176.
Suggestibility,  relation  to,  i.  162,  44.0-1.

Nascimento,  Jose  Custodio  Fernandez  do,  case
of,  i.  393-4.

Nasse,  cited,  160  noU\

"  Natural  and  Mesmeric  Clairvoyance,"  cited,
i.  207  note,  470.

Nature-speech,  ii.  571.

"Nature,"  quoted,  i.  455-6;  cited,  ii.  542
note.

Neilson,  cited,  i.  462.

Nervous  development,  modern  rapidity  of,  i.
92-3-

Nervous  disorders  cured  by  hypnotism,  i.
460.

Nery,  Donna,  dream  of,  ii.  347.

Netherclift,  F.  G.,  cited,  ii.  502.

Neuralgia,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  470-1.

Neurasthenia,  i.  465.

Neuro-muscular  changes  produced — by  self-
suggestion,  i.  168,  444-7;  by  hypnotism,
i.  187,  197.

Nevius,  Dr.  John,  cited,  ii.  198-200,  500-1.

"  Nevroses  et  I  dees  Fixes,"  cited,  i.  298,  460,
461,  463;  quoted,  i.  303-5,  461.

Newbold,   Prof.   Romaine,  cases  recorded  by,

i-  J34>  373-9;  cited,  *•  3r4l  »•  i98~9»

239,  604;  quoted,  i.  352-4;    ii.   500-1.
Newnham,    Mrs.,  telepathic  impression  of,  i.

418-19;  ii.  187;  planchette  writing  by,

ii.  199,  207,  426-31.
,  Rev.   P.   H.,  dream  of,  i.  147,  418-19;

telepathic     experiments     by,     ii.     140,

147-8,  187,  426-31.
Newton,  case  of,  i.  569.
Nicotinism,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  463-4.
"  Niederen  Sinne  der  Insekten,  Die,"  cited,  i.

479  note.

Nightmare,  i.  123-4.
Nims,  F.  A.,  case  reported  by,  i.  282.
Nisbet,  E.  T.,  case  reported  by,  i.  675-8.
Nordau,  Dr.  Max,  cited,  i.  71.
Normal —

Genius  best  type  of,  i.  72,  77,  78.
Misuse  of  term,  i.  333.
Scope  of  term,  i.  20,  76-7.
Normandie,  Rev.  C.  Y.  de,  quoted,  ii.  184-5.
"  Northern  Journal  of    Medicine,"  quoted,  i.

321-2.
Norton,   Capt.    Cecil,   apparition   seen   by,  ii.

336-8.
"  Nouvelles  Observations  sur  un  cas  de  Som-

nambulisme,"    cited,   ii.    131    note,  159

note'2-,  144  note1.


650


INDEX


Number -forms,  i.  565,  598-600.

Nut-shells,  clairvoyant  reading  of  mottoes  in,  i.

557-8.

O.,  Mr.,  case  sent  by,  ii.  209,  556-9.
— ,  Fraulein  Anna,  case  of,  i.  51,  53-4.
Objectivation  of  types —
Dreams,  in,  i.  126.
Hypnotic  influence  on,  i.  195.
*'  Observations  de  M6decine  Pratique,"  cited,

i.  445,  500;  quoted,  1.485.
Occult  wisdom,  ii.  277.
Ochorowicz,  Prof.,  cited,  ii.  545  ;  experiments

watched  by,  i.  525.

O'Gorman,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  248  note.
Oliphant,  Mrs.,  cited,  ii.  571  note.
"  On  the  So-called  Divining    Rod,"  cited,  i.

480-1.
"  Ophthalmology  and  Diseases  of  the  Nervous

System,"  cited,  i.  317  note.
Osgood,  Dr.  Hamilton,  cited,  i.  471.
"Over  the  Teacups,"  quoted,  i.  660-1.

P.,   experiments  with,  i.  499,  538-9,   547-53.

579-84-

— ,  Captain,  case  of,  ii.  43.
— ,  Mile,  de,  case  of,  ii.  156.
— ,  Mr.,  hallucination  of,  ii.  381.
— ,  Mrs.,  apparitions  seen  by,  ii.  326-9.
" — ,   G."   (George    Pelham),   control   by,   ii.

36,  198,  237-8,  241-3,  253-5,  608-20.
Pk.,  case  of,  i.  300.
P— 11,  case  of,  i.  503-5.
Pt.,  Mme.,  case  of,  i.  461.
Paige,  E.,  case  sent  by,  ii.  559-60.
Pain  (see  also  Analgesia) —

Anaesthetic    suppression    of,    not  perma-
nent, i.  472-3.

Dream  memory  of,  i.  181.

Hypnotism  in  relation  to,  i.  23,  470.

Inhibition  of,  ii.  550.

Memory  of,  i.  472-4.

Mind-healing  of,  i.  212.

Nature  of,  i.  179-81.

Self-suggestion  effective  in  removal  of,  i.
471.

Sense  of,  distinguished  from  temperature-
sense,  i.  65-6.

Transference  of  sensation    of,   i.    540-1,

543,  613-14.

Palasolithic  psychology,  i.  247,  249.
Palladia,  apparitions  of,  ii.  21-5.
Palliser,  Matthew,  phantasm  of,  ii.  343-4.
Panaesthesia  in  primal  germ,  i.  186 ;  ii.  269.
Paquet,  Mrs.  Agnes,  vision  seen  by,  i.  282-4.
Paramnesia,  ii.  264.
Paraphasia  in  hysteria,  i.  53.
Parish,  E.,  cited,  i.  645  ana  note^.
Parker,    Hon.    Mrs.,    apparition    seen   by,  i.

678-80.
Parry,    Miss   Lucy  Gambier,  phantasm  of,  ii.

376-7.

Parsons,  Dr.  D.  J.,  case  of,  i.  441 ;  ii.  111-112.
Pascal,  case  of,  cited,  i.  117.
Passion,  analysis  of,  i.  112-13.
"Pathologic    des    Emotions,"    cited,    i.    587

note  2.

Payne,  Joseph,  case  of,  cited,  i.  519.
Pearce,  W.  H.,  case  of,  i.  654-6.


Pearson,  Miss  Ann,  phantasm  of,  ii.  334.
Pedrono,  case  of,  i.  567  note.
Peed,  Rev.  J.,  case  reported  by,  i.  558-9.
"  Pelham,  George  "  ("  G.  P." ),  control  by,  ii.
36,    198,    237-8,    241-3,    253-5,    608-
620.

Pennee,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  68  note.
Perceptive  faculty —

Hypnotic  influence  on,  i.  184-7.
Independent  of  sense-organs,  i.  191.
Pereliguine,     Anastasia,    alleged    communica-
tion from,  ii.  471-3.
Perkins,  Dr.  Elisha,  i.  489.
Personality —

Common-sense  view  of,  i.  10-13,  J7,  222-
"Co-ordination"  view,  i.  10-11.
Dissociation  of,  i.  249-51,  263,  297.
Infinite  God  transcending,  ii.  308,  313.
Integration  of,  the  human  object,  i.  216.
Isolation  of  elements  of,  i.  57.
Modifiable   nature  of  complex  forces  in,

i.  68.

Multiplex  —  cases  of,  $.338-54;  tendency
towards,  ii.  423;  nature  "of,  ii.  512;
automatisms  with  character  of,  ii.
520.

Psychological  view  of,  i.  10-11.
Secondary,  see  Secondary  personality.
Splinters  of,  perhaps  evidenced  in  teasing

"controls,"  ii.  200-1.
Supraliminal  life  a  privileged  case  of,  i.

223.
Perspiration,  excessive,  hypnotic  influence  on,

i.  491.
Perturbation  masking  evolution,  i.  21,  56,  93;

ii.  86.

Pesaro  experiments,  cited,  ii.  193.
Peterson,  Dr.  F.,  cited,  i.  490.  '
Pe'te'tin,  cited,  i.  485-6,  500,  523,  539  note*.
Petrovo-Solovovo,   Michael,  cases  sent  by,  ii.

40-2,  478-80;  cited,  ii.  51,  555.
Phantasmogenetic  centres,  i.  232,  247,  264-5,

273-4,  685  ;  ii.  1 86,  194,  685.
Phantasms —

Death,  about  moment  of,  ii.  271,  283.
Discarnate    spirits,    of,     see     Discarnate

spirits — Apparitions.
Living,  of  the,  i.  225-7,  272-4,  281,  287,

291  ;  ii.  323,  34576.
"  Phantasms  of  the  Living  " —

Cited,  i.  4,  8,  24-5,  124,  125,  207  note,
228,  245,  247-8,  254,  280,  284,  286,
291,  416-17,  523,  529,  533;  539  **f
notes,  543,  570,  636  seq.,  642-3,  688,
699-700;  ii.  31,  42-5,  52,  101,  114,

3°°t  345,  369,  388.
Production  of,  i.  243.
Quoted,  i.     137-8,    144,     H8-9,   255-63,
269,    272,   280,    287-290,     292-6,    394,
398,  413-16,  418-20,  424-33,  542,  601,
613-14,  646-51,  654-9,  661-7,  678-82,
686-8;    ii.   62-3,  66-7,  69-71,   169-70,
336-7,  343-4,  348-51,  367,  372-3,  376-9,
415-16,  423-5.

Phillips,  R.  C.,  quoted,  i.  559-61.

"  Philosophy  of  Mysticism,"  cited,  i.  58  note.

Phinuit,  Dr.,  control  by,  ii.  220,  237-41,
245-7,  600-1,  604-8,  610-13,  616,  619-
624.


INDEX


651


Phipson,  Dr.  T.  L.,  cited,  ii.  539.
Phobies,  i.  465-8.
Phosphorescence,  ii.  515,  538-40.
"  Phosphorescence,"  cited,  ii.  539.
Photogeny,  vital,  ii.  540-1,  547.
"Phrenological    Journal     and     Miscellany,"

cited,  i.  667  note  1.
Physical  phenomena,  mental  phenomena  not

to  be  explained  in  terms  of,  i.  13  note.
Pierce,  A.  H.,  cited,  i.  12  note  2.
Pike,  J.,  dream  of,  i.  147,  415-16.
Piper,  Mrs.,  case  of,  ii.  237-56 ;  case  cited,  i.
29,  205;  ii.  137,  190-1,  198,  200,  213,
311;  reports  on,  ii.  599-624.
Pitres,  Dr.,  case  of  patient  of,  i.  47,  164,  512.
Planchette,    see     Motor    automatisms — Writ-
ing.

Planetary  and  cosmic,  see  Cosmic.
Plasticity-
Hypnotic    somnambulism    productive    of

greater,  i.  217.

Primitive,  recovery  of,  i.  193-4.
Reason,   of,   combined  with    stability   of

instinct,  i.  195.
Plato-
Love    as    depicted    by    (quotation    from

"Symposium"),  i.  112-15.
Reminiscence  theory  of,  i.  117-19.
Socrates,    incidents    regarding,   described

by,  ii.  97-9.

Plotmus,  quoted,  n.  289-91  and  note.
Plummer,  Rev.  W.  S.,  cited,  i.  338.
Plutarch,  cited,  ii.  99.
Podmore,  Frank —

Cases  under  notice    of  —  attested    by,  i.

658;  investigated   by,  i.  681  ;  ii.  353,

356,  358-9,  387;  reported  by,  i.  381-2.

Census  of  Hallucinations,  on  committee

of,. i.  570.

Cited,  i.  244,  219  note;  ii.  30  and  note,
56,   68,    207   and  note,  220,   230  note,

5OI-3>  555»  573»  578-
Quoted,  i.  619-22,  642,  688-90.
Poetry,  nature  of,  i.  101-2.
Points  de  repere,  i.  185,  190,  238,  375,  499,

578.
Polarisation  of    light,   analogy    from,   i.   235

note.

Pole,  Mr.  W.,  quoted,  i.  81.
Poltergeists,  ii.  72,  501,  555.
Poly-ideism,  i.  470.

Ponomareff,  N.  J.,  apparition  of,  ii.  40-2.
Possession —

Analogies  for,  ii.  192-4,  201-2,  254.
Angelic  or  diabolic,  not  found,  ii.  198-9.
Brain  function  in  cases  of,  ii.  201,  204,

254.

Chinese,  ii.  198-9,  500-1.
Definition  of,  ii.  189.
Diabolic,  not  found,  ii.  198-9;  so-called,

i.  303-5.
Ecstasy       sometimes       indistinguishable

from,  ii.  210.

Family  circles  or  groups,  in,  ii.  209.
Home  case,  see  Home.
Hostile,  not  found,  ii.  198.
Importance  of  theory  of,  ii.  191.
"  Inspiration  "  identical  with,  ii.  115.
Mischievous  "controls,"  ii.  200.


f    Possession — continued.

Moses  case,  see  Moses.

Motor   automatism,   extreme  case  of,  ii.

189.

Nature  of,  ii.  190-1,  196-7,  203-5.
Piper,  Mrs.,  case  of,  ii.  237-56.
Popular  expectations  regarding,  ii.  203.
Processes  of,  ii.  250-5.
So-called,  i.  65,  305,  360-8;  ii.  422-3.
Spirit-possession —

Break      in      series      of      psychological
changes  possibly  effected  by,   i.  39.
Cases  of,  i.  205.
Evidence  for,  i.  28-9.
Split  personality,  risk  of  confusion  with,

ii.  198.

Telekinesis  in  relation  to,  ii.  205-8.
Telepathy,  development  of,  i.  250.
Two  or  more  spirits,  by,  ii.  190.
Undesirable  spirits,  by,  ii.  554.
X.,  Mme.,  case  of,  ii.  125-30.
"  Possibilities  of   Mai-Observation  and  Lapse

of  Memory,  The,"  cited,  i.  646.
Pouchet,  case  of,  i.  569.
Powilewicz,  Dr.,  hypnotic  cure  by,  i.  326.
"  Practitioner,"  cited,  i.  498  note.
Pratt,  Thomas,  dream  of,  i.  400-2.
Prayer —

Belief  in,  i.  242.
Nature  of,  ii.  313,  554.
Telepathy  in  relation  to,  ii.  306.
Theological  connotation  of,  ii.  309.
Precognition —

Cases  of,  i.  558-9;  ii.  262  nofe,  435-40.
Complexity  involved  in,  i.  136.
Death,  of,  see  tinder  Death.
Discussion    of,    i.    246,   248;    ii.    262-4,

268-73.
Dreams,   in,    i.    142-3,   400-13;    11.   271,

524.

Hallucination,  in.  i.  668-71.
Hypnotic  trance,  in,  i.  210.
Joan  of  Arc,  case  of,  ii.  404.
Monitions  classed  as,  ii.  268.
Somnambulism,  in,  i.  204.
"  Prelude,  The,"  cited,  i.  109-11.
Premonition,  vague,  of  evil  (see  also  Precog-
nition), ii.  196.

Prenatal  suggestion,  i.  177,  455-8;  ii.  515-16.
Prevision,  see  Precognition.
Prevorst,  Seeress  of,  ii.  570-1.
Preyer,  W.,  cited,  i.  442.
Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  case  of  subject  of,  i.  63,

341,  344-52;  ii.  199.
"Principles    of    Psychology,"    cited,    i.     88

note1,  569  note1;  quoted,  i.  336.
Proctor,  Mr.,  cited,  ii.  399.
"  Progres  Medical,"  cited,  i.  497  notes2,8.
Prolongeau,  case  of,  i.  80,  83.
Promnesia    (double    memory),  i.   644-5    an(^

note1;  ii.  264.
Protoplasm —

Genius,  origin  of,  referred  to,  i.  117.
Pansesthesia  of,  i.  186 ;  ii.  269.
Prophylactic  measures,  analogy  from,  i.  36.
Proust,  Dr.,  case  of  patient  of,  i.  61,  317-18.
Proximity,  sensibility  to —
Animals,  of,  i.  483-4.
Persons,  of,  i.  487.


65  2


INDEX


Prudhomme,  Sully,  quoted,  i.  89;  ii.  139.
Pruit,  J.  W.,  case  recorded  by,  ii.  566.
Pseudo-possession,  see  Possession — So-called.
Pseudo-presentiments,  i.  644-6,  667.
Psychical  invasion —

Cases  of,  i.  263-9,  649-50,  653-6,  675-
700;  by  spirits  of  the  living,  i.  147-8;
by  spirits  of  the  dying  or  dead,  i.  150;
where  only  percipient  retains  memory
of  circumstance,  i.  286-91  ;  where
agent  and  percipient  retain  memory
of  circumstance,  i.  291,  418-21;  ii.
147.
Continuity  of  dream-life  suggested  by,

i.  263.

Dreams,  in,  i.  147,  417,423.
Nature  of,  ii.  525.
Series  of  cases  in,  i.  254.
Space    conceptions    involved    in,    i.   231,

247.

Telepathic  impact  merging  into,  ii.  186.
Uncertainty    of    experiment    in,    i.    292

and  note.
Psychical    Research   Society,   see  Society  for

Psychical  Research.
"  Psychische    Behandlung   der   Neurasthenic,

Die,"  cited,  i.  465.

"Psychische    Studien,"    quoted,    ii.    178-82,
466,  493-4.


Psycho-therapeutics,  ii.  515,  527.
"  Psycho-Thdrapie,"  cited,  i.   45


471.


459,   462,  465,


"  Psychological    Review,    The,"    quoted,    ii.

239.
"Psychologic     der     Suggestion,"     cited,     i.

"Psychologic    des    Sentiments,"     cited,     ii.

139  note^.
"Psychologic  du  Raisonnement,  La,"  cited,

i.  569  note  i.
Psychology —

Experimental  stage  of,  i.  235  note.
Palaeolithic,  i.  247,  249.
"  Psychology  "  (James),  cited,  i.  587  note*.
"  Psychology  of  Suggestion,    The,"  cited,  i.

6 1  note.
Psychorrhagy —

Cases  of,  i.  264-5.
Hauntings  perhaps  due  to,  ii.  75.
Scope  of  term,  i.  264.
Puys6gur,    Marquis    de,  cited,   i.   485-6,   539

note2',  work  of,  i.  159.
Pulse,  hypnotic  effect  on,  i.  475,  491.
Pythagoras,  cited,  ii.  135-6.

Q.,  phantasm  of,  ii.  380-1.

— ,  Lady,  dream  of,  i.  410-13.

— ,  Miss   Mary,  auditory  hallucination  heard

by,  ii.  58-60.
Quentin,      Col.,     communication     regarding,

ii.  166-7.
Quicherat,  M.,  cited,  ii.  101-2,  404.

R.,  Dr.,  apparition  of,  ii.  35.
— ,  Mile.,  case  of,  i.  533.
— ,  Mr.,  hallucination  of,  ii.  381.
— ,  Mr.  Van,  case  of,  i.  80,  82.
— ,  Mrs.,  planchette    writing    by,    ii.    161-7,
457-8.


R.,  Mrs.    Constance,    auditory    hallucination

of,  i.  680-2.
— ,    Miss    A.    E.,    apparition     seen     by,     i.

659-60.
— ,    Miss    E.    W.,    apparition    seen    by,    i.

686-7.

— ,  Miss  Lucy,  case  of,  i.  51-3.
— .  Marceline,  case  of,  i.  331-3.
Radberg,  Alma,  case  of,  i.  497,  554-5.
Radnor,  Lady,  case  recorded  by,  ii.  452-3.
Ralph,     Miss,     experiments      with,     i.     542,

603  seq.,  613-14.
Ramadier,  Dr.,  i.  491.

Ramsay,  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  289-90
and  note.

,  Prof.,  quoted,  ii.  528.

Rapport —

Experiments  for,  i.  185.

Nature  of,  i.  209.

Socrates,  case  of,  ii.  96,  98-9.

Thought-transference    formerly    held    to

depend  on,  i.  600.
Various  opinions  on,  i.  540.
"  Rapport   in  der   Hypnose,    Der,"   cited,   i.

540.
Raps —

Cases  of,  ii.    160,  171,  208,  449,  454-5,
461,   472,    474-7,    492,    503-4,    588-9,

59',  593>..595-
Nature  of,  11.  92,  537.
Rarey  method,  i.  163,  200.
Rawson,     Henry     G.,     experiments     by,    i.

614-19.

Raymond,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  298.
Raynes,  Dr.  S.  H.,  ii.  315.
Read,  Surg.-Genl.  L.  H.,  cited,  i,  311-12.
Reading  with  sole  of  foot,  i.  500.
Reality,  symbolism  and,  compared,  i.  277.
"  Recherches      Experimental, "      cited,     i.

497-
"  Recherches   Physiologiques  sur  1'Homme,"

cited,  i.  159  note.
"Recherches    sur    1'Homme    dans    le    Som-

nambulisme,"  cited,  i.  485.
Recollection,  see  Memory.
Red  light,  stimulation  of  faculty  by,  i.  587

notei;  ii.  90.
Reddell,  Frances,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  266,

268.

Redmond,  Miss,  experiments  by,  i.  613.
Reed,  Lieut.-Col.,  apparition  of,  i.  255-7.

,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  17.

,  Mrs.,  vision  of,  i.  426-9.

Reeves,    Henry    E.,   apparition    seen    by,  ii.

46-8.

Re"gis,  cited,  i.  460.
Reichenbach,  Baron,  cited,  i.  483.
Reid,  quoted,  i.  10.
Reincarnation   (see    also  Transmigration),   ii.

134-5,  139  and  note  2.
Relationship  in  regard    to   telepathy,   i.  272

and  note.
"  Religio-Philosophic  Journal,"  cited,  i.  360;

quoted,  i.    382-3,    413-15;    ii.    334~5»

489-91-
Religion—

Ancient  Sage  (Lao  Tzu),  of  the,  ii.  286.
Buddhism,  ii.  286,  289-91.
Christianity,  ii.  280-3,  286,  288,  294-7.


INDEX


653


Religion—  continued.

Conversion,  see  that  title.

Definition  of,  i.  115;  ii.  257,  285,  306.

Evolution  of,  ii.  306.

Materialism  concordant  with  view  of,  as

to  will-power,  i.  218.
Methods  of,  ii.  305.
Natural,  ii.  286,  296.
Oracular,  ii.  283.
Platonic  love,  relation  to,  i.  115.
Post-mortem  evidence  in  relation   to,   ii.

78-9,  133.  287,  3°8-
Postulates  of,  i.  119.
Proof  of  preamble   of,   the   task  of    the

S.P.R.,  ii.  297.

Science — complementary   to,   i.    33  ;    ap-
plied  to,    ii.    275 ;    developed   into,    ii.
284,  290,  297  ;  originally  one  with,  ii.
296.
Synthesis    of,   provisional    sketch   of,   ii.

284-92.

Reminiscence  theory  of  Plato,  i.  117-19.
Renterghem,  Dr.  Van —

Cited,  i.  459,  460,  462,  464,  465,  471.
Work  of,  i.  1 56.

"Report   of    the    International    Congress   of
Experimental       Psychology      (1892),"
cited,  i.  566  note'2-.
"  Report  on  the   Census  of   Hallucinations,"

see  under  Hallucinations.
Repression,  early  need  of,  i.  173.
Reptiles,  hypnotic  experiments  on,  i.  163,

441-2.
"  Researches   in   Spiritualism,"   cited,  ii.   541

note,  583.

"Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritual-
ism," cited,  ii.  579.
Restitution  of  function,  i.  476-7.
Retrocognition —

Cases  of,  ii.  262  note.
Discussion  of,  i.  n,  69,  262-8.
Dreams,  in,  ii.  524.
Hauntings  in  relation  to,  ii.  76.
Spiritually  given,  ii.  550.
Telaesthetic,  ii.  248.
Rette,  cited,  i.  89.
Revelation —

Civilisation's  attitude  towards,  ii.  135.
Nature  of,  ii.  287.
"Revelations  of  a  Spirit  Medium,"  cited,  ii.

5°3-
"  Reves,  Les,"  cited,  i.   130  note  \  370  and

note.
41  Revue  de  1'Hypnotisme" —

Cited,  i.  181,  331  note,  440,  445,  459-60,
462,  464,  465  and  notes,  466,  471,  472,
486,  490-1  and  nofes2-5,  497  and  note^,
498,  512-14,  518,  566  note^-;  ii.  114
note.
Quoted,  i.  317,  455,  458-60,  463,  464,

466,  471,  476.

41  Revue  de  Medecine,"  quoted,  i.  130-1.
"  Revue  des   Etudes    Psychiques,"  quoted,  i.

520.
"  Revue  Philosophique  " —

Cited,  i.  79  note,  470,  477,  510,  533;  ii.

423-

Quoted,  i.  322-30,  501-2,  521,  524-5
"Revue  Positive,"  ii.  139.


"Revue    Scientifique,"    cited,    i.    331,    512;

quoted,  i.  133-4.

Reynolds,  Mary,  case  of,  i.  62,  336,  338.
Rheumatism,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  470.
Ribot,  quoted,  i.  10,  90;  cited,  ii.  139  note^-.
Richardson,   Miss,   case  reported  by,   i.  431-

,  Mrs.,  case  of,  i.  398-9.

Richet,  Prof.  Charles —

Case  sent  by,  ii.  212-13.

Cited,  i.  195,  533,  601  note;  ii.  93.

Experiments  by,  i.  528;  ii.  144,  42^-4.

Quoted,  i.  486-7.

Work  of,  i.  161.
Riddell,    W.,   planchette  experiments   by,    ii.

146-7.

Rider,  Jane,  case  of,  i.  524.
Rifat.  cited,  i.  440.

Ringier,  Georg,  cited,  i.  462,  464,  465.
"  Rivista  di   Studi    Psichici,"    cited,    i.   671 ;

quoted,  ii.  442-4.

Robert  Lowe,  case  of  the,  i.  654-6.
Robinet,  cited,  i.  477.
Robinson,  William  E.,  cited,  ii.  503.
Rochas,  De,  cited,  i.  500.
Rocking,  soporific  effect  of,  i.  165.
Roff,  Mary,  case  of,  i.  361-6.
Romances    possibly  suggested    by  discarnate

spirits,  ii.  140.

Romanes,  G.  ].,  case  reported  by,  i.  419-21.
Rose,  case  of,  i.  496-7.
Rose-asthma,  i.  483.
Rosse,  quoted,  i.  321.
Rossi-Pagnoni,  Prof.—

Cited,  ii.  168,  503.

Experiments  by,  ii.  458-61.
"  Rou,"  case  of,  i.  299.
Rowe,    Jim,    alleged    communications    from,

ii.  155-6.
Royce,  Prof.—

Case  attested  by,  ii.  27.

Case  sent  by,  ii.  404.

Cited,  i.  371-2,  644-6.

Quoted,  i.  86.

Rumour,  Greek  theory  of,  i.  243.
Russell,  Edwin,  apparition  of,  ii.  45-8.
Russen,  Thomas,  care  of,  i.  309.

S.    Dr.  and  Mrs.,  case  of,  i.  244.

—  Lieut.,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  699.

—  Miss,  planchette  writing  of,  ii.  155-6.

—  Mrs.,  auditory  hallucination  of,  i.  680-2.

—  Col.  A.  v.,  case  reported  by,  i.  371-2.

—  lima,  case  of,  i.  194,  460,  495-6-

—  Dr.  J.,  experiments  by,  i.  629-32.

—  Mr.  N.  T-,  case  of,  i.  245.
S — t,  case  of,  i.  451-2.
Sacerdotalism,  ii.  309.
Safford,  Prof.,  case  of,  i.  80,  82.

St.  Brieuc,  case  of  Bishop  of,  cited,  ii.  68.
"St.  Louis    Medical   and   Surgical  Journal,"

cited,  ii.  315.
Saint-Saens,  cited,  i.  90.
St.  Theresa,  trances  of,  i.  5.
Saints,  i.  56,  119-20.
Salpetriere  School  of  Hypnotism,   see  under

Hypnotism.

Samways,  Mrs.,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  648-9.
Sand,  George,  work  of,  cited,  i.  105-6.


654


INDEX


Sanders,  Rev.  Const.  Blackmon  (X  +  Y  =  Z),

case  of,  ii.  217-18,  222,  562-9.
Sanity,  definition  of,  ii.  102.
Saunier,  M.,  case  investigated  by,  ii.  143.
Sauter  case,  514.
Sch — ,  Jeanne,  case  of,  i.  517-18.
Scented  secretions,  ii.  528-9.
Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  experiments  by,  ii.    124,

418-22.

Schmidkunz,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  533.
SchmolL  Anton,  cited,  i.  601  note.
Schnelle'r,  Fraulein,  case  reported  by,  i.  433-4.
Schrenck-Notzing,  Von —

Cited,  i.  177  note,  459,  465,  498,  513-14,

60 1  note.

Hypnotic  results  obtained  by,  i.  438.
Schumann,  quoted,  i.  103  note.
"Schura,"     alleged     communications     from,

ii.  179-82.
Science —

Achievements  of,  ii.  308.

Development    of,    into    philosophy    and

religion,  ii.  284,  290,  297.
Ideals  of,  ii.  258.
Language  of,  i.  99.

Methods     of,     ii.     300-1;     applied     to
psychology,  i.  1-2 ;  to  religion,  ii.  275,
279-81,  298.
Nature  of,  ii.  295.

Religion — complementary  to,  i.  33;  de-
fined by,  ii.  275;  developed  out  of,
ii.  284,  290,  297;  originally  one  with,
ii.  296.

Synthesis  of  the  Universe,  ii.  297.
Scott,   Capt.   Daniel,   case   of    dream    of,   i.
387-90.

,  Miss     Louisa,      apparition      seen      by,

ii.  396-7.

,  Miss     M.    W.,    apparition     seen     by,

ii.  396-9.

Script  (see  Motor  automatisms — Writing).
Scripture,  Prof.,  cited,  i.  79  note,  80;  quoted,

i.  82-4.

Scryers,  see  Crystal-vision.
Searle,   Mrs.    Richard,  apparition   of,  i.  281,

665-6.
Secondary  personality —

Accident  a  cause  of,  i.  61.
Dyspepsia,  following  on,  i.  321-2.
Emotionally  selected,  i.  57.
Epilepsy,  following  on,  i.  308-17.
Exhaustion  of  vitality  a  cause  of,  i.  61.
Hypnotism,  under,  i.  322-3.
Hysteria,  in,  i.  317-19.
Improvement  on  primary,   i.   62-4,  333.
Memory    in,    i.    128,   ii.    192;    hypnotic
memory  analogous  to,  i.   171-2;  hyp-
notic   influence    on,   i.    196;    hypnotic
stages  resembling,  i.  450.
Memory  of,  lost  to  primary,  i.  332,  333,

336;  not  recovered,  i.  320,  322.
Memory  of  primary  recovered  in  dreams

during,  i.  338.

Multiplex  personality,  see  that  title.
Possession   theory  in  the  light  of,  i.  65  ;

ii.  192,  198.

Primary  superseded  by,  i.  331-5  ;
memory  of  primary  recovered  during,


Secondary  personality — continued.
Rudimentary  form  of,  i.  299.
Sleep,  of,  i.   66,   151-2,   155;    beginning!

in  sleep,  i.  333,  336.
Somnambulism    developing    into,    i.    60,

203,  305-6.
Telaesthesia  analogous  to  phenomena  of,

i.  250.
"Seherin  von  Prevorst,  Die,"  cited,  ii.  570!

and  note.

Self-consciousness,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  467.
Self-projection,  i.  251".
Self-suggestion —

Anaesthesia    and    rigidity    produced    by,  i

i-  533-

Charms  and  incantations  as,  ii.  310.

Curative  power  of,  ii.  311,  513.

Dreams,  in,  i.  369.

Increasing  importance  of,  i.  198.

Narcotic  influence  on,  i.  441.

Nature  of,  ii.  311-13.

Pain  suppressed  by,  i.  471.

Schemes  of,  i.  198,  211-14.
"  Semirus  "  control,  ii.  161,  450,  454,  457.
Sensation,  community  of,  i.  487,  540-3.
Sense  organs —

Mixed,  theory  of,  5.  186  note,  479-80.

Perceptive  power  independent  of,  i.  191.

Specialisation  of,  i.  224,  479-80.
Sensitives,  perception  of,  by  spirits,  ii.  253.
Sensibility,  Sensitivity —

Central  sensory  perception,  stimulation
of,  i.  188-92,  234 ;  symbolic  character
of,  i.  276;  potentiality  of,  i.  482.

Concomitances  of,  i.  224-5.

Confusion  in,  ii.  269.

Drugs  and  food,  to,  i.  483.

Exteriorisation  of,  i.  500-1.

Heat,  to — distinguished  from  pain-sense,
i.  65-6;  hypnotic  effect  on,  i.  475.

Internal  and  external  character  of,  i.
223.

Irregularity  of  distribution  of,  i.  482.

Magnets,  to,  i.  482-3,  488.

Specialisation  of  undifferentiated,  i.  224,
478.

Transposition  of  senses,  i.  191-2,  500-2.
Sensory  automatism —

Genius  and  hypnotism,  relation  to,  i.
104.

Hallucinations,  see  that  title.

Healthy  subjects  of,  i.  228.

Moral  predisposing  causes  for,  i.  229.

Motor  automatisms,  compared  with,  ii.
77,  115-16;  closely  allied  with,  ii.  103,
520.

Nature  of,  i.  222.

Scope  of  subject,  i.  23-5.

Spirit,  existence  and;  persistence  of,
proved  by,  ii.  76.

Spiritually  controlled,  ii.  550.

Telepathy  a  prerequisite  of,  i.  241.
Sewel,  Dr.  J.,  ii.  321.

Sexual  passion,  disorders  of,  cured  by  hypnot-
ism, i.  176-7.

Seybert,  Henry,  cited,  ii.  503.
Shagren,  Mrs.,  vision  seen  by,  421-3.
Shell-hearing,  i.  275.
Shells,  theory  of,  ii.  ii.


INDEX


655


Shelley  criticised,  i.  97.
Shock,  catalepsy,  &c.,  induced  by,  i.  163.
Shyness,  hypnotic  influence  on,  i.  178,  179.
Sidgwick,  Mrs. —

Case  attested  by,  i.  654.

Case  investigated  by,  ii.  342.

Case  reported  by,  i.  543~6-

Census  of   Hallucinations,   on  committee

of,  i.  570.
Cited,  i.  402,  406,  599  note;  11.   71  note,

501-2  and  note.
Cross-examination    of    witnesses    by,    i.

640.
Experiments  by,    i.    171,    190,   208,  240,

452-5,  535-9-

Experiments  watched  by,  i.  547,  551.
Quoted,  i.  282-4,  682-5 ;  ii.  72  and  note-

75  and  note.
Sidgwick,  Prof. —

Cases  attested  by,  i.  649;  ii.  33.
Cases  investigated  by,  i.  678;  ii.  342.
Case  reported  by,  ii.  122-3.
Census    of    Hallucinations    under    direc-
tion of,  i.  570.

Cited,  i.  144,  146,  599  note ;  ii.  501-2.
Cross-examination     of    witnesses     by,   i.

640.

Experiments  by,  i.  499,  600.
Experiments  watched  by,  i.  547.
Presidency   of   S.P.R.   first    held  by,   ii.

224.

Sidis,  Dr.  Boris,  cited,  5.  61  and  note.
Sight,  see  Visual  faculty.
Silent  willing,  i.  208,  539-40.
Simpson,  Anne,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  348.
Sinclair,  B.  F.,  apparition  of,  i.  697-8.
Skae,  Dr.  David,  case  reported  by,  i.  321-2.
Skeat,  Prof.,  cited,  ii.  230.
Skilton,  J.  W.,  case  of,  ii.  571-2.
Skirving,  Alexander,  case  of,  ii.  114,  415-16.
Sleep  (see  also  Dream) —

"  Anatomy  of  Sleep,"  cited,  ii.  348.
Break  in  series  of  psychological  changes

possibly  at  the  point  of,  i.  39.
Genius  compared  with,  i.  135.
Hyperaesthesia  of,  i.  124-5,  369.
Hypnotism,  a   developed   form  of,  i.  90,
202;      contrasted     with,    i.     170,    172;
applied   to,   restricting  causes  of   wak-
ing, i.  196.
Incantation   compared   to,   by   spirits,   ii.

254.

Maximum  of,  not  discovered,  i.  152.
Mentation  during,  i.  89-90.
Nature  of,  i.  122,  150,  221.
Preaching  during,  i.  519  and  notes.
Recuperative  power  of.  i.   123,   126,  150,

202;  ii.  81.

Reversion  and  preversion  in,  i.  21.
Rocking  to  induce,  i.  165.
Secondary  personality   of,   i.    66;    begin-
ning in,  i.  333.  336.
Self-projection  during,  i.  295.
Somnambulism,  relation  to,  i.  123.
Subliminal   self  active  in,   i.  155,  220-1;

ii.  81.

Trance  replacing,  i.  353.
Travelling  clairvoyance  in,  ii.  193.
Sleep-waking,  see  Somnambulism.


Smell,  sense  of —

Analogy  from,  ii.  85  note  1.

Divisibility  of,    theoretically    possible,  i.

484.

Hallucination  of,  i.  51-2,  86-7.
Hyperaesthesia  of,  ii.  414.
Motor  inhibition  possibly  due  to,  ii.  107^

109.

Transference  of,  i.  613.
Smith,  Mile.,  case  of,  ii.  503.

,  Mrs.,  dream  of,  i.  416-17.

,  G.  A.,  experiments  by,  i.  451-5,  499,

534-41,  547-53,  578-84.

,  George  Main,   table-tilting   experiments

by,  ii.  144,  425-6.

,  H.   Arthur,   planchette  experiences  of,.

ii.  120-2.

,  H.  Babbington,  cited,  ii.  168,  458-60.

,  Helene,    Mile.,    case    of,    ii.     131-44  'r

case  cited,  i.  305  ;  ii.  95  note,  230.
,  Mrs.  J.  P.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  342-

,  J.  VV.,  cited,  i.  601  note.

Smoking,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  463-4.

Smyth,  Sibbie  (nee  Towns),  apparition   seen

by,  ii.  62-3.

Society  for  Psychical  Research-
Founding  of,  i.  8  note *  ;  ii.  224.
Function  of,  ii.  292-307.
Methods  of,  i.  7-8.
Test  letters  to  be    sent  to,    suggestions

regarding,  ii.  499.
Socrates-
Clairvoyance  of,  ii.  141.
Daemon  of,  i.  108;  ii.  95-100,  103.
Vision  of,  ii.  273-4.
'  Sogenannte    Hypnose     der    Tiere,    Die,"1

cited,  i.  442.

Solovyoff,  V.  S.,  cited,  ii.  502.
"  Some  Account  of  the  Vampires  of  Onset,"

cited,  ii.  503.

"  Sommeil  et  les  Reves,  Les,"  cited,  i.  132.
Somnambulism —

Accidents  rare  in,  i.  198.
Analogy  from,  for  post-mortem  communi-
cations, ii.  6.

Cases  of,  i.  204-5,  519-20.
Diseases  prescribed  for  during,  i.  520.
Genius  compared  with,  i.  124.
Hypnotic   trance  of  wider  range  than,  i.

*78,  193  ;  compared  with,  i.  198.
Hysteria  compared  with,  i.  22.
Nature  of,  i.  203.
Phobic  of,  i.  467.
Precognition  in,  i.  204.
Secondary   personality    starting    from,    i.

305-6.

Self-absorption  in,  ii.  202.
Sleep,  relation  to,  i.  123.
"  Somnambulisme   Provoque,    Le,"    cited,    i.

476,  491  note1,  502  note2.
11  Somnolism  and  Psycheism,"  cited,  i.  556.
Sorgel,  case  of,  i.  308-9.
Soul,  see  Spirit.
Sound-seers,  i.  224-5.
Space-
Ecstasy  not  necessarily  involving  change

of,  ii.  259.
Intermediate  conception  of,  i.  231.


656


INDEX


Space— continued.

Spirit  cognizance  of,  i.  231  ;  ii.  252.

Spiritual  phenomena  in  relation  to,  i.  30.

Telepathy,  relation  to,  i.  30,  274-5.
Spalding,    Miss    Agnes,   apparition   seen  by,    i

ii.  377-80.
Speech —

Hysteric  disturbances  of,  i.  53,  65.

Limitations  of,  i.  98,  100.

Recovery  of,  by  suggestion,  i.  476.
Speer,  Charlton,  cited,  ii.  227  note.
• ,  Dr.     Stanhope     Templeman,     observa-
tions of,  i.  32  ;   ii.  541  ;  qualifications
of,  as  a  witness,  ii.  584-5.
,  Mrs.  Stanhope,  ii.   227  note,  231,-  515,

583-5-
Spirit —

Existence  of,  postulated,  i.  74,  119,  151,
217-19,   231,   251;    proved  by  sensory
automatisms,  ii.  76.
Laws  of    matter    an    incidental    case  of

laws  of,  i.  488.

Material  organisms  controlled  by,  i.
217;  ii.  204-5,  521-2,  545;  as  viewed
by,  ii.  545.

Persistence  of,  admissible  of  proof,  ii.
79;  proved  by  sensory  automatisms,
ii.  76.

Spirit-drawings,  symbolic  character  of,  i.  too.
"  Spirit    Drawings,"   cited,    i.    100  ;    quoted,

ii.  400-1.

Spirit-healing,  theory  of,  i.  212,  213.
"  Spirit   Identity,"   cited,  ii.    167,    225,    583,

592-4.

Spirit-lights,  ii.  541.
Spirit-possession,  see  Possession.
Spirit-rapping,  see  Raps.
"  Spirit    Slate-writing    and   Kindred    Pheno-
mena," cited,  ii.  503.
"  Spirit  Teachings  " —

Cited,  ii.  224,  227  note,  228,  553,  583.
Preface  quoted,  ii.  588-91.
Spirits,  disembodied,  see  Discarnate  spirits.
Spiritual  environment,  i.  95-6,  215-19.
"  Spiritual  Magazine,"  quoted,  i.  656-7.
Spiritualism —

Books  on  (see  also  "  Spirit  Teachings  "),
ii.   207   and  note,    503,    541  note,  555,
579>  583-
Fraud  in  connection  with,  ii.  206-7  and

note.

Home,  D.  D.,  case  of,  ii.  221-3.
Methods  of,  i.  7;  ii.  304-5.
Moses,  Rev.  W.  S.,  case  of,  ii.  223-37.
Phenomena  of,  ii.  92-3.
Piper,  Mrs.,  case  of,  ii.  237-56.
Pulpit  attacks  on,  ii.  133-4.
Support   of,    by    subliminal    self  theory,

i.  16.
<;  Spiritualisme  :     Faits    Curieux,"   cited,   ii.

440.

"  Spiritualist,"  quoted,  i.  654-5.
Squires,  Mr.,  case  of,  i.  137.

,  Jesse  L.,  dream  of,  i.  379-81.

Squirrell,  Elizabeth,  case  of,  i.  520,  523-4.
Stack,  J.  H.,  cited,  ii.  jjoi.
Stage-fright,  hypnotic  influence  on,  i.  195.
Starck,    Lieut. -Col.    N.,    communications  to,
ii.  478-80.


"  Statuvolism,"    cited,      i.     160,    485,     500;

quoted,  i.  555-6.
Stealing,  see  Kleptomania.
Steel,  Mr.,  experiments  by,  i.  603  seq.
Stevens,  Dr.  E.   W.,  cited,  i.  338  ;  quoted,  i.

360-5.
Stevenson,   J.,    auditory  hallucination  of,   i.

274.
,  R.    L.,    dreams    of,    i.    91,    126,    303 ;

ii.  144  ;  delirious  illusions  of,  i.  300-3.
Stewart,  Miss,  phantasm  of,  ii.  377-80.

,  Prof.  Balfour,  experiments  by,  i.  600.

,  David,  case  sent  by,  ii.  362.

Stigmatisation,  i.  188,  492-5,  497;  ii.  513-14,

527.
Stimulants,  impulse  to,  cured  by  hypnotism,

i.  176.
Stimulus  and  check  in  education  and  hypno-

t  tism,  i.  173-5.
Stoicism,  i.  212.

Stone,  Mrs.,  apparitions  of,  i.  648-9.
"  Storia  di  un  Caso  d'Isterismo  con  Sogna-

zione    Spontanea,"  cited,   i.   500  note,

520.
Storie,    Mrs.,    apparition   seen   by,  i.    144-7;

caseof,  cited,  i.  284  ;  ii.  18-19,42,  52.
Stramm,    Mile.    (Mme.     Kaigorodoff),     com-
munications to,  ii.  170-1,  466-71.
Stubbing,  Mrs.,  dream  of,  i.  415.
Stuckenborg,  Mrs.,  case  of,  i.  495.
"  Studien  iiber  Hysteric,"  cited,  i.  51,  299.
"  Studies  in  Psychical  Research,"  cited,  ii.  230

note,  502-3.

"  Study  of  Fears,"  cited,  i.  41  note.
Stupor  attonitus,  i.  163.
Sturgis,  Dr.  Russell,  cited,  i.  40  note.
"  Subconscient  chez  les  Artistes,  les  Savants,

et  les  Ecrivains,  Le,"  quoted,  i.  89.
Subliminal,  definition  of  term,  i.  14.
"  Subliminal  Self    or    Unconscious   Cerebra-
tion," cited,  i.  12  note1*.
Substitutions  of  faculty,  i.  477.
Suddick,    Dr.   S.    T.,  case    recorded    by,   ii.

489-93.

Suggestion  (see  also  Hypnotism) —
Cures  effected  by,  i.  69.
Pre-conceptual,  ii.  543-4.
Pre-natal,  i.  455-8  ;  ii.  515-16.
Self-suggestion  started  by,  i.  154.
"  Suggestion  Hypnotique  dans  ses  Rapports

avec  le  Droit  Civil  et  le  Droit  Criminel,

La,"  cited,  i.  51^.
"  Suggestions  -  Therapie       bei      krankhaften

Erscheinungen       des      Geschlechts-Le-

bens,   Die,"  cited,  i.  177  note.
"  Suggestions  -  Therapie      bei      krankhaften

Erscheinungen   des    Geschlechtssinnes,

Die."  cited,  i.  459.
Suicide,    phantoms    in     connection    with,   i.

271-2.

Summerbell,  Miss   L.    D.,   planchette  experi-
ments by,  ii.  145-6.
Sun -circles,  ii.  570.
Supernormal —

Abnormal  contrasted  with,  ii.  85.
Definition  of  term,  i.  5  note.
Supervision  by  subliminal  self,  i.  45.
Supplication,  definition  of,  ii.  310.
Surgical  operations  under  hypnotism,  i.  160.


INDEX


657


Surin,  Pere,  case  of,  cited,  i.  304.
Survival  —

Agnosticism   regarding,   i.    i  ;    ii.    296-7,
307.

Proof  of  —  conceivable,   ii.   79  ;    furnished

by  sensory  automatisms,  ii.  76.
Sutton,  Mrs.,  communications  to,  ii.  245-7.
Swedenborg,  Emmanuel  —

Case  of,  i.  5  ;  ii.  191,  218-20,  569-70.

Cited,  ii.  308.

Communications  from,  ii.  596.
Sycosis  menti,  cure  of,  by  suggestion,  i.  472.
Symbolism  —

Art,  in,  i.  101.

Communication  by  means  of,  i.  100-1.

Reality  compared  with,  i.  277.

Telaesthetic  vision,  in,  i.  276-7.
"Symposium,"  quoted,  i.  113-15.
Synaesthesia,  i.  224-5,  279;  ii.  270.
Synthetic    Society,  The,   paper  read    before,

ii.  287  note.
Syringomyelitis,  anaesthesia  of,  i.  44.

T.  (Dufouris'  patient),  case  of,  i.  518.

—  ,  Mr.,  experiments  with,  i.  453-5,  547-51,


—  ,  Mrs.,  case  of,  i.  148-50;  ii.  34.

Tabes  dorsalis,  i.  44.

Table-tilting,  ii.  92-4,  144,  150-3,  156-9,  207,

248  note,  423-6,  477,  489-91.
Table-turning,  ii.  92-4;  books  on,  ii.  555.
Tabour,  Mrs.,  case  reported  by,  i.  421-3.
Tactile  sensibility,  a  motor  inhibition  possibly

due  to,  ii.  HO-II.
Taine,  cited,  i.  127.

Tait,  William  J.,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  683-5.
Tandy,    Rev.    G.    M.,    apparition    seen    by,

ii.  56-7.
Taste-

Coloured,  i.  566  note  !.

Community  of,  i.  541-2.

Stimulation  of,  in  hysteria  by  red  light,

i.  587  note*.
Transference  of,  i.  613.
Taunton,   Mrs.,   apparition    seen   by,  i.   281,

666-7.
Taylor,   Col.   G.   L.  le  M.,  experiments  by,

i.  598-9.

Teale,  Dr.,  case  of  patient  of,  i.  491  note*.
-  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  18.
Telaesthesia—

Case  of,  ii.  111-14;  where  agent  retains
memory  of  circumstance,  i.  279-86  ;
where  agent  and  percipient  retain
memory  of  circumstance,  i.  291  ;  where
only  percipient  retains  memory  of
circumstance,  i.  286-91;  where  know-
ledge not  supraliminally  remembered,
i.  270-5.
Crystal-vision  and  shell-hearing,  in,

i.  275.

Dream,  in,  i.  275.
Excitement,  scenes    of,   attracting    clair-

voyant, i.  279,  281.
Genius,  relation  to,  i.  108.
Hyperaesthesia  —  merging    into,  i.   191-2,
275  ;  ii.  264  ;  possibly  the  explanation
of  some  apparent  cases  of,  ii.  270.
Implications  of,  ii.  274.

VOL.  II.


Telaesthesia — continued.

Lot-drawing,  in,  i.  671.

Methods  of,  i.  275.

Reciprocal,  i.  291-6.

Retrocognitive,  i.  31;  ii.  248.

Scope  of  term,  i.  136.

Somnambulism,  in,  i.  204.

Space  and  time  problems  of,  i.  137.

Spiritually  guided,  ii.  551.

Split  personality  phenomena  analogous
to,  i.  250.

Swedenborg,  of,  see  Swedenborg.

Symbolic  character  of  visions  in,  i.  276-7.

Telepathy — compared  with,  i.  in  ;  in
relation  to,  i.  246,  278 ;  sometimes  in-
distinguishable from,  ii.  518.

Terrene  evolution  not  accountable  for,
i.  118.

Time-relations  in,  i.  276,  282,  284,  285.

Uncertainty  of  experiment  in,  i.  292  and

note.
Telekinesis  (see  also  Raps) —

Books  on,  ii.  554.

Cases  of,  ii.  503-4.

Direct  writing,  ii.  535-6,  548.

Energy  in,  ii.  529-30,  535.

Experiments  in,  i.  197.

Hyperboulia,  relation  to,  ii.  522.

Home,  case  of,  see  Home.

Messages  accompanied  by,  ii.  171,  187.

Moses,  W.  S.,  case  of,  see  Moses.

Nature  of,  ii.  116,  205,  207-8.

Phenomena  of,  ii.  545-8.
Teleological  automatisms,  ii.  132,  140-1.
Telepathy-
Agency,  joint,  in,  i.  612-13 ;  question  of
agency  in  death  phantasms,  ii.  345.

Anaesthesia  and  rigidity,  whether  pro-
duced by,  i.  535-9.

Animals,  between,  possibility  of,  i.  246
note  ;  from,  i.  634-6.

Brain  not  necessary  to  transmission  of,
ii.  195-6.

Cases  of,  i.  547~53'  600-34,  649-67,  672-
700 ;  ii.  144-53.  45°-

Clairvoyant  visions  in,  ii.  197.

Collective,  i.  246,  248.

Crystal-vision  in  relation  to,  i.  238.

Discarnate  spirits,  from,  i.  246,  248 ;  ii.
142-3.

Distance,  from,  i.  619-34.

Dream  evincing,  i.  147.

Etherial  transmission  of,  ii.  195.

Evidence  for,  criticism  of,  i.  636-46.

Evolutive  nature  of,  ii.  85  and  note  1.

Expansion  of  idea  of,  ii.  281-2.

Experiments  in  (early),  i.  243.

Flournoy  on,  ii.  141.

Genius,  relation  to,  i.  108.

Ghosts  in  relation  to,  i.  25.

Gravitation,  law  of,  analogous  to,  i.  38.

Hyperaesthesia  merging  into,  ii.  517.

Hypnosis  induced  by,  i.  207,  209,  484,
570  ;  productive  of,  i.  210  ;  ii.  8.

Implications  of,  ii.  274.

Importance  of  law  of,  i.  95-6;  ii.  258.

Inadequacy  of  term,  i.  136.

Intermediate  position  of,  i.  231.

Malaise  caused  by,  ii.  104.

a  T


658


INDEX


Telepathy — continued.

Mental  habits  in  relation  to,  i.  598-600.
Messages    by,   experiments    in,  cited,    i.

629-32.
Mind   to  mind  theory  of,   untenable  in

cases  of  possession,  ii.  196.
Mixed,  ii.  250.
Modification  of  pictures  by  percipient,  i.

245.

Nature  of,  ii.  521-2.

Phinuit  control  in  the  light  of,  ii.  606-7.
Possession  an  extreme  case  of,  ii.  194-5.
Prayer  in  relation  to,  ii.  306.
Presumptive  evidence  for,  i.  241-2.
Prevalent  as  law  in  spiritual  as  well  as

material  world,  i.  26.
Proximity  in  relation  to,  i.  244.
Psychical  invasion  perhaps  indistinguish-
able   from,    in    motor    automatism,  ii.
1 86.

Reciprocal,  i.  248.

Savages,  frequent  among,  ii.  85  note l.
Scope  of  term,  i.  136.
Self-projection  in,  i.  251.
Sensory    automatism,   prerequisite  of,   i.

241.

Somnambulism,  in,  i.  204.
Spatial  link  in,  i.  274-5.
Spontaneity  of,  ii.  149.
Telaesthesia    compared    with,  i.    in;    in
relation    to,    i.    246,    278;    sometimes
indistinguishable  from,  ii.  518.
Telergy  correlative  to,  ii.  197.
Terrene  evolution    not   accountable    for,

i.  118.

Threefold  classification  of,  ii.  8.
Twinship  in  relation  to,  i.  272  and  note.
Variability  of,  ii.  149.
Telergy,  ii.  197,  204,  522,  526.
Temperature —

Hypnotic  influence  on,  i.  491  and  note  4.
Pain -sense  distinguished  from  sense  of,

i.  65-6.

Tennyson  quoted,  ii.  276.
Terrors —

Agoraphobia,  i.  42.
Hystero-epileptic  attacks,  in,  i.  328-9.
Hypnotic  effect  on,  i.  299.
Instinctive,  i.  41.

Terry,  Etta,  automatic  writing  by,  ii.  485-6.
Tertiary  personality,  i.  324-31.
Test  of  post-mortem  identity,  ii.  499.
Teste,  Dr.  Alphonse,  cited,  i.  485,  520.
Thach,  Dr.  W.  T.,  quoted,  ii.  564,  566.
Thames  Tunnel  accident,  dream  of,  i.  280-1.
Thaw,  Dr.  A.  Blair,  cited,  i.  601  note.

,  Margaret  and   Ruthie,   communications

from,  ii.  621-2.

Theobald,  Mprell,  quoted,  ii.  329-31.
Theology,    discarnate    spirits'    messages    not

concerned  with,  ii.  78-9,  133,  287,  308.
"  Theory  of  Heat  "  cited,  ii.  530  note.
Theosophical    Society,  inquiry    regarding,  ii.

501-2.

"  Th6rapeutique  Suggestive,"  quoted,  i.  474.
Thermal  sensibility — distinguished  from  pain-
sense,  i.   65-6  ;  hypnotic  effect  on,  i.

475-
Thompson,  Mrs.,  case  of,  i.  29.


Thomson,  Miss  Ethel,  apparition  seen  by,  i.
694-5.

,  H.  S.,  case  of  mesmeric  efficacy  of,  i.

208,  309,  442-3.

,  Isaac  C — ,  communications  to,  ii.  241.

Thornton,  Abraham,  telepathic  case  in  regard

to,  i.  661.
Thorpe,    Courtenay,    apparition    of,    i.    281,

663-5.

Thought-transference,  see  Telepathy.
Thoulet,  Prof.,  case  of,  ii.  212-13,  217,  262

note.

Thury,  Prof.,  cited,  ii.  555.
Tic  convulsif,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  460.
Tic  douloureux,  hypnotic  cure  of,  i.  470.
Time—-
Calculation of,  involved  in  post-hypnotic

suggestions,  i.  502-10.
Crystal-visions,  in,  i.  246.
Hallucination  of,  i.  54.
Haun tings  in  relation  to,  ii.  76.
Precognitipn,  see  that  title.
Retrocognition,  see  that  title.
Spirit  cognisance  of,  ii.  252.
Spiritual  phenomena  in  relation

i.  31.

Subliminal  sense  of,  i.  85-6.
Telaesthesia,  in,  i.  276,  282,  284,  285.
Timmin,  Marian,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  230.
Tissi6,  Dr.,  case  of  patient  of,  i.  129-30,  370.
Tobacco-smoking,  hypnotic  cure   of,  i.   463-

464.

Tolosa-Latour,  Dr.,  experiment  by,  i.  533.
Tourette,  Gilles  de  la,  cited,  i.  514;  ii.  422.
Tout,  Hill,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  133.
Towns,  Capt.,  apparition  of,  ii.  62-3.
Townshend,  Rev.  C.  H.,  cited,  i.  543.
Traducianist  Theory,  ii.  266-7.
Trance —

Bertrand,  Rev.  L.  J.,  case  of,  ii.  322-3.
Break  in  series  of  psychological  changes

possibly  at  the  point  of,  i.  39.
Death      conditions      of     communicating

spirit  reproduced  in,  ii.  220.
Home,  D.  D.,  case  of,  ii.  221-3.
Kinds  of,  ii.  191,  204.
Luminosity  in,  ii.  515.
Moses,  W.  S.,  case  of,  ii.  226-7.
Nature  of,  ii.  196-8,  205,  524.
Piper,  Mrs.,  case  of,  ii.  237-56.
Skilton,  J.  W.,  case  of,  ii.  571-2.
Sleep    replaced    by,    i.    353;    resembled

by,  ii.  193.

Swedenborg,  of,  see  Swedenborg.
Three  main  types  of,  ii.  217.
Varying  quality  of,  ii.  239.
Wiltse,  Dr.,  case  of,  ii.  315-22.
Trance-speakers,  professional,   self-hypnotisa-

tion  of,  i.  195.
"Transactions  of  the  College  of  Surgeons  of

Philadelphia,"  quoted,  i.  336.
Transmigration   (see  also    Reincarnation),  ii.

267.

Transposition  of  senses,  i.  191-2,  500-2.
Travers,     Thomas    (Howells),    case    of,    ii.

149-53'

"Tribune  Me"dicale,"  quoted,  i.  530.
Trowbridge,  Dr.  G.  R.,  cited,  i.  309.
Truesdell,  John  W.,  cited,  ii.  503.


INDEX


659


Tuckey,  Lloyd,  cited,  i.  462.
Tudor,  William,  dream  of,  i.  399-400.
Tumours,  analogy  from,  for  idees  fixes,  i.  40.
Twinship  in  relation  to  telepathy,  i.  272  and

note.
Tyre,  Miss  L.,  apparition  seen  by,  ii.  360-1.

"  Ueber    die    Trugwahrnehmung,"    cited,    i.

645  note1*.

Unconscious  cerebration  theory,  ii.  519  note.
Unconscious  simulation,  i.  477.
Underwood,    B.    F.,    communications   to,    ii.

462-6.
—  ,  Mrs.,    automatic    writing    by,    ii.    168,

461  and  note'^-^66.

Uniformity  of  material  Nature,  ii.  300-1.
Unity-

Consciousness,  of,  dreams  subversive  of,

i.  58.

Cosmic,  ii.  298.
Human,  ii.  282,  287,  303.
"  Urbain      Grandier     et     les     Posse"dees     de

Loudun,"  cited,  ii.  423  note.
Urbantschisch,  cited,  i.  587  note2.
11  Use  of   Hypnotism  in    the   First   Degree,

The,"  cited,  i.  40  note.
Useless,  anti-scientific  nature  of  term,  i.  150.

V.,    Mrs.,    apparitions    seen    by,    ii.    26-7,

332-3-
—  ,  Mrs.,    planchette  writing    by,    ii.    161-2;

spirit  reference  to,  ii.  457.
Value  of  human  being,  test  of,  ii.  132.
Vane,  Lady,  case  reported  by,  ii,  438-40.
Varis,  Chris.,  prophecy  regarding,  ii.  489-93.
Varley,  Cromwell    F.,    case  reported    by,   i.

654.
Vaso-motor  system  —

Hypnotic    influence    on,    i.    187-8,    191,

490-5.

Telepathic  influence  on,  ii.  103-4.
Vaughan,    Rev.    Edward    T.,    case  recorded

by,  ii.  504-5.
Vennum,        Mary       Lurancy       (  "  Watseka

Wonder  "),  case  of,  i.  360-8.
Venter,   Mrs.   (Miss  Mabel  Jenness),   dream

of,  i.  423-4.

Verity  family,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  292-6.
Verrall,  Mrs.—

Case  of  crystal-visions  of,  i.  238,  584-6.


Experiments  by,  i.  578.
of,    ii.
410.


Motor   inhibition


105,    140,   268,


Musical  dream  of,  i.  126.

Quoted,  i.  569-70.
Verworn,  cited,  i.  442.
Vesci,  Lady  de,  case  of,  ii.  104,  409-10.
Vesication,  hypnotic    production    of,    i.    188,

J93~4i  493~9-

"  Vesillo  Spiritista,"  quoted,  ii.  480-2.
Vibrations  —

Human  organism  a  complex  of,  ii.  88.
Telepathy   in   relation   to,    i.    245-6  ;    ii.

141.

Vicars,     Mrs.     G.      Rayleigh     (Miss    Edith
Maughan),    apparitions    of,    i.    653-4,

693-5-

Violence,  tendency  to,   cured  by  hypnotism,
i.  176.


Virgil,  cited,  i.  124.

Vis  medicatrix  Naturae,  i.  216.

Visual  faculty —

After-images,  i.  225.

Entoptic,  i.  225.

Etherial    environment    assumed    for,    ii.

298.

Genius,  of,  i.  227.

Hallucinations    involving,    stronger     evi-
dentially   than    those    involving    audi-
tory, i.  254  note.
Hallucinatory      figures     behind     himself

seen  by  percipient,  i.  281.
Hypnagogic  pictures,  in,  i.  125.
Hypnotic  influence  on,  i.  184-5,  475~9-
Hysteric  effect  on,  i.  47,  353.
Imagination-images,  i.  226-7.
Inward,    i.    103;    ii.  300;    imperfect  co-
ordination of  inward  with  outward,  i.
277,  281.

Memory-images,  i.  226.
Non-optical,  i.  223-4,  229,  264.
Other    impressions    expressed   by  means

of,i.  570.

Specialisation  of,  i.  224.
Stimulation    of,    by    tuning-fork,    i.   587

note  2.

Theoretical  possibilities   of,  i.   230,   231.
Transposition  of,  i.  500-2.
Visions-
Clairvoyant,  i.  137,  139,  143  ;  ii.  441.
Consolatory,  ii.  26,  374.
Crystal,  see  Crystal-vision.
Smith,  Helene,  case  of,  ii.  142-3.
Vital  Phenomena,  scheme  of,  ii.  505-54.
Vlavianos,    Dr.,    case    reported  by,    i.   460;

cited,  i.  462,  464.
Vive",  Louis,  case  of,  i.  62-4,  193-4,  338-43,

482,  497.
Voisin,  Dr.  Auguste —

Cases  of  patients  of,  i.  129,  463,  517-18.

Cited,  i.  459,  460,  462.

Methods  of,  i.  65, 172  note,  440-1.

,  Dr.  Jules,  i.  339  ;  cited,  i.  339  note.

Voltaire,  genius  of,  i.  75.

W.,  Major,  apparition  seen  by,  i.  657-8.

— ,  Miss,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  31.

— ,  Miss,  communications  to,  ii.  241.

— ,  Miss,  hallucination  of,  ii.  373-4.

— .  Miss  (Rev.  A.  Bellamy's  case),  phantasm
of,  ii.  350-1.

— ,  Mr.,  apparition  of,  i.  666-7.

— ,  Mr.,  experiments  with,  i.  547,  551.

— ,  Mr.,  hallucination  of,  ii.  iio-n;  auto-
matic writing  by,  ii.  172-8,  262  note,
487-9.

— ,  Miss  E.  G.,  case  recorded  by,  ii.  622.

— ,  Eliza,  auditory  hallucination  of,  ii.  70-1 .

— ,  J.  H.,  dream  of,  i.  419-21.

W — s,  case  of,  i.  503-4.

Wait,  Marshall,  case  of,  ii.  109.

Wakley,  cited,  i.  489.

Waldegrave,  Lady,  case  of  maid  of,  i.  266-
268.

Walker,  Mrs.  J.,  ticking  of  letter  to,  ii.  365-
367.

Wallace,  Alfred  Russel,  cited,  i.  6  and
note,  15.


66o


INDEX


Wamby,  Mr.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  61,  362.
Warburton,  Canon,  case  of,  i.  137-8,  287.
Warlomont,  Dr.,  i.  492-3.
"  Warton's  English  Poetry,"  cited,  ii.  230,
Water-
Mesmerised,  i.  484.
Running,  method  of  finding,  i.  480-1.
"  Watseka    Wonder,"    case    of,    i.   65,   338,

360-8.

Watt,  internal  visualisation  of,  i.  226.
Watts,  Anna  Mary  Howitt,  cited,  ii.  570  note.
,  J.   Hunter,  dream  of,  i.   137,  279,  381-

382.
Wedgwood,     Hensleigh,     automatic    writing

by,  ii.  161-7,  207,  457-8.
Weight,  subliminal  sense  of,  i.  85,  87.
Wellington,  Mr.,  vision  of,  i.  424-6.
Wells,  experiments  on,  i.  534,  540.
Wendell,  Prof.  Barrett,  cited,  h.  220.
Wesermann,  H.  M.,  experiments  of,  i.  698-

700  ;   ii.  30.

West,  Mrs.,  case  of,  i.  286,  394-5.
"  Westoby,  Fanny,"  case  of,  ii.  230,  597-8.
Wetterstrand,  Dr.  Otto-
Cited,  i.  122,  462,  464,  465,  533.
Hypnotic  results  obtained  by,  i.  438-9.
"  What  is  Hypnotism  ?  "  quoted,  i.  166.
Whately,  Archbp.,  case  of,  i.  80,  82.
Wheatcroft,  Mrs.,  case  of,  cited,  ii.  18.
Whipple,  G.  M.,  cited,  i.  567.
White,    Miss    Susie    Nickerson,   case    of,  ii.

559-60.

White  webs,  vision  of,  i.  593.
Whittaker,  Henderson,  apparition  of,  i.  669-

670.

Wiesler,  Mrs.  A.  von,  case  of,  ii.  178-82.
Wilcox,  Dr.,  cited,  i.  354.
Wilkie,  Mrs.,  dream  of,  i.  382-5.

,  John  E.,  case  of,  ii.  214-17.

Wilkinson,  W.  M.,  i.  100;  ii.  94  note,  400-1,

579-
Will—     '

Complex  obedience  to,  ii.  511.
Extension  of  power  of,  into  the  spiritual

world,  ii.  542-3,  554.
Hypnotic    influence    on,    i.    192,    196-8,

208.

Possibilities  of,  ii.  521-2,  542-3.
Self -projection  effected  by,  i.  296.
Silent  willing,  i.  208,  539-40.
Williams,    Rev.     Thomas    Lockyer,   appari-
tions of,  i.  264,  646-8.
Willing  game,  the,  i.  539,  6po.
Willington  Mill  case  cited,  ii.  399.
Willis,  Dr.  J.  L.  M.,  cited,  i.  436.
Wilmot,  Mrs.,  apparition  of,  i.  232,  682-5.
Wilson,  Archdeacon,  case  oi,  cited,  ii.  18.

,  Dr.  Albert,  case  reported  by,  i.  171  note.

,  Thomas  (Bp.  of  Sodor  and  Man),  com-
munications regarding,  ii.  230.


Wiltse,  Dr.  A.  S.—

Premonitory  visions  of,  i.  668-71.

Trance  vision  of,  ii.  193,  315-22,  525.
Windt,  Harry  de,  case  of,  ii.  455-6.
Wingfield,    Frederick,    dream    of,    i.    429-31
and  note  1.

,  H.  E.,  i.  477.

,  Dr.    Hugh,    hypnotic    results    obtained

«r       byiU-'  I6A'  l89'  438'  4,39'-  445~7^
Winsor,  Miss  Anna,  case  of,  i.  354-60;  case

cited,  i.  64,  520 ;  ii.  186,  218,  262
note.

Witchcraft,  i.  4,  171,  636-7.

Wittgenstein,  Prince  Emile  von,  communi-
cation to,  ii.  494-5 .

Wittmann,  Blanche,  case  of,  i.  331,  447-8.

Wood,  A.  B.,  case  reported  by,  i.  282.

Woodd  knockings,  ii.  477.

Wordsworth,  cited,  i.  104,  109-11  ;  ii.  139.

Writing,  direct,  ii.  535-6,  548  (see  also  under
Motor  automatism).

Wiincher,  Herr,  vision  of,  i.  433-4.

Wundt,  cited,  i.  667  note  i.

Wyman,  William  H.,  case  of,  ii.  106-7.

Wynne,  Capt.,  cited,  ii.  581  note^-.

X.,  Dr.,  case  reported  by,  ii.  124-30.

— ,  Mme.,  case  of,  ii.  125-30,  210,  503.

— ,  Mme.    (Dr.    Cullerre's    patient),  case  of,

i.  476.
— ,  Mme.  (Dr.   Bourdon's    patient),  case  of,

i.  518-19.

— ,  Mr.,  case  of,  i.  463-4.
— ,  Mrs.,  case  of,  ii.  173-4.
— ,  Emile,  case  of,  i.  317-18.
— ,  Fe"lida,  case  of,  i.  62,  64,  333-5  ;  ii.  198.
"  X  +  Y  =  Z,"  case,  ii.  217-18,  222,  562-9.
Xenophon,  quoted,  ii.  96.

Y.,  Mrs.,  case  of,  i.  456-8.
Yowanovitch,  M.,  case  of,  i.  565-6.

Z.  Dr.,  case  of,  ii.  125-30.

—  Hon.,  case  of,  ii.  445.

—  Lady,  dreams  of,  i.  406-8.

—  Lord,  case  of  death  of,  ii.  60,  367-9.

—  Mrs.,  phantasm  of,  ii.  339.

—  Alma,  case  of,  i.  63-4.

Zeitgeist  theory,  ii.  120  and  note,  134,  257.

"  Zeitschrift  fiir  Hypnotismus,"  cited,  i.  160
note  l,  498.

"Zoist"—

Cited,   i.   134,  163,  207,    208,    276,  309,
442-3,  470,  472,  484-6,  532,  539  and
note*,  540,  546,  558.
Quoted,  i.  305-6,  321-2,  372-3,  557-8.

Zones  analgesiques,  occurrence  of,  in  witch-
craft, i.  4.

"Zur  kritik  des  telepathischen  Beweis-
Materiels,"  cited,  i.  645  note*.


J
H  Classifieb    Catalogue

OF  WORKS  IN

GENERAL    LITERATURE

PUBLISHED    BY

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.

39    PATERNOSTER    ROW,    LONDON,    E.G.

31  AND  93  FIFTH  AVENUE,  NEW  YORK,  AND  32  HORNBY  ROAD,  BOMBAY


CONT

BADMINTON  LIBRARY  (THE).    -^12
3IOGRAPHY,        PERSONAL        ME-
MOIRS,   &c.        g
:HILDREN'S  BOOKS                   -         -     32

;LASSICAL  LITERATURE,  TRANS-
LATIONS, ETC.        ....    22
:OOKERY,     DOMESTIC     MANAGE-
MENT, &c.         36
EVOLUTION,         ANTHROPOLOGY,

&C.          21

•ICTION,  HUMOUR,  &c.   -         -         -     25
•"IX  E  ARTS  (THE)  AND  MUSIC       -     36
>UR,  FEATHER  AND  FIN  SERIES     15
IISTORY,       POLITICS,        POLITY,

POLITICAL  MEMOIRS,  &c.  -           3
LANGUAGE,  HISTORY  AND
SCIENCE  OF   20
OGIC,  RHETORIC,  PSYCHOLOGY,

&c.  17

ENTS.

MENTAL,  MORAL,  AND  POLITICAL
PHILOSOPHY  17

MISCELLANEOUS  AND  CRITICAL
WORKS      38

POETRY  AND  THE  DRAMA              -     23

POLITICAL   ECONOMY   AND  ECO-
NOMICS     ------      20

POPULAR  SCIENCE  -                  ..30
RELIGION,  THE  SCIENCE  OF         -     21
SILVER  LIBRARY  (THE)         -         -     33
SPORT  AND  PASTIME                         -     12

STONYHURST      PHILOSOPHICAL
SERIES      ...                  -         -     iq

TRAVEL   AND   ADVENTURE,  THE
COLONIES,  &c.         -         -         -         -     ii

WORKS  OF  REFERENCE-         -         -     31

INDEX     OF    AUTHO

Page                                          Page
obott  (Evelyn)      3,  19,  22     Banks  (M.  M.)                    24
—  (J.  H.  M.)          -          3    Baring-Gould  (Rev.
—  (T.  K.)      -        -  17,18        S.)-        -        -        -  21,38
—  (E.  A.)               -        17    Barnett(S.A.andH.)       20
:land  (A.  H.  D.)     -          3     Baynes  (T.  S.)  -        -         38
:ton  (Eliza)   -        -        36    Beaconsfield  (Earl  of)      25
lelborg  (O.)   -        -        -2    Beaufort  (Duke  01)12,13,  14
schylus                   -        22     Becker  (W.  A.)       '  -         22
ibemarle  (Earl  of)  -        n    Beesly  (A.  H.)  -        -          9
.cock  (C.  W.)          -        15    Bell  (Mrs.  Hugh)      -        23
len  (Grant)    -        -        30     Bent  (J.  Theodore)  -         u
.[good  (G.)      -        -          3     Besant  (Sir  Walter)-          3
.•-rstone  (Lord)     -         15     Bickerdyke  (J.)          -  14,  15
-'g\vin  (M.  C.)        -        T,6    Bird  (G.)                             23
•  stey(F.)       -        -        25    Blackburne  (J.  H.)   -        15
astophanes    -        -        22     Bland  (Mrs.  Hubert)          24
astotle                             17    Blount  (Sir  E.)         -          9
nold  (Sir  Edwin)  -  n,  23    Boase  (Rev.  C.  W.)  -          6
-  (Dr.  T.)     -                   3     Boedder  (Rev.  B.)     -         19
.hbourne  (Lord)    -          3    Bonnell  (H.  H.)        -        38
Jhby  (H.)        -         -         36     Booth  (A.  J.)     -        -        38
oley  (W.  J.)-        -    3,  20    Bottome  (P.)    -        -        25
.•ebury  (Lord)         -        21  '  Bowen  (W.  E.)         -          9
.'re  (Rev.  J.)  -        -         31  >  Brassey  (Lady)          -        n
Icon             .  -        -9,17     Bright  (Rev.  J.  F.)  -          3
Igehot  (W.)  -       9,  20,  38    Broadfoot  (Major  W.)      13
Igwell  (R.)     -        -          3     Brooks  (H.  J.)  -        -         17
lilev  (H.  C.)  -         -        25     Brown  (A.  F.)  -         -        32
1  Hie  (A.  F.)  -                  3    Bruce  (R.  I.)     -                  3
t  r.  (Alexander)               17     Buckland  (las.)         -        32
.  H.)    -        -        38  ,  Buckle  (H.  T.)  -        -        "3
—  (SirS.  W.)        -  ii,  12     Bull  (T.)                              36
1  four  (A.  J.)              13,21     Burke  (U.  R.)   -        -          3
1  1  (John)        -        -         ii     Burne-Jones  (Sir  E.)         36

RS    AND     EDITORS.

Page                                          Page
Burns  (C.  L.)    -        -        36    Dallinger  (F.  W.)     -          5
Burrows  (Montagu)            6    Dauglish  (M.  G.)      -          9
Butler  (E.  A.)  -        -        30    Davenport  (A.)         -        25
Campbell  (Rev.  Lewis)           Davidson  (A.  M.  C.)        22
21,22,38    (W.  L.)     -      17,20,21
Chesney  (Sir  G.)                 3    Davies  (J.  F.)   -        -        22
Childe-Pemberton(W.S.)  9    Dent  (C.  T.)      -        -        14
Chisholm  (G.  C  )      -        31  ;  De  Salis  (Mrs.)         -         36
Cholmondeley-Pennell            De  Tocqueville  (A.)  -          4
(H.)        ...        13     Devas  (C.  S.)    -        -  19,  20
Christie  (R.  C.)         -        38    Dickinson  (G.  L.)     -          4
Churchill  (Winston  S.)  4,  25     (W.  H.)    -        -        38
Cicero       -        -        -        22    Dougall  (L.)      -        -        25
Clarke  (Rev.  R.  F.)  -        19    Dowden  (E.)     -                4o
Climenson  (E.  J.)     -        10    Doyle  (Sir  A.  Conan)        25
Clodd  (Edward)        -  21,30    Du  Bois  (W.  E.  B.)-         5
Clutterbuck  (W.  J.)-         12     Dunbar  (Mary  F.)    -        25
Colenso  (R.  J.)          -        36  1  Dyson  (E.)       -         -        26
Conington  (John)              23     Ellis  (J.  H.)       -        -         15
Conybeare(Rev.W.J.)            (R.  L.)       -        -         17
&  Howson  (Dean)         33    Erasmus  -                           9
Coolidge  (W.  A.  B.)         n     Evans  (Sir  John)      -        38
Corbett  (Julian  S.)  -          4     Falkiner  (C.  L.)        -          4
Coutts  (W.)      -         -        22     Farrar  (Dean)   -        -  20,  26
Cox  (Harding)           -         13    Fitzmaurice  (Lord  E.)       4
Crake  (Rev.  A.  D.)   -        32    Folkard  (H.  C.)         -        15
Crawford  (J.  H.)       -        25    Ford  (H.)  -        -        -        16
Creed  (S.)         -        -        25  1  Fountain  (P              -        n
Creiehton  (Bishop)  -4,  6,  9    Fowler  (Edith  H.)    -        26
Cross  (A.  L.)     -        -           5     Francis  (Francis)      -         16
Crozier(J.B.)  -        -    9,17    (M.  E.)      -        -        26
Cutts  (Rev.  E.  L.)    -          6    Freeman  (Edward  A.)          6
Dabney  (J.  P.)  -        -        23    Fremantle  (T.  F.)     -        ift
Dale(L.)-        -        -          4    Frost  (G.)-        -        -        38

INDEX     OF     AUTHORS     AND      EDITORS— continue


Pagi

Page

rage                                          p

Voude  (James  A.)  4,9,11,26

Kaye(Sir  J.  W.)       -          6

Nichols  (F.  M.)         -          9

Steel  (A.  G.)      -

Duller  (F.  W.)  -        -          5

Keary  (C.  F.;    -        -         23

Oakesmith  (J.)-        -        22

Stephen  (Leslie)

"urneaux  (W.)           -        30

Kelly  (E.)-        -        -        18

Ogilvie  (R.)      -        -        22

Stephens  (H.  Morse)

iardiner  (Samuel  R.)         5

Kent  (C.  B.  R.)         -          6

Oldfield  (Hon.  Mrs.)          9    Sternberg        (Count

aathorne-Hardy  (Hon.

Kielmansegge  (F.)    -          9

Osbourne  (L.)  -        -        28           Adalbert)    -

A.  E.)         -        -  15,  16

Killick(Rev.  A.  H.)  -        18

Packard  (A.  S.)          -        21     Stevens  (R.  W.)

ieikie  (Rev.  Cunning-
ham)                               38
Jibson(C.  H.)-        -        17

Kitchin  (Dr.  G.  W.)           6
Knight  (E.  F.)  -        -  11,14
Kostlin  (J.)        -         -         10

Paget(Sirj.)    -         -         10
Park(W.)          -        -        16
Parker  (B.)                         40

Stevenson  (R.  L.)  25,28
Storr  (F.)  -
Stuart-  Wortley  (A.  J.)ij

ileig  (Rev.  G.  R.)    -        10

Kristeller  (P.)   -        -        37

Payne-Gallwey    (Sir               StubbsJJ.  W.)  -

iraham  (A.)     -        -          5

Ladd  (G.  T.)     -        -        18

R.)       -                   14,  16

IW.J-

(P.  A.)       -        -  15,  16

Lang  (Andrew)  6  ,13,  14,  16,

Pearse  (H.  H.  S.)     -          6

Suffolk  &  Berkshire

(G.  F.)       -        -        20
iranby  (Marquess  of)      15
irant  (Sir  A.)  -        -        17

21,22,  23,  27,  32,  39
Lapsley(G.  T.)         -          5
Laurie  (S.  S.)   -        -          6

Peek  (Hedley)  -        -        14
Pemberton    (W.    S.
Childe-)          -        -          9

(Earlol)     -
Sullivan  (Sir  E.)
Sully  (James)    -

Jraves  (R.  P.)  -         -          9

Lawrence  (F.  W.)    -        20

Penrose  (H.  H.)        -        33

Sutherland  (A.  and  G.)

Jreen  (T.  Hill)         -  17,  18

Lear  (H.  L.  Sidney)-        36

Phillipps-Wolley(C.)  12,28

(Alex.)       -        -  19

ireene  (E.  B.)-        -          5
ireville  (C.  C.  F.)    -          5

Lecky  (W.  E.  H.)   6,  18,  23

T    ooc    n         \     \                -                  -                   T<7

Pierce  (A.  H.)  -        -         19
Pole  (VV  )  -        -        -        17

(G.)    -
Suttner  (B.  von)

irose  (T.  H.)   -                 18    Lighten  0.  A.)        -        «

Pollock  (W.  H.)  -        13,  40

Swan  (M.)

iross  (C.)         -        -          5  1  Leslie  (T.  E.  Cliffe)  -        20
irove  (Lady)    -                   i  i  Lieven  (Princess)     -        10

Poole(W.  H.  and  Mrs.)     36
Poore  (G.  V.)   -        -        40

Swinburne  (A.  J.)     -
Symes  (J-  E-)    -

(Mrs.  Lilly)       -        13
iuiney  (L.  I.)   -        -          9
jurdon  (Lady  Camilla)   26
iurnhill  (J.)     -        -         18
iwilt  (J.)  -        -        -        31
laggard  (H.  Rider)
ii,  26,  27,  38
lalliwell-Phillipps(J.)     10
lamilton  (Col.  H.  B.)        5
lamlin  (A.  D.  F.)    -        36
larding  (S.  B.)         -          5

Lmdley(J.)       -        -        31
Locock  (C.  D.)          -        16
Lodge  (H.  C.)  -        -          6
Loftie  (Rev.  W.  J.)  -         6
Longman  (C.  J.)       -  12,  16
(F.  W.)      -        -        16
(G.  H.)      -        -13.15
(Mrs.  C.  J.)        -        37
Lowell  (A.  L.)  -        -          6

Portman  (L.)     -        -        28
Powell  (E.)       -        -          7
Powys  (Mrs.  P.  L.)  -        10
Praeger  (S.  Rosamond)    33
Pritchett  (R.  T.)       -        14
Proctor  (R.  A.)       17,30,  35
Raine  (Rev.  James)  -          6
Ramal  (W.)       -        -        24
Randolph  (C.  F.)      -          7
Rankin  (R.)       -         -    8,  25

Tait(J.)     -        -        '
Tallentyre  (S.  G.)     -
Tappan  (E.  M.)
Tavlor  (Col.  Meadows)
Thomas  (J.  W.)
Thomson  (H.  C.)      -
ThornhilKW.  J.)     -
Thornton  (T.  H.)     -
Thuillier  (H.  F.)       -
Todd  (A.)  -

la  msworth  (A.  C.)    13,  14
larte  (Bret)      -        -        27
larting(J.  E.)-        -        15
lartwig  (G.)     -        -        30
lassall(A.)       -         -          8
laweis  (H.  R.)          -    9,  36
lead  (Mrs.)      -        -        37

Lucian                                22
Lutoslawski  (W.)     -        18
Lyall(Edna)     -        -  27,32
Lynch  (G.)        -        -          6
(H.  F.  B.)-        -        12
Lytton  (Earl  of)        -        24
Macaulay  (Lord)  6,7,  10,24

Ransome  (Cyril)        -      3,  8
Reid  (S.  J.)                          9
Rhoades  (J.)     -        -        23
Rice  (S.  P.)       -        -        12
Rich  (A.)  ---        23
Richmond  (Ennis)    -        19
Rickaby  (Rev.  John)         19

Tout  (T.  F.)      -
Toynbee  (A.)     -
Trevelyan(SirG.O.)
6,  7,  8,  9
—  (G.  M.)      -
Trollope  (Anthony)  -
Turner  (ri.  G.)

leath  (D.  D.)  -         -         17
leathcote  (J.  M.)     -        14

Macdonald  (Dr.  G.)  -        24
Macfarren  (Sir  G.  A.)        37

(Rev.  Joseph)    -        19
Ridley  (Lady  Alice)  -        28

TyndalKJ.)        -        -    9
Tyrrell  (R.  Y.)  -        -32

(C.  G.)       -        -         14
(N.)                             ii
lelmholtz  (Hermann
von)                              30
lenderson      (Lieut-
Col.  G.  F.  R.)  -          9

MackaiKI.  W.)        -10,23
Mackenzie  (C.  G.)    -        16
Mackinnon  (J.)          -          7
Macleod  (H.  D.)        -        20
Macpherson  (Rev.H.A.)  15
Madden  (D.  H.)        -        16

Riley(J.  W.)     -        -        24
Roberts  (E.  P.)         -        33
Robertson  (W.  G.)  -        37
Roget  (Peter  M.)      -  20,  31
Romanes  (G.  J.)  10,  19,21,24
(Mrs.  G.  J.)       -        10

Unwin  (R.)
Upton(F.K.and  Bertha)

Van  Dyke  (J.  C.)      -
Vanderpoel  (E.  N.)  -

lenry  (W.)       -    '    -        14

Magniisson  (E.)        -        28

Ronalds  (A.)      -        -        17

Virgil

lenty  (G.  A.)  -        -        32
liggins  (Mrs.  N.)    -          9

Maher  (Rev.  M.)       -        19
Mallet  (B.)        -        -          7

Roosevelt  (T.)  -        -          6
Ross  (Martin)  -        -        28

Wagner  (R.)     -        -
Wakeman  (H.  O.)    -

Hill  (Mabel)     -        -          5

Malleson  (Col.  G.  B.)          6

Rossetti  (Maria  Fran-

Walford  (L.  B.)

lillier  (G.  Lacy)       -         13
-lime  (H.  W.  L.)      -        22
lodgson  (Shadworth)       18
•loenig  (F.)       -        -        38

Marbot  (Baron  de)   -        10
Marchment  (A.  W.)          27
Marshman  (J.  C.)      -          9
Maryon  (M.)    -        -        39

cesca)                               40
Rotheram  (M.  A.)    -        36
Rowe  (R.  P.  P.)        -        14
Russell  (Lady)-        -        10

Wallas  (Graham)     -
(Mrs.  Graham)  -
Walpole  (Sir  Spencer)  8
(Horace)    -

Hogan  (J.  F.)    -        -          9
Holmes  (R.  R.)         -        10
lomer      -        -        -        22
Hope  (Anthony)       -        27
lorace      -        -        -        22

Mason  (A.  E.  W.)    -        27
Maskelyne  (J.  N.)     -         16
Matthews  (B.)          -        39
Maunder  (S.)    -         -        31
Max  Miiller  (F.)

Sandars  (T.  C.)         -        18
Sanders  (E.  K.)                    9
Savage-  Armstrong(G.F.)25
Scott  (F.  J.)      -        -        37
Seebohm  (F.)    -        -    8,  10

Walrond  (Col.  H.)    -
Walsingham(Lord)-
Ward(Mrs.  W.)
Warwick  (Countess  of)
Watson  (A.  E.  T.)i2,i3

Houston  (D.  F.)        -          5

10,   l8,  20,  21,  22,  27,  39

Selous  (F.  C.)   -        -  12,  17

Weathers  (J.)   -

Howard  (Lady  Mabel)     27
Howitt(W.)      -        -        ii
Hudson  (W.  H.)       -        30
Huish  (M.  B.)  -        -        37

May  (Sir  T.  Erskine)          7
Meade  (L.  T.)  -        -        32
Melville  (G.J.Whyte)      27
Merivale  (Dean)        -          7

Senior  (W.)       -         -  13,  15
Seton-Karr  (Sir  H.)-          8
Sewell  (Elizabeth  M.)       28
Shadwell  (A.)    -        -        40

Webb  (Mr.  and  Mrs.
Sidney)
(Judge  T.)
(T.  E.)       -

Hullah(J.)                  -        37

Mernman  'H.  S.)      -        27

Shakespeare      -         -        25

Weber  (A.)

Hume  (David)  -        -        18
(M.  A.  S.)         -          3

Mill  (John  Stuart)    -  18,  20
Millais  (J.  G.)  -        -  16,  30

Shaw  (W.  A.)  -        -          8
Shearman  (M.)          -  12,  13

Weir  (Capt.  R.)
Wellington  (Duchess  of

Hunt  (Rev.  W.)        -          6
Hunter  (Sir  W.)      -          6
lutchinson  (Horace  G.)

Milner  (G.)        -         -        40
Monck(W.  H.  S.)    -        19
Montague  (F.  C.)     -          7

Sheehan  (P.  A.)        -        28
Sheppard  (E.)  -        -          8
Sinclair  (A.)      -        -         14

Wemyss  (M.  C.  E.)-
Weyman  (Stanley)  -
Whately(Archbishop)  i

13,  16,  27,  38

Moore  (T.)        -        -        31     skrine  (F.  H.)  -        -          o

Whitelaw  (R.)  -

ngelow  (Jean)          -         23
[ngram  (T.  D.)         -          6
ames  (W.)       -        -  18,  21

(Rev.  Edward)  -        17
Morgan  (C.  Lloyd)  -        21
Morris  (W.)      -    22,  23,  24,

Smith  (C.  Fell)         -        10
(R.  Bosworth)  -          8
(T.  C.)       -        -          5

Whittall(SirJ.  W.)-
Wilkins  (G.)     -
—  (W.  H.)     -

'ameson  (Mrs.  Anna)        37

27,  28,  37,  40

(W.  P.  Haskett)        12

Willich  (C.  M.)

efferies  (Richard)    -        38
[ekyll  (Gertrude)      -        38
erome(ferome  K.)  -        27
ohnson  (J  .  &  J.  H.)         39

Mulhall  (M.  G.)        -        20
Murray  (Hilda)         -        33
Myers  (F.  W.  H.)     -        19
Nansen  (F.)      -        -        12

Somerville  (E.)         -        28    Wood  (Rev.  J.  G.)   -
Sophocles          -        -        23    Wood-Martin  (W.  G.)
Soulsby(LncyH.)    -        40    Wyatt  (A.  J.)    -
Southey  (R.)     -        -        40    Wylie  (J.  H.)    -

ones  (H.  Bence)      -        31
oyce  (P.  W.)    -      6,  27,  39
ustim'an                            18

Nash  (V.)  ---          7
i  Nesbit  (E.)        -        -        24
i  Nettleship  (R.  L.)    -        17

SfiSM-t;        '    9>  11  Yeats  (S.  Levett)     -
spender  (A.  £..)         -        12    Yoxall  (T    H  )  •
Stanley  (Bishop)       -         31     '

Cant  (I.)   -        -        -        18  !  Newman  (Cardinal)  -        28

Stebbing  (W.)  -        -        28    Zeller  (E.)

MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


History,  Polities,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &c.


Abbott. — A  HISTORY  OF  GREECE.
By  EVELYN  ABBOTT,  M.A.,  LL.D.

Part  I. — From  the  Earliest  Times  to  the
Ionian  Revolt.  Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

Part  II. — 500-445  B.C.     Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

Part  III. — From  the  Peace  of  445  B.C.  to
the  Fall  of  the  Thirty  at  Athens  in  403
B.C.  Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.

Abbott. —  TOMMY  CORNSTALK  :  being
Some  Account  of  the  Less  Notable
Features  of  the  South  African  War  from
the  Point  of  View  of  the  Australian  Ranks.
By  J.  H.  M.  ABBOTT.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

Acland  and  Ransome. — A  HAND-
BOOK IN  OUTLINE  OF  THE  POLITICAL  HIS-
TORY OF  ENGLAND  TO  1896.  Chronologically
Arranged.  By  the  Right  Hon.  A.  H.  DYKE
ACLAND,  and  CYRIL  RANSOME,  M.A.  Crown
8vo.,  6s.

Allgood.  —  CHINA  WAR,  1860  :
LETTERS  AND  JOURNALS.  By  Major-
General  G.  ALLGOOD,  C.B.,  formerly  Lieut.
G.  ALLGOOD,  ist  Division  China  Field
Force.  With  Maps,  Plans,  and  Illustra-
tions. Demy  410.  125.  6d.  net.

\nnual  Register  (The).    A  Review

of  Public  Events  at  Home  and  Abroad,  for
the  year  1901.  8vo.,  185.

Volumes  of  the  ANNUAL  REGISTER  tor  the
years  1863-1900  can  stillbehad.  iSs.each.

Arnold. — INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES
ON  MODERN  HISTORY.  By  THOMAS  AR-
NOLD, D.D.,  formerly  Head  Master  of  Rugby
School.  Svo.,  75.  6d.

.shbourne. — PITT  :  SOME  CHAPTERS
ON  His  LIFE  AND  TIMES.  By  the  Right

,Hon.  EDWARD  GIBSON,  LORD  ASHBOURNE,
Lord  Chancellor  of  Ireland.  With  n  Por-
traits. 8vo.,  gilt  top,  215.

,shley. — SURVEYS,  HISTORIC  AND
ECONOMIC  :  a  Volume  of  Essays.  By  W.
J.  ASHLEY,  M.A.  8vo.,  gs.  net.


Baillie. — THE  ORIENTAL  CLUB,  AND
HANOVER  SQUARE.  By  ALEXANDER  F.
BAILLIE.  With  6  Photogravure  Portraits
and  8  Full-page  Illustrations.  Crown  410.,
255.  net.

Besant.— />/£  HISTORY  OF  LONDON.
By  Sir  WALTER  BESANT.  With  74  Illus-
trations. Crown  8vo.,  is.  gd.  Or  bound
as  a  School  Prize  Book,  gilt  edges,  2$.  6d.

Bright. — A  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.
By  the  Rev.  J.  FRANCK  BRIGHT,  D.D.

Period    I.     MEDIEVAL  MONARCHY:     A.D.
449-1485.     Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Period  II.     PERSONAL  MONARCHY.     1485-
1688.     Crown  8vo.,  55.

Period  III.     CONSTITUTIONAL  MONARCHY-
1689-1837.     Crown  8vo.,  7$.  6d.

Period  IV.     THE  GROWTH  OF  DEMOCRACY.
1837-1880.     Crown  8vo.,  65.

Bruce. — THE  FORWARD  POLICY  AND
ITS  RESULTS',  or,  Thirty-five  Years'  Work
amongst  the  Tribes  on  our  North-Western
Frontier  of  India.  By  RICHARD  ISAAC
BRUCE,  C.I.E.  With  28  Illustrations  and
a  Map.  8vo.,  155.  net.

Buckle. — HISTORY  OF  CIVILISATION
IN  ENGLAND.  By  HENRY  THOMAS  BUCKLE.

Cabinet  'Edition.     3  vols.     Crown  8vo.,  245.
'  Silver  Library  '  Edition.     3  vols.     Crown
8vo.,  los.  6d.

Burke. — A  HISTORY  OF  SPAIN,
FROM  THE  EARLIEST  TIMES  TO  THE
DEATH  OF  FERDINAND  THE  CATHOLIC.
By  ULICK  RALPH  BURKE,  M.A.  Edited
by  MARTIN  A.  S.  HUME.  With  6  Maps.
2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  165.  net.

Caroline,  Queen. —  CAROLINE  THE
ILLUSTRIOUS,  Q UEEN-CONSORT  OF  GEORGE

II.    AND     SOMETIME    QUEEN   REGENT:    3.

Study  of  Her  Life  and  Time.  By  W.  H.
WILKINS,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  Author  of  '  The
Love  of  an  Uncrowned  Queen  '.  2  vols.,
8vo.,  365.


iagwell. — IRELAND  UNDER  THE  '  Chesney. — INDIAN  POLITY:  a  View  of
TUDORS.  By  RICHARD  BAGWELL,  LL.D.  the  System  of  Administration  in  India.  By
3  vols.)  Vols.  I.  and  II.  From  the  first  General  Sir  GEORGE  CHESNEY,  K.C.B.
nvasion  of  the  Northmen  to  the  year  1578.  With  Map  showing  all  the  Administrative
5vo.,  325.  Vol.  III.  1578-1603.  8vo.,  iSs.  J  Divisions  of  British  India.  8vo.,  2is.


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


History,  Polities,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &e, — continued.


Churchill  (WINSTON  SPENCER,  M.P.).

THE  RIVER  WAR  :  an  Historical
Account  of  the  Reconquest  of  the  Soudan.
Edited  by  Colonel  F.  RHODES,  D.S.O.
With  Photogravure  Portrait  of  Viscount
Kitchener  of  Khartoum,  and  22  Maps  and
Plans.  8vo.,  105.  6d.  net.

THE  STORY  OF  THE  MALAKAND
FIELD  FORCE,  1897.  With  6  Maps  and
Plans.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

LONDON  TOLADYSMITH  VIA.PRETORIA  .
Crown  8vo.,  65.

IAN  HAMILTON'S  MARCH.  With
Portrait  of  Major-General  Sir  Ian
Hamilton,  and  10  Maps  and  Plans.
Crown  8vo.,  6s.


Corbett  (JULIAN  S.),


DRAKE    AND    THE    TUDOR   NAVY,

with  a  History  of  the  Rise  of  England
as  a  Maritime  Power.  With  Portraits,
Illustrations  and  Maps.  2  vols.  Crown
8vo.,  1 6s.

THE  SUCCESSORS  OF  DRAKE.  With
4  Portraits  (2  Photogravures)  and  12
Maps  and  Plans.  8vo.,  2.1.5.


Creighton    (M.,    D.D.,    Late    Lord

Bishop  of  London).

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  PAPACY  FROM
THE  GREAT  SCHISM  TO  THE  SACK  OF
ROME,  1378-1527.  6  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,
55.  net  each.

QUEEN  ELIZABETH.    With  Portrait.

Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

HISTORICAL  ESSAYS  AND  REVIEWS.
Edited  by  LOUISE  CREIGHTON.  Crown
8vo.,  55.  net.


Dale. —  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  ENGLISH
CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY.  By  LUCY
DALE,  late  Scholar  of  Somerville  College,
Oxford.  Crown  8vo.,  65.


De  Tocqueville. — DEMOCRACY  IN
AMERICA-.  By  ALEXIS  DE  TOCQUEVILLE.
Translated  by  HENRY  REEVE,  C.B.,  D.C.L.
2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  165.


Dickinson. — THE  DEVELOPMENT  OP
PARLIAMENT  DURING  THE  NINETEENTH
CENTURY.  By  G.  LOWES  DICKINSON,  M.A.
8vo.,  75.  6d.

Falkiner. — STUDIES  IN  IRISH  HIS-
TORY AND  BIOGRAPHY,  Mainly  of  the
Eighteenth  Century.  By  C.  LITTON
FALKINER.  8vo.,  125.  6d.  net.


Fitzmaurice.  —  CHARLES  WILLIAM
FERDINAND,  DUKE  OF  BRUNSWICK:  an
Historical  Study.  By  Lord  EDMUND
FITZMAURICE.  With  Map  and  2  Portraits.
8vo.,  6s.  net.


Froude  QAMES  A.).

THE  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  from  the
Fall  of  Wolsey  to  the  Defeat  of  the
Spanish  Armada.  12  vols.  Crown  8vo.,
3s.  6d.  each.

THE  DIVORCE  OF  CATHERINE  OF
ARAGON.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  SPANISH  STORY  OF  THE  AR-
MADA, and  other  Essays.  Cr.  8vo.,  35. 6d.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND  IN  THE
EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.  3  vols.  Cr.Svo.,
ios.  6d.

ENGLISH  SEAMEN  IN  THE  SIXTEENTH
.  CENTURY.

Cabinet  Edition.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.
Illustrated    Edition.       With    5     Photo-
gravure Plates   and  16   other    Illustra-
tions.    Large  Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  top,  6s.  net.
'  Silver  Library  '  Edition.   Cr.  Svo.,  3*. 6rf.

THE  COUNCIL  OF  TRENT.  Crowr
8vo.,  3s.  6d.

SHOR  T  STUDIES  ON  GREA  T  SUBJECTS
Cabinet  Edition.     4  vols.     245.
'  Silver  Library  '  Edition.    4  vols.   Crowi
8vo.,  3s.  6d.  each.

CAESAR  :  a  Sketch.     Cr.  Svo,  35.  6d

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  o
JAMES  ANTHONY  FROUDE.  Edited  b
P.  S.  ALLEN,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  3*-  w


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


riistory,  Politics,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &c. — continued.

fuller. — EGYPT  AND  THE  HINTER-  \  Gross. — THE  SOURCES  AND  LITERA-
LAND.  By  FREDERIC  W.  FULLER.  With  j  TURE  OF  ENGLISH  HISTORY,  FROM  THE
Frontispiece  and  Map  of  Egypt  and  the  :  EARLIEST  TIMES  TO  ABOUT  1485.  By
Sudan.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.  net.  CHARLES  GROSS,  Ph.D.  8vo.,  i8s.  net.


jrardiner  (SAMUEL  RAWSON,  D.C.L.,
LL.D.).

HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  from  the  Ac-
cession of  James  I.  to  the  Outbreak  of  the
Civil  War,  1603-1642.  With  7  Maps.
10  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net  each.


A  HISTORY  OF  THE    GREAT

WAR,    1642-1649.      With   54    Maps    and
Plans.     4  vols.      Cr.  8vo.,  55.  net  each.

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  COMMONWEALTH
AND  THE  PROTECTORATE.  1649-1656.

Library  Edition.    3  vols.    8vo.,  £3  35.

Cabinet  Edition.     4  vols.    Crown  Svo.,
55.  net  each.  [In  course  of  publication.

THE  STUDENT'S  Jiff  STORY  OF  ENG-
LAND. With  378  Illustrations.  Crown
8vo.,  gilt  top,  125.

Also  in  Three  Volumes,  price  4$.  each.

WHAT  GUNPOWDER  PLOT  WAS.
With  8  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

CROMWELL'S  PLACE  IN  HISTORY.
Founded  on  Six  Lectures  delivered  in  the
University  of  Oxford.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

OLIVER  CROMWELL.  With  Frontis-
piece. Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

<*rman  Empire  (The)  of  To-day  :

Outlines  of  its  Formation  and  Development.
:sy  '  ^/ERITAS  '.     Crown  8vo.,  65.  net.


Caham.  —  ROMAN  AFRICA  :  an  Out-
ne  of  the  History  of  the  Roman  Occupa-
:on  of  North  Africa,  based  chiefly  upon
nscriptions  and  Monumental  Remains  in
lat  Country.  By  ALEXANDER  GRAHAM,
•'.S.A.,  F.R.I.B.A.  With  30  reproductions
f  Original  Drawings  by  the  Author,  and
Maps.  8vo.,  165.  net.

Geville.  —  A  JOURNAL  OF  THE  REIGNS
F  KING  GEORGE  IV.,  KING  WILLIAM  IV.,
VD  QUEEN  VICTORIA.  By  CHARLES  C.  F.
REVILLE,  formerly  Clerk  of  the  Council.
vols.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.


Hamilton. — HISTORICAL  RECORD  oi<
THE  14777  (KING'S)  HUSSARS,  from  A.D.  1715
to  A.D.  1900.  By  Colonel  HENRY  BLACK-
BURNE  HAMILTON,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,
Oxford ;  late  Commanding  the  Regiment.
With  15  Coloured  Plates,  35  Portraits,  etc.,
in  Photogravure,  and  10  Maps  and  Plans.
Crown  4to.,  gilt  edges,  425.  net.

HARVARD  HISTORICAL  STUDIES.

THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  AFRICAN
SLAVE  TIRADE  TO  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF
AMERICA,  1638-1870.  By  W.  E.  B.  Du
Bois,  Ph.D.  8vo.,  75.  6d.

THE  CONTEST  OVER  THE  RATIFICATON
OF  THE  FEDERAL  CONSTITUTION  IN  MASSA-
CHUSETTS. By  S.  B.  HARDING, A.M.  Svo. ,6s.

A  CRITICAL  STUDY  OF  NULLIFICATION
IN  SOUTH  CAROLINA.  By  D.  F.  HOUSTON,
A.M.  8vo.,  65.

NOMINATIONS  FOR  ELECTIVE  OFFICE
IN  THE  UNITED  STATES.  By  FREDERICK
W.  DALLINGER,  A.M.  8vo.,  75.  6d.

A  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  BRITISH  MUNI-
CIPAL HISTORY,  INCLUDING  GILDS  AND
PARLIAMENTARY  REPRESENTATION.  By
CHARLES  GROSS,  Ph.D.  8vo.,  125.

THE  LIBERTY  AND  FREE  SOIL  PARTIES
IN  THE  NORTH  WEST.  By  THEODORE  C.
SMITH,  Ph.D.  Svo,  75.  6d.

THE  PROVINCIAL  GOVERNOR  IN  THE
ENGLISH  COLONIES  OF  NORTH  AMERICA.
By  EVARTS  BOUTELL  GREENE.  Svo.,  75.  6rf.

THE  COUNTY  PALATINE  OF  DURHAM.
a  Study  in  Constitutional  History.  By  GAIL-
LARD  THOMAS  LAPSLEY,  Ph.D.  8vo.,  zos.  6d.

THE  ANGLICAN  EPISCOPATE  AND  THE
AMERICAN  COLONIES.  By  ARTHUR  LYON
CROSS,  Ph.D.,  Instructor  in  History  in  the
University  of  Michigan.  8vo.,  los.  6d,


. — LIBERTY  DOCUMENTS.  With
Contemporary  Exposition  and  Critical  Com-
ments drawn  from  various  Writers.  Selected
and  Prepared  by  MABEL  HILL.  Edited  with
an  Introduction  byALBERT  BUSH'NELL  HART,
Ph.D.  Large  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.  net.


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


History,  Polities,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &e. — continue


Historic  Towns.— Edited  by  E.  A.
FREEMAN,  D.C.L.,  and  Rev. WILLIAM  HUNT,
M.A.  With  Maps  and  Plans.  Crown  8vo.,
35.  6d.  each.


Bristol.   By  Rev.  W.  Hunt.

Carlisle.  By  Mandell
Creighton,  D.D.

Cinque  Ports.  By  Mon-
tagu Burrows.

Colchester.  By  Rev.  E.L.
Cutts.

Exeter.    By  E.  A.  Freeman.

London.  By  Rev.  W.  J.
Loftie.


Oxford.      By  Rev.  C.  W.
Boase.

Winchester.      By  G.    W.
Kitchin,  D.D.

York.       By    Rev.    James
Raine.

New  York.    By  Tneodore
Roosevelt.

Boston  (U.S.)     By  Henry
Cabot  Lodge.


Hunter. — A  HISTORY   OF   BRITISH

INDIA.  By  Sir  WTILLIAM  WILSON  HUNTER,
K.C.S.I.,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Vol.  I.— Introduc-
tory to  the  Overthrow  of  the  English  in  the
Spice  Archipelago,  1623.  With  4  Maps.
8vo.,  185.  Vol.  II.— To  the  Union  of  the
Old  and  New  Companies  under  the  Earl  of
Godolphin's  Award,  1708.  8vo.,  165.

Ingram. — A    CRITICAL    EXAMINA-
TION OF  IRISH  HISTORY.     From  the  Eliza-  I
bethan  Conquest  to  the  Legislative  Union  !
of  1800.     By  T.  DUNBAR  INGRAM,  LL.D.
2  vols.     8vo.,  245.


Lecky  (The  Rt.  Hon.  WILLIAM  E.  I
HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  IN  THE  Etc

TEENTH  CEA  TURY.

Library  Edition.  8  vols.  8vo.  Vols
and  II.,  1700-1760,  365. ;  Vols.  III.  i
IV.,  1760-1784,  36s. ;  Vols.  V.  and  ^
1784-1793,  365. ;  Vols.  VII.  and  VI
1793-1800,  365.

Cabinet  Edition.  ENGLAND.  7  vols.  Cro
8vo.,  55.  net  each.  IRELAND.  5  v<
Crown  8vo.,  55.  net  each.

HISTORY  OF  EUROPEAN  MORA
FROM  AUGUSTUS  TO  CHARLEMAGNE.
vols.  Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  net.

HISTORY  OF  THE  RISE  AND  I  NFL

ENCE  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF  RATIONALISM

EUROPE.     2  vols.     Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  r

DEMOCRACY  AND  LIBERTY.

Library  Edition.     2  vols.     8vo.,  365.
Cabinet  Edition.   2  vols.   Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  r


Lowell. — GOVERNMENTS  AND  P,
TIES  IN  CONTINENTAL  EUROPE.  By
LAWRENCE  LOWELL.  2  vols.  8vo.,  2


Joyce.  —A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  IRE-  \
LAND,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  1603.  By  i
P.  W.  JOYCE,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo.,  105.  6d.

Kaye  and  Malleson.—  HISTORY  OF

THE  INDIAN  MUTINY,  1857-1858.  By  Sir
JOHN  W.  KAYE  and  Colonel  G.  B.  MALLE-
SON. With  Analytical  Index  and  Maps  and
Plans.  6  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

Kent. — THE  ENGLISH  RADICALS  :  an
Historical  Sketch.  By  C.  B.  ROYLANCE
KENT.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.

Lang  (ANDREW).

THE  MYSTERY  OF  MARY  STUART.
With  6  Photogravure  Plates  (4  Portraits)
and  15  other  Illustrations.  8vo.,  185.  net.

JAMES  THE  SIXTH  AND  THE  GOWRIE
MYSTERY.  With  Cowrie's  Coat  of  Arms
in  colour,  2  Photogravure  Portraits  and
other  Illustrations.  8vo.,  125.  6d.  net.

Laurie.  — His  TO  RICA  L  SUR  VE  Y  OF
PRE-CHRISTIAN  EDUCATION.  By  S.  S.
LAURIE,  A.M.,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.


Lumsden's  Horse,  Records  of

Edited  by  H.  H.  S.  PEARSE.  With  a  fci
and  numerous  Portraits  and  Illustration ;
the  Text.  4to.,  2is.  net.


Lynch.—  THE  WAR  OF  THE  Civ\
SATIONS  :  BEING  A  RECORD  OF  '  A  FORE\
DEVIL'S'  EXPERIENCES  WITH  THE  AL.\
IN  CHINA.  By  GEORGE  LYNCH,  Sp<;J
Correspondent  of  the  '  Sphere,'  etc.  Via
Portrait  and  21  Illustrations.  Crown  £j,
65.  net.


Macaulay  (Lord).


THE  LIFE   AND    WORKS   OF

MACAULAY.

'Edinburgh'  Edition.  lovols.  8vo.,fo.fP

Vols.  I. -IV.    HISTORY  OF

Vols.    V.-VII.      ESSAYS,

INDIAN  PENAL  CODE,  CONTRA
TO  KNIGHT'S  'QUARTERLY MA

Vol.  VIII.   SPEECHES,  LAYS  01
ROME,  MISCELLANEOUS  POEMS,  j

Vols.    IX.    and    X.       THE    LIFE  :>
LETTERS  OF  LORD  MACAULAY-  iv
Sir   G.  O.  TREVELYAN,  Bart,


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


istory,  Politics,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &,&.— continued.


acaulay  (Lord) — continued.
THE  WORKS.

'  Albany'   Edition.       With   12  Portraits.

12  vols.  Large  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.
Vols.    I. -VI.      HISTORY   OF   ENGLAND,

FROM  THE  ACCESSION  OF  JAMES  THE

SECOND.

Vols.  VII. -X.  ESSAYS  AND  BIOGRAPHIES.
Vols.    XI. -XII.      SPEECHES,    LAYS    OF

ANCIENT  ROME,  ETC.,  AND  INDEX.


Cabinet  Edition.       16  vols.      Post  8vo.,

£4  if«-
Library  Edition.     5  vols.     8vo.,  £4.

{ ISTORY   of    ENGLAND   FROM   THE
ACCESSION  OF  JAMES  THE  SECOND.
Popular  Edition,     2  vols.     Cr.  8vo.,  55.
Student's  Edition.   2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  ias.
People's  Edition.    4  vx>ls.    Cr.  8vo.,  165.
'Albany1  Edition.     With  6  Portraits.     6

vols.  Large  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.
Cabinet  Edition.  8  vols.  Post  8vo.,  485.
'  Edinburgh'  Edition.  4  vols.  8vo.,  65.  !

each.

RITICAL  AND  HISTORICAL  ESSAYS,  \
WITH  LAYS  OF  ANCIENT  ROME,  etc.,  in  i
volume.

•Popular  Edition.     Crown  8vo.,  25.  bd.
Silver  Library  '  Edition.     With  Portrait
and  4  Illustrations  to  the  '  Lays'.     Cr
8vo.,  35.  6d.

(:ITICAL  AND  HISTORICAL  ESSAYS.

Student's  Edition,    i  vol.    Cr.  8vo.,  6s.
Trevelyan  '  Edition.    2  vols.    Cr.  8vo.,  95.
Cabinet  Edition.    4  vols.   Post  8vo.,  245.
Edinburgh  '  Edition.     3  vols.     8vo.,  65.
each.
library  Edition.     3  vols.     Svo.,  365.

2  SA  ys,  which  may  be  had  separately,
iwed,  6rf.  each  ;  cloth,  is.  each.


ddin  and  Walpole.


Frederick  the  Great.


•ok  s  Boswell's  Johnson,  j  Ranke  and  Gladstone

>ry.
11  HJ


all:


Constitutional


Hi  ,r

''am  Hastings.

-e.rl  of  Chatham  (Two


Lord  Bacon.

Lord  Clive.

Lord     Byron,    and     The

Comic      Dramatists    of

the   Restoration.


iksCELLANEOUS  WRITINGS,  \

BEECHES  AND   POEMS.

)pular  Edition.     Crown  8vr..;  2s.  6d.
ibinet  Edition.    4  voh.     i'osi  8vo.,  245.  |

SECTIONS  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF
~>RD  M ACAULAY.  Edited,  with  Occa-
;)nal  Notes,  by  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  G.  O.
<EVELYAN,  Bart.  Crown  «vo.,  65.


Mackinnon  QAMES,  Ph.D.).

THE  HISTORY  OF  EDWARD  THE
THIRD.  8vo.,  185.

THE  GROWTH  AND  DECLINE  OF  THE
FRENCH  MONARCHY.  8vo.,  215.  net.

Mallet. — MALLET  DU  PAN  AND  THE
FRENCH  REVOLUTION.  By  BERNARD
MALLET.  With  Photogravure  Portrait.
8vo.,  125.  6d.  net.

May. — THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  HIS-
TORY OF  ENGLAND  since  the  Accession
of  George  III.  1760-1870.  By  Sir  THOMAS
ERSKINE  MAY,  K.C.B.  (Lord  Farnborough).
3  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  185.

Merivale  (CHARLES,  D.D.).

HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  UNDER  THE
EMPIRE.  8  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

THE  FALL  OF  THE  ROMAN  REPUBLIC:
a  Short  History  of  the  Last  Century  of  the
Commonwealth.  i2mo.,  js.  6d.

GENERAL  HISTORY  OF  ROME,  from
the  Foundation  of  the  City  to  the  Fall  of
Augustulus,  B.C.  753-A.o.  476.  With  5
Maps.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.

Montague.  —  THE  ELEMENTS  OF
ENGLISH  CONSTITUTIONAL  HISTORY.  By
F.  C.  MONTAGUE,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Nash. — THE  GREAT  FAMINE  AND
ITS  CAUSES.  By  VAUGHAN  NASH.  With
8  Illustrations  from  Photographs  by  the
Author,  and  a  Map  of  India  showing  the
Famine  Area.  Crown  8vo.,  65.

Owens    College    Essays.— Edited

by  T.  F.  TOUT,  M.A.,  Professor  of  History
in  the  Owens  College,  Victoria  University,
and  JAMES  TAIT,  M.A.,  Assistant  Lecturer
in  History.  With  4  Maps.  Svo.,  125.  6d.  net.

Powell     and     Trevelyan.  —  THE

PEASANTS'  RISING  AND  THE  LOLLARDS:
a  Collection  of  Unpublished  Documents.
Edited  by  EDGAR  POWELL  and  G.  M.
TREVELYAN.  8vo.,  65.  net.

Randolph.—/1/^  LAW  AND  POLICY
OF  ANNEXATION,  with  Special  Reference  to
the  Philippines  ;  together  with  Observations
on  the  Status  of  Cuba.  By  CARMAN  F.
RANDOLPH.  8vo.,  gs.  net.


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


History,  Polities,  Polity,  Political  Memoirs,  &e.-

Rankin  (REGINALD).


THE  MARQUIS  D'ARGENSON  ;  AND
RICHARD  THE  SECOND.  8vo.,  105.  6d.  net.

A  SUBALTERN'S  LETTERS  TO  His
WIFE.  (The  Boer  War.)  Crown  8vo.,
35.  6d.

Ransome. — THE  RISE  OF  CONSTI-
TUTIONAL GOVERNMENT  IN  ENGLAND.
By  CYRIL  RANSOME,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  65.

Seebohm  (FREDERIC,  LL.D.,  F.S.A.).

THE  ENGLISH  VILLAGE  COMMUNITY.
With  13  Maps  and  Plates.  8vo.,  165.

TRIBAL  CUSTOM  IN  ANGLO-SAXON
LAW ;  being  an  Essay  supplemental  to
(i)  '  The  English  Village  Community,'
(a)  « The  Tribal  System  in  Wales '.
8vo.,  165.

Seton-Karr. — THE  CALL  TO  ARMS,

1900-1901 ;  or  a  Review  of  the  Imperial
Yeomanry  Movement,  and  some  subjects
connected  therewith.  By  Sir  HENRY  SETON-
KARR,  M.P.  With  a  Frontispiece  by  R.
CATON-WOODVILLE.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

Shaw. — A  HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH
CHURCH  DURING  THE  CIVIL  WARS  AND
UNDER  THE  COMMONWEALTH,  1640-1660.
By  WILLIAM  A.  SHAW,  Litt.D.  2  vols.
8vo.,  365.

Sheppard.  —  THE  OLD  ROYAL
PALACE  OF  WHITEHALL.  By  EDGAR
SHEPPARD,  D.D.,  Sub-Dean  of  H.M.
Chapels  Royal,  Sub-Almoner  to  the  King.
With  6  Photogravure  Plates  and  33  other
Illustrations.  Medium  8vo.,  2is.  net.


Smith. — CARTHAGE  AND  THE  CARTH-
AGINIANS. By  R.  BOSWORTH  SMITH,  M.A.
With  Maps,  Plans,  etc.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6rf.

Stephens.  —  A  HISTORY  OF  THE
FRENCH  REVOLUTION.  By  H.  MORSE
STEPHENS.  8vo.  Vols.  I.  and  II.  185.  each.

Sternberg.  —  MY  EXPERIENCES  OF
THE  BOER  WAR.  By  ADALBERT  COUNT
STERNBERG.  With  Preface  by  Lieut.-Col.
G.  F.  R.  HENDERSON.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.


Stubbs.  —  HISTORY  OF  THE      NII-I
SITY  OF  DUBLIN.    By  J.  W.  STUBBS.    8'

125.  6d.

•
Stubbs.  —  HISTORICAL     LVTRODI

TIONS      TO      THE      '  ROLLS      SERIES'.

WILLIAM  STUBBS,  D.D.,  formerly  Bisl
of  Oxford,  Regius  Professor  of  Mod
History  in  the  University.  Collected  ;
Edited  by  ARTHUR  HASSALL,  M.A.  8'


Sutherland.  —  THE  HISTORY  OF  A

TRALIA    AND    NEW  ZEALAND,    from    it

1900.  By  ALEXANDER  SUTHERLAND,  M,
and  GEORGE  SUTHERLAND,  M.A.  Crc
8vo.,  2s.  6d.

Taylor.  —  A  STUDENT'S  MANUAL
THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIA.  By  Colonel  M
DOWS  TAYLOR,  C.S.I.  Cr.  8vo.,  75.  6d.

Thomson.  —  CHINA  AND  THEPOWEI

a  Narrative  of  the  Outbreak  of  1900.
H.   C.    THOMSON.      With  2  Maps  and
Illustrations:      8vo.,    los.   6d.    net.


.  -  PA  RLIA  MENTA  R  Y       GOVE1
MENT     IN     THE     BRITISH     COLONIES.

ALPHEUS  TODD,  LL.D.     8vo.,  305.  net.
Trevelyan.  —  THE  AMERICAN  RE

LUTION.     Part  I.  1766-1776.     By  Sir  G.
TREVELYAN,  Bart.     8vo.,  165.

Trevelyan.  —  ENGLAND  IN  THE  A
OF  WYCLIFFE.  By  GEORGE  MACAU
TREVELYAN.  8vo.,  155.

Wakeman  and  H  assail.—  Es.

INTRODUCTORY  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  ENGI\
CONSTITUTIONAL     HISTORY.      Edited
HENRY     OFFLEY     WAKEMAN,    M.A.,
ARTHUR  HASSALL,  M.A.     Crown

Walpole.  —  His  TOR  Y    OF    ENGL

FROM    THE     CONCLUSION    OF    THE

WAR  IN  1815  TO  1858.     By  Sir  SPE>J
WALPOLE,  K.C.B.  6  vols.  Cr.  8vo.,  bs.  e>

Wylie  QAMES  HAMILTON,  M.A.).

HISTORY     OF     ENGLAND

HENRY  IV.     4  vols.     Crown  8vo.    !
I.,  1399-1404,   105.  6d.     Vol.  II.,
1406,  155.  (out  of  print).     Vol.  III.,  i  "'
1411,  155.     Vol.  IV.,  1411-1413,  2n.|

THE  COUNCIL  OF  CONSTANCE  r
DBA  TH  OF  J  OHN  Hus.    Cr  .  8vo.  ,  6s  j  '


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Biography,   Personal   Memoirs,  &c.


aeon. — THE  LETTERS  AND  LIFE  OF  :
FRANCIS  BACON,  INCLUDING  ALL  HIS  Oc-  !
CASIONAL  WORKS.     Edited  by  JAMES  SPED-
DING.     7  vols.     8vo.,  ^4  45.

,agehot. — BIOGRA  PHICA  L  ST  UDIES.
By  WALTER  BAGEHOT.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Bernards  (The)  of  Abington  and

Nether  Winchendon :   A  Family  History.  ;
By  Mrs.  NAPIER  HIGGINS.     2  Vols.     Svo.

ilount.  —  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  SIR
EDWARD  BLOUNT,  K.C.B.,  ETC.  Edited
by  STUART  J.  REID,  Author  of  '  The  Life
and  Times  of  Sydney  Smith,'  etc.  With  3
Photogravure  Plates.  8vo.,  los.  6d.  net.

lowen. — EDWARD  BOWEN  :  A   ME-  '

MOIR.  By  the  Rev.  the  Hon.  W.  E.  BOWEN.
With  Appendices,  3  Photogravure  Portraits
and  2  other  Illustrations.  Svo.,  125.  6d.  net.

arlyle.— THOMAS  CARLYLE:  A  His-
tory of  his  Life.  By  JAMES  ANTHONY
FROUDE.

I795"I^35-     2  vols.     Crown  8vo.,  75.
.1834-1881.     2  vols.     Crown  8vo.,  75.

irozier. — MY  INNER  LIFE  :  being  a

Chapter  in  Personal  Evolution  and  Auto-
biography. By  JOHN  BEATTIE  CROZIER,
LL.D.  8vo.,  145.

lante. — THE  LIFE  AND   WORKS  OF

DANTE  ALLIGHIKRI  :  being  an  Introduction  '
:o  the  Study  of  the   '  Divina  Commedia '.
By  the   Rev.    J.    F.    HOGAN,   D.D.      With
Portrait.     8vo.,  125.  6d.

lanton. — LIFE  OF  DANTON.  By  A.
H.  BEESLY.  With  Portraits.  Cr.  Svo.,  6s.

le  Bode.—  THE  BARONESS  DE  BODE,

[775-1803.  By  WILLIAM  S.  CHILDE-PEM-
5ERTON.  With  4  Photogravure  Portraits
ind  other  Illustrations.  Svo.,  gilt  top,
2s.  6d.  net.

rasmus.

LIFE  AND   LETTERS   OF  ERASMUS.
By  JAMES   ANTHONY   FROUDE.      Crown
,   Svo.,  35.  6d.

THE  EPISTLES  OF  ERASMUS,  from
his  Earliest  Letters  to  his  Fifty-first  Year,
arranged   in   Order   of    Time.      English
Translations,  with   a  Commentary.     By  I
FRANCIS  MORGAN  NICHOLS.  Svo.,  185.  net.

Jiraday. — FARADAY  AS  A  Dis-
OVERER.  By  JOHN  TYNDALL.  Crown
.•o.,  35.  6d.


Fenelon  :  his  Friends  and  his
Enemies,  1651-1715.  By  E.  K.  SANDERS.
With  Portrait.  8vo.,  105.  6d.


EARLY  HISTORY  OF
CHARLES  JAMES  Fox.  By  the  Right  Hon.
Sir  G.  O.  TREVELYAN,  Bart.  Crown  8vo.,
35.  6rf.

Froude. — HURRELL  FROUDE  :  Some

Reprints  and  Reprinted  Comments.  With
a  Biographical  Preface  by  the  Editor,
L.  I.  GUINEY.  With  Illustrations.  Svo.

Granville. — SOME  RECORDS  OF  THE
LATER  LIFE  OF  HARRIET,  COUNTESS
GRANVILLE.  By  her  Granddaughter,  the
Hon.  Mrs.  OLDFIELD.  With  17  Portraits.
8vo.,  gilt  top,  165.  net.

Grey.  —  MEMOIR  OF  SIR  GEORGE
GREY,  BART,  G.C.B.,  1799-1882.  By
MANDELL  CREIGHTON,  D. D.,  late  Lord
Bishop  of  London.  With  3  Portraits.
Crown  Svo.,  65.  net.

Hamilton. — LIFE  OF  SIR  WILLIAM
HAMILTON.  By  R.  P.  GRAVES.  Svo.  3  vols.
155.  each.  ADDENDUM.  Svo.,  6d.  sewed.

Harrow   School   Register  (The),

1801-1900.  Second  Edition,  igoi.  Edited
by  M.  G.  DAUGLISH,  Barrister-at-Law.
Svo.  155.  net.

Havelock. — MEMOIRS  OF  SIR  HENRY
HAVELOCK,  K.C.B.  By  JOHN  CLARK
MARSHMAN.  Crown  8vo.,  3$.  6d.

Haweis. — MY  MUSICAL  LIFE.  By  the
Rev.H.R.HAWEis.  With  Portrait  of  Richard
Wagner  and  3  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  6s.  net.

Hunter. — THE  LIFE  OF  SIR  WILLIAM
WILSON  HUNTER,  K. C.S.I.,  M.A.,  LL.D.
Author  of  '  A  History  of  British  India,'  etc.
By  FRANCIS  HENRY  SKRINE,  F.S.S.  With
6  Portraits  (2  Photogravures)  and  4  other
Illustrations.  Svo.,  165.  net.

Jackson. — STONEWALL  JACKSON  AND
THE  AMERICAN  CIVIL  WAR.  By  Lieut. -Col.
G.  F.  R.  HENDERSON.  With  2  Portraits  and
33  Maps  and  Plans.  2  vols.  Cr.  Svo.,  i6«.  net.

Kielmansegge.— DIARY  OF  A  JOUR-
NEY TO  ENGLAND  IN  THE  YEARS  1761-
1762.  By  Count  FREDERICK  KIELMAN-
SEGGE. With  4  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.
55.  net.


io         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Biography,   Personal  Memoirs,   &e.— continued.


Lieven.  —  LETTERS  OF  DOROTHEA,
PRINCESS  LIE  YEN,  DURING  HER  RESIDENCE
IN  LONDON,  1812-1834.  Edited  by  LIONEL
G.  ROBINSON.  With  2  Photogravure  Por-
traits. 8vo.,  145.  net.

Luther.  —  LIFE    OF    LUTHER.       By

JULIUS    KOSTLIN.      With    62    Illustrations
and  4  Facsimilies'of  MSS.     Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Macau  lay. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS
OF  LORD  MACAULAY.  By  the  Right  Hon.
Sir  G.  O.  TREVELYAN,  Bart.

Popular  Edition,    i  vol.    Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  bd.

Student's  Edition      i  vol.     Cr.  8vo.,  65.

Cabinet  Edition.     2  vols.     Post  8vo.,  125.

'  Edinburgh' Edition.  2  vols.  8vo. ,6s.  each.

Library  Edition.     2  vols.     8vo.,  365.

Marbot.  —  THE  MEMOIRS  OF  THE
BARON  DE  MARBOT.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,
75.

Max  M tiller  (F.)

THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  THE
RIGHT  HON.  FRIEDRICH  MAX  MULLER.
Edited  by  his  Wife.  With  Photogravure
Portraits  and  other  Illustrations.  2  vols.,
8vo.,  325.  net.

MY  AUTOBIOGRAPHY:  a  Fragment.
With  6  Portraits.  8vo.,  125.  6d.

AULD  LANG  SYNE.  Second  Series.
8vo.,  105.  6d.

CHIPS  FROM  A  GERMAN  WORKSHOP.
Vol.  II.  Biographical  Essays.  Cr.  8vo.,  55.

Meade. — GENERAL  SIR  RICHARD  }
MEADE  AND  THE  FEUDATORY  STATES  OF  I
CENTRAL  AND  SOUTHERN  INDIA.  By  ;
THOMAS  HENRY  THORNTON.  With  Portrait,  i
Map  and  Illustrations.  8vo.,  los.  6d.  net.

Morris.  —  THE  LIFE  OF  WILLIAM  \
MORRIS.  By  J.  W.  MACKAIL.  With  2  Por-  |
traits  and  8  other  Illustrations  by  E.  H.  NEW,  |
etc.  2  vols.  Large  Crown  8vo.,  105.  net.

On  the  Banks  of  the  Seine.     By  |

A.  M.  F.,  Author  of  '  Foreign  Courts  and  I
Foreign  Homes'.     Crown  8vo.,  65.

Paget. — MEMOIRS  AND  LETTERS  .OF  !
SIR  JAMES  PAGET.     Edited  by   STEPHEN  J
PAGET,   one    of  his  sons.     With    Portrait.
8vo.,  6s.  net.

Plac  e. — THE  L  IFE  OF  FRANCIS  PL  A  CE,  \
1771-1854.  By  GRAHAM  WALLAS,  M.A.  I
With  2  Portraits.  8vo.,  125.


Powys. — PASSAGES  FROM  THEDIARI
OF  MRS.  PHILIP  LYBBE  POWYS,  OF  HAI
WICK  HOUSE,  OXON.  1756-1808.  Edited
EMILY  I.  CLIMENSON.  8vo.,  gilt  top,  i6j

Ramakr/sh/ia :     His     LIFE    AI

SAYINGS.  By  the  Right  Hon.  F.  M
MULLER.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

Rich. — MARY  RICH,  COUNTESS  ,
WARWICK  (1625-1678)  :  Her  Family  a
Friends.  By  C.  FELL  SMITH.  With
Photogravure  Portraits  and  9  other  Illust;
tions.  8vo.,  gilt  top,  185.  net.

Rochester,    and    other    Litera:

Rakes  of  the  Court  of  Charles  II.,  wi
some  Account  of  their  Surroundings.  1
the  Author  of  '  The  Life  of  Sir  Kene
Digby,'  The  Life  of  a  Prig,'  etc.  With
Portraits.  8vo.,  i6s.

Romanes. — THE  LIFE  AND  LETTE.
OF  GEORGE  JOHN  A'OMANES,  A/.A.,  LI..1
F.ft.S.  Written  and  Edited  by  his  WIF
With  Portrait  and  2  Illustrations.  Cr.  8v
55.  net.

RuSSell.  SlYALLOlVFIELD     AND    I

OWNERS.  By  CONSTANCE  LADY  RUSSEL
of  Swallowfield  Park.  With  15  Photogravu
Portraits  and  36  other  Illustrations.  41
gilt  edges,  425.  net.

Seebohm. —  THEOXFOR  D  REFORMED
—JOHN  COLET,  ERASMUS,  AND  1  HOM.
MORE  :  a  History  of  their  Fellow- Wor
By  FREDERIC  SEEBOHM.  hvo.,  145.

Shakespeare.  —  OUTLINES  OF  :

LIFE  OF  SHAKESPEARE.  By  J.  O.  HALI
WELL-PHILLIPPS.  With  Illustrations  <u
Facsimiles.  2  vols.  Royal  8vo.,  215.

Tales  of  my  Father.— By  A.  M.  F

Author  of  '  Foreign  Courts  and  Foreif
Homes,'  and  '  On  the  Banks  of  the  Seine
Crown  8vo.,  65.

Tallentyre. — THE    WOMEN  OF

SALONS,  and  other  French  Portraits.  J
S.  G.  TALLENTYRE.  With  u  Photogravu
Portraits.  8vo.,  los.  6d.  net.

Victoria,    Queen,    1819-1901.     i

RICHARD  R.  HOLMES,  M.V.O.,  F.S.A.,  L;
rarian  to  the  Queen.  With  Photogravu
Portrait.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt  top,  55.  net.

Walpole. — SOME     UNPUBLISI
LETTERS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.     Edit
by  Sir  SPENCER  WALPOLE,  K.C.B.     Wi
2  Portraits.     Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.  net.

Wellington.— LIFE    OF   THE  Di
OF    WELLINGTON.      By    the   Rev.  G
GLEIG,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6rf.


MESSRS.   LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Travel  and  Adventure,  the  Colonies,  &e.


mold. — SEAS  AND  LANDS.  By  Sir
EDWIN  ARNOLD.  With  71  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

aker  (Sir  S.  W.).

EIGHT  YEARS  IN  CEYLON.     With  6
Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE    RIFLE   AND    THE   HOUND   IN
CEYLON.    With  6  Illusts.    Cr.  bvo.,  35.  6d.


lall  GOHN).

THE  ALPINE  GUIDE.    Reconstructed
and  Revised  on  behalf  of  the  Alpine  Club,
by  W.  A.  B.  COOLIDGE.
Vol.  I.,  THE  WESTERN  ALPS:  the  Alpine
Region,   South   of  the   Rhone   Valley,
from  the  Col  de  Tenda  to  the  Simplon
Pass.    With  g  New  and  Revised  Maps.
Crown  8vo.,  125.  net.

HINTS  AND  NOTES,  PRACTICAL  AND
SCIENTIFIC,  FOR  TRAVELLERS  IN  THE

'•  ALPS  :  being  a  Revision  of  the  General
Introduction  to  the  '  Alpine  Guide  '.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  net.


lent. — THE  RUINED  CITIES  OF  MA-
SHONALAND  :  being  a  Record  of  Excavation
ind  Exploration  in  1891.  By  J.  THEODORE
BENT.  With  117  Illustrations.  Crown
4vo.,  35.  6d.


1'assey  (The  Late  Lady).

4  VOYAGE  IN  THE  '  SUNBEAM  ' ;   OUR

HOME    ON    THE    OCEAN  FOR    ELEVEN

MONTHS.

Cabinet  Edition.  With  Map  and  66  Illus-
trations. Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  75.  6d.

'  Silver  Library  '  Edition.  With  66  Illus-
trations. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Popular  Edition.  With  60  Illustrations.
4to.,  6d.  sewed,  is.  cloth.

School  Edition.  With  37  Illustrations.
Fcp.,  25.  cloth,  or  35.  white  parchment.

SUNSHINE  AND  STORM  IN  THE  EAST.
Popular  Edition.     With  103  Illustrations.
4to.,  6d.   sewed,    15.   cloth.

A-  THE  TRADES,  THE  TROPICS,  AND
THE  '  ROARING  FORTIES  '.
Cabinet  Edition.    With  Map  and  220  Illus-
trations.    Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  75.  6d.


Fountain  (PAUL).

THE  GREAT  DESERTS  AND  FORESTS
'    OF  NORTH  AMERICA.    With  a  Preface  by
W.  H.  HUDSON,  Author  of  The  Naturalist
in  La  Plata,'  etc.     8vo.,  95.  6d.  net.

THE  GREAT  MOUNTAINS  AND
FORESTS  OF  SOUTH  AMERICA.  With
Portrait  and  7  Illustrations.  8vo.,  105.  6d.
net.

Froude  GAMES  A.).

OCEANA  :  or  England  and  her  Col-
onies. With  9  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,3s.  6d.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  THE  WEST  INDIES:
or,  the  Bow  of  Ulysses.  With  9  Illustra-
tions. Crown  8vo.,  25.  boards,  25.  6d.  cloth.

Grove. — SETENTV-ONE  DAYS'  CAMP-
ING IN  MOROCCO.  By  Lady  GROVE.  With
Photogravure  Portrait  and  32  Illustrations
from  Photographs.  8vo.,  75.  6d.  net.

Haggard. — A  WINTER  PILGRIMAGE  :

Being  an  Account  of  Travels  through
Palestine,  Italy  and  the  Island  of  Cyprus,
undertaken  in  the  year  1900.  By  H.  RIDER
HAGGARD.  With  31  Illustrations  from  Photo-
graphs. Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  top,  125.  6d.  net.

Heathcote.— ST.  KILDA.  By  NOR-
MAN HEATHCOTE.  With  80  Illustrations
from  Sketches  and  Photographs  of  the
People,  Scenery  and  Birds  by  the  Author.
8vo.,  105.  6d.  net,

Howitt. —  VISITS  TO  REMARKABLE
PLACES.  Old  Halls,  Battle-Fields,  Scenes,
illustrative  of  Striking  Passages  in  English
History  and  Poetry.  By  WILLIAM  HOWITT.
With  80  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

;  Knight  (E.  F.).

WITH  THE  ROYAL  TOUR  :  a  Narra-
tive of  the  Recent  Tour  of  the  Duke  and
Duchess  of  Cornwall  and  York  through
Greater  Britain.  With  16  Illustrations
and  a  Map.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

THE  CRUISE  OF  THE  '  ALERTE  ' :  the
Narrative  of  a  Search  for  Treasure  on  the
Desert  Island  of  Trinidad.  With  2  Maps
and  23  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

WHERE  THREE  EMPIRES  MEET:  a
Narrative  of  Recent  Travel  in  Kashmir,
Western  Tibet,  Baltistan,  Ladak,  Gilgit,
and  the  adjoining  Countries.  With  a
Map  and  54  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  '  FALCON'  ON  THE  BALTIC:  a
Voyage  from  London  to  Copenhagen  in
a  Three-Tonner.  With  10  Full-page
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.


12         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Travel  and  Adventure,  the  Colonies,  &e. — continued.


Lees. — PEAKS  AND  PINES  :  another
Norway  Book.  By  J.  A.  LEES.  With  63
Illustrations  and  Photographs.  Cr.  8vo.,  65.


Lees  and  Clutterbuck.— B.C.  1887  :
A  RAMBLE  IN  BRITISH  COLUMBIA.  By  J.  A.
LEES  and  W.  J.  CLUTTERBUCK.  With  Map
and  75  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Lynch. — ARMENIA:  Travels  and
Studies.  By  H.  F.  B.  LYNCH.  With  197
Illustrations  (some  in  tints)  reproduced
from  Photographs  and  Sketches  by  the
Author,  16  Maps  and  Plans,  a  Bibliography,
and  a  Map  of  Armenia  and  adjacent
countries.  2  vols.  Medium  8vo.,  gilt  top,
425.  net.


Smith, — CLIMBING  IN  THE  BRITIS
ISLES.  By  W.  P.  HASKETT  SMITH.  Wi
Illustrations  and  Numerous  Plans.

Part  I.  ENGLAND.     i6mo.,  35.  net.

Part  II.  WALES  AND  IRELAND.     i6m<
35.  net.

Spender. — Two    WINTERS   IN  No.

WAY:  being  an  Account  of  Two  Holida
spent  on  Snow-shoes  and  in  Sleigh  Drivin
and  including  an  Expedition  to  the  Lapp
By  A.  EDMUND  SPENDER.  With  40  Illusti
tions  from  Photographs.  8vo.,  IDS.  6rf.  ni

Stephen.  —  THE  PLAY- GROUND  <
EUROPE  (The  Alps).  By  Sir  LESL
STEPHEN,  K.C.B.  With  4  Illustration
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Three    in    Norway.      By  Two

Them.     With  a  Map  and  59  Illustratior

.  —  THE   FIRST    CROSSING    OF  \      Crown  8vo.,  2s.  boards,  25.  6d.  cloth.
GREENLAND.   By  FRIDTJOF  NANSEN.  With


143  Illustrations  and  a  Map.
35.  6d.


Crown  8vo.,


Rice. — OCCASIONAL  ESSAYS  ON  NA-
TIVE SOUTH  INDIAN  LIFE.  By  STANLEY
P.  RICE,  Indian  Civil  Service.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.


Tyndall.— (JOHN).


THE  GLACIERS  OF  THE  ALPS.    Wii
6 1  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6rf.  m

HOURS  OF  EXERCISE  IN  THE  Au

With  7  Illustrations.    Cr.  8vo.,  6s.  6rf.  n


Sport  and  Pastime.

THE  BADMINTON  LIBRARY.

Edited  by  HIS  GRACE  THE  (EIGHTH)  DUKE  OF  BEAUFORT,  K.G.,
and  A.  E.  T.  WATSON.


ARCHER  V.  By  C.  J.  LONGMAN  and
Col.  H.WALROND.  With  Contributions  by
Miss  LEGH,  Viscount  DILLON,  etc.  With
2  Maps,  23  Plates  and  172  Illustrations  in
the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  65.  net;  half-
bound,  with  gilt  top,  95.  net.


A  THLE  TICS.  By  MONTAGUE
SHEARMAN.  With  Chapters  on  Athletics
at  School  by  W.  BEACHER  THOMAS  ;  Ath-
letic Sports  in  America  by  C.  H.  SHERRILL  ;
a  Contribution  on  Paper-chasing  by  W.  RYE,
and  an  Introduction  by  Sir  RICHARD  WEB-
STER (Lord  ALVERSTONE).  With  12  Plates
and  37  Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Cr.  8vo.,
cloth,  65.  net ;  half-bound,with  gilt  top,gs.net.


BIG     GAME    SHOOTING.
CLIVE  PHILLIPPS-WOLLEY.

Vol.    I.       AFRICA     AND     AMER1
With  Contributions  by  Sir  SAMUEL
BAKER,  W.  C.  OSWELL,  F.  C.  SEI
etc.     With  20  Plates  and  57  Illustratii
in  the  Text.     Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  65.  n'
half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  95.  net.

Vol.    II.      EUROPE,   ASIA,   AND  TJ;
ARCTIC  REGIONS.      With   Contri
tions     by     Lieut.-Colonel      R.
PERCY,    Major     ALGERNON     C.
PERCY,  etc.    With  17  Plates  and  56  II
trations  in  the  Text.     Crown  8vo.,  cl«
65.  net ;  half-bound,  with  gilt  top,


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Sport  and   Pastime — continued.

THE    BADMINTON    LIBRARY— continued.

Edited  by  HIS  GRACE  THE  (EIGHTH)  DUKE  OF  BEAUFORT,  K.G.,
and  A.  E.  T.  WATSON.


BILLIARDS.  By  Major  W.  BROAD-
FOOT,  R.E.  With  Contributions  by  A.  H.
BOYD,  SYDENHAM  DIXON,  W.  J.  FORD,  etc.
With  ii  Plates,  19  Illustrations  in  the  Text,
and  numerous  Diagrams.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,
65.  net ;  half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.


COURSING    AND    FALCONRY.

By  HARDING  Cox,  CHARLES  RICHARDSON,
and  the  Hon.  GERALD  LASCELLES.  With
20  Plates  and  55  Illustrations  in  the  Text.
Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net ;  half-bound,  with
gilt  top,  gs.  net.

CRICKET.  By  A.  G.  STEEL  and
the  Hon.  R.  H.  LYTTELTON.  With  Con-
tributions by  ANDREW  LANG,  W.  G.  GRACE,
F.  GALE,  etc.  With  13  Plates  and  52  Illus-
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.
net ;  half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.


CYCLING.  By  the  EARL  OF  ALBE-
MARLE  and  G.  LACY  HILLIER.  With  19

,  Plates  and  44  Illustrations  in  the  Text.
Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net ;  half-bound,  with
gilt  top,  gs.  net.


DANCING.  By  Mrs.  LILLY  GROVE.
With  Contributions  by  Miss  MIDDLETON,
The  Hon.  Mrs.  ARMYTAGE,  etc.  With
Musical  Examples,  and  38  Full-page  Plates
and  93  Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown
8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net ;  half-bound,  with  gilt
top,  gs.  net.


DRIVING.  ByHisGracethe(Eighth)
DUKE  of  BEAUFORT,  K.G.  With  Contribu-
tions by  A.  E.  T.  WATSON  the  EARL  OF
ONSLOW,  etc.  With  12  Plates  and  54  Illus-
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.

,   net ;  half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.

FENCING,      BOXING,      AND

WRESTLING.  By  WALTER  H.  POLLOCK,
F.  C.  GROVE,  C.  PREVOST,  E.  B.  MITCHELL,
and  WALTER  ARMSTRONG.  With  18  Plates
and  24  Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown
8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net;  half-bound,  with  gilt
top,  gs.  net.


FISHING.     By  H.  CHOLMONDELEY-
PENNELL.

Vol.  I.  SALMON  AND  TROUT.  With
Contributions  by  H.  R.  FRANCIS,  Major
JOHN  P.  TRAHERNE,  etc.  With  9  Plates
and  numerous  Illustrations  of  Tackle,  etc.
Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net ;  half-bound,
with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.

Vol.  II.  PIKE  AND  OTHER  COARSE
FISH.  With  Contributions  by  the
MARQUIS  OF  EXETER,  WILLIAM  SENIOR,
G.  CHRISTOPHER  DAVIS,  etc.  With
7  Plates  and  numerous  Illustrations  01
Tackle,  etc.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net ;
half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.

FOOTBALL.  HISTORY,  by  MON-
TAGUE SHEARMAN  ;  THE  ASSOCIATION
GAME,  by  W.  J.  OAKLEY  and  G.  O.  SMITH  ;
THE  RUGBY  UNION  GAME,  by  FRANK
MITCHELL.  With  other  Contributions  by
R.  E.  MACNAGHTEN,  M.  C.  KEMP,  J.  E.
VINCENT,  WALTER  CAMP  and  A.  SUTHER-
LAND. With  19  Plates  and  35  Illustrations
in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net  ;
half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.

GOLF.  By  HORACE  G.  HUTCHINSON.
With  Contributions  by  the  Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.
BALFOUR,M. P.,  Sir  WALTER  SIMPSON,  Bart.,
ANDREW  LANG,  etc.  With  34  Plates  and  56
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,
6s.  net ;  half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.

HUNTING.  By  His  Grace  the
(Eighth)  DUKE  OF  BEAUFORT,  K.G.,  and
MOWBRAY  MORRIS.  With  Contributions  by
the  EARL  OF  SUFFOLK  AND  BERKSHIRE,
Rev.  E.  W.  L.  DAVIES,  G.  H.  LONGMAN,
etc.  With  5  Plates  and  54  Illustrations  in
the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net ;  half-
bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.

MOTORS  AND  MOTOR-DRIV-
ING. By  ALFRED  C.  HARMSWORTH,  the
MARQUIS  DE  CHASSELOUP-LAUBAT,  the
Hon.  JOHN  SCOTT-MONTAGU,  R.  J.  ME-
CREDY,  the  Hon.  C.  S.  ROLLS,  Sir  DAVID
SALOMONS,  Bart.,  etc.  With  13  Plates  and
136  Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo..
cloth,  gs.  net ;  half-bound,  I2s.  net.
A  Cloth  Box  for  use  when  Motoring,  2s.  net.


MESSRS.   LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Sport  and  Pastime — continued.

THE   BADMINTON    LIBRARY— continued.

Edited  by  HIS  GRACE  THE  (EIGHTH)  DUKE  OF  BEAUFORT,  K.G.,
and  A.  E.  T.  WATSON.

MOUNTAINEERING.      By  C.  T.  ,  SEA  Ff SUING.     By  JOHN  BICKEI


DENT.  With  Contributions  by  the  Right
Hon.  J.  BRYCE,  M.P.,  Sir  MARTIN  CONWAY,
D.  W.  FRESHFIELD,  C.  E.  MATTHEWS,  etc.
With  13  Plates  and  91  Illustrations  in  the
Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net ;  half-
bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.

POETRY  OF  SPORT  (THE}.—
Selected  by  HEDLEY  PEEK.  With  a
Chapter  on  Classical  Allusions  to  Sport  by
ANDREW  LANG,  and  a  Special  Preface  to
the  BADMINTON  LIBRARY  by  A.  E.  T.
WATSON.  With  32  Plates  and  74  Illustra-
tions in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  65.
net ;  half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  95.  net.

RACING  AND  STEEPLE-CHAS-
ING. By  the  EARL  OF  SUFFOLK  AND
BERKSHIRE,  W.  G.  CRAVEN,  the  Hon.  F.
LAWLEY,  ARTHUR  COVENTRY,  and  A.  E.  T.
WATSON.  With  Frontispiece  and  56  Illus-
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  65.
net ;  half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.

RIDING  AND  POLO.  By  Captain
ROBERT  WEIR,  J.  MORAY  BROWN,  T.  F.
DALE,  THE  LATE  DUKE  OF  BEAUFORT,  THE
EARL  OF  SUFFOLK  AND  BERKSHIRE,  etc.
With  18  Plates  and  41  Illusts.  in  the  Text.
Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  65.  net;  half-bound,
with  gilt  top,  95.  net.

ROWING.  By  R.  P.  P.  ROWE  and
C.  M.  PITMAN.  With  Chapters  on  Steering
by  C.  P.  SEROCOLD  and  F.  C.  BEGG  ;  Met-
ropolitan Rowing  by  S.  LE  BLANC  SMITH  ;
and  on  PUNTING  by  P.  W.  SQUIRE.  With
75  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  65.  net ;
half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  95.  net.

SHOOTING.

Vol.  I.  FIELD  AND  CpVERT.  By  LORD
WALSINGHAM  and  Sir  RALPH  PAYNE-
GALLWEY,  Bart.  With  Contributions  by
the  Hon.  GERALD  LASCELLES  and  A.  J.
STUART-WORTLEY.  With  ii  Plates  and
95  Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown  Svo.,
cloth,  6s.  net;  half-bound,  with  gilt  top,
95.  net.

Vol.  II.  MOOR  AND  MARSH.  By
LORD  WALSINGHAM  and  Sir  RALPH  PAYNE-
GALLWEY,  Bart.  With  Contributions  by
LORD  LOVAT  and  Lord  CHARLES  LENNOX
KERR.  With  8  Plates  and  57  Illustrations
in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net ;
half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  95.  net.


DYKE,  Sir  H.  W.  GORE-BOOTH,  ALFRI
C.  HARMSWORTH,  and  W.  SENIOR.  Writh  :
Full-page  Plates  and  175  Illusts.  in  the  Tea
Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net ;  half-bound,  wi
gilt  top,  gs.  net.


SKATING,  CURLING,  TOBOL
GANING.  By  J.  M.  HEATHCOTE,  C.  <
TEBBUTT,  T.  MAXWELL  WITHAM,  Re
JOHN  KERR,  ORMOND  HAKE,  HENRY  j
BUCK,  etc.  With  12  Plates  and  272  Illu
trations  in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6
net ;  half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.


SWIMMING.  By  ARCHIBALD  Sn
CLAIR  and  WILLIAM  HENRY,  Hon.  Sees,  of  tl
Life-Saving  Society.  With  13  Plates  and  i
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  clot
6s.  net  ;  half-bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.


TENNIS,  LA  WN  TENNL
RACKETS  AND  FIVES.  By  J.  M.  ar
C.  G.  HEATHCOTE,  E.  O.  PLEYDELL-BO'
VERIE,  and  A.  C.  AINGER.  With  Contributioi
by  the  Hon.  A.  LYTTELTON,  W.  C.  MA
SHALL,  Miss  L.  DOD,  etc.  With  14  Plates  at
65  Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown  8v<
cloth,  6s.  net ;  half-bound,  with  gilt  to
gs.  net.

YACHTING.

Vol.  I.  CRUISING,  CONSTRUCT10
OF  YACHTS,  YACHT  RACIN
RULES,  FITTING-OUT,  etc.  By  S
EDWARD  SULLIVAN,  Bart.,  THE  EARL  <
PEMBROKE,  LORD  BRASSEY,  K.C.B.,  (j
E.  SETH-SMITH,  C.B.,  G.  L.  WATSON,  :
T.  PRITCHETT,  E.  F.  KNIGHT,  etc.  Wi
21  Plates  and  g3  Illustrations  in  tj
Text.  Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  6s.  net ;  ha
bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.

Vol.  II.  YACHT  CLUBS,  YACH'
ING  IN  AMERICA  AND  TK
COLONIES,  YACHT  RACING,  eij
By  R.  T.  PRITCHETT,  THE  MARQUIS

DUFFERIN  AND  AvA,  K.P.,  THE    EARL

ONSLOW,  JAMES  MCFERRAN,  etc.     W
35   Plates   and    160   Illustrations   in
Text.     Crown   8vo.,   cloth,  gs.  net;  ha
bound,  with  gilt  top,  gs.  net.


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Sport  and  Pastime— continued.

FUR,    FEATHER,   AND   FIN   SERIES.

Edited  by  A.  E.  T.  WATSON.

Crown  8vo.,  price  55.  each  Volume,  cloth.

*#*  The  Volumes  arc  also  issued  half -bound  in  Leather,  with  gilt  top.     Price  75.  6d.  net  each.

THE  PARTRIDGE.  Natural  His-
tory, by  the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ;
Shooting,  by  A.  J.  STUART-WORTLEY  ;
Cookery,  by  GEORGE  SAINTSBURY.  With
n  Illustrations  and  various  Diagrams.
Crown  8vo.,  55.


THE  GROUSE.  Natural  History,  by
the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON;  Shooting,
by  A.  J.  STUART-WOKTLEY  ;  Cookery,  by
GEORGE  SAINTSBURY.  With  13  Illustrations
and  various  Diagrams.  Crown  8vo.,  55.


THEPHEASANT.  Natural  History,
by  the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ;  Shooting,
by  A.  J.  STUART-WORTLEY  ;  Cookery,  by
ALEXANDER  INNES  SHAND.  With  10  Illus-
trations and  various  Diagrams.  Crown
8vo.,  55.


THE  HARE.  Natural  History,  by
the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ;  Shooting,
by  the  Hon.  GERALD  LASCELLES  ;  Coursing,
by  CHARLES  RICHARDSON  ;  Hunting,  by  J.
S.  GIBBONS  and  G.  H.  LONGMAN  ;  Cookery,
by  Col.  KENNEY  HERBERT.  With  9
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  55.


RED  DEER. — Natural  History,  by
the  Rev.  H.  A.  MACPHERSON  ;  Deer  Stalk-
ing, by  CAMERON  OF  LOCHIEL  ;  Stag
Hunting,  by  Viscount  EBRINGTON  ;
Cookery,  by  ALEXANDER  INNES  SHAND.
With  10  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

THE  SALMON.  By  the  Hon.  A.  E.
GATHORNE-HARDY.  With  Chapters  on  the
Law  of  Salmon  Fishing  by  CLAUD  DOUGLAS
PENNANT;  Cookery,  by  ALEXANDER  INNES
SHAND.  With  8  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  55.

THE  TROUT.  By  the  MARQUESS
OF  GRANBY.  With  Chapters  on  the  Breed-
ing of  Trout  by  Col.  H.  CUSTANCE  ;  and
Cookery,  by  ALEXANDER  INNES  SHAND.
With  12  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

THE  RABBIT.  By  JAMES  EDMUND
HARTING.  Cookery,  by  ALEXANDER  INNES
SHAND.  With  10  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  55.

PIKE  AND  PERCH.  By  WILLIAM
SENIOR  ('  Redspinner,'  Editor  of  the
1  Field ').  With  Chapters  by  JOHN  BICKER-
DYKE  and  W.  H.  POPE;  Cookery,  by
ALEXANDER  INNES  SHAND.  With  12  Il-
lustrations. Crown  8vo.,  55.


Riverstone    and   Alcock. — SURREY

CRICKET:  its  History  and  Associations.
Edited  by  the  Right  Hon.  LORD  ALVEK-
STONE,  L.C.J.,  President,  and  C.W.  ALCOCK,
Secretary,  of  the  Surrey  County  Cricket
Club.  With  48  Illustrations.  '.8vo.,  165.  net.


Bickerdyke.— DAYS  OF  MY  LIFE  ON
WATER,  FRESH  AND  SALT;  and  other
Papers.  By  JOHN  BICKERDYKE.  With
Photo-etching  Frontispiece  and  8  Full-page

,    Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

31ackburne.  —  MR.    BLACKBURNES

GAMES  AT  CHESS.  Selected,  Annotated
and  Arranged  by  Himself.  Edited,  with  a
Biographical  Sketch  and  a  brief  History  of
Blindfold  Chess,  by  P.  ANDERSON  GRAHAM.
With  Portrait  of  Mr.  Blackburne.  8vo.,
7*.  6d.  net.


Dead  Shot  (The) :  or,  Sportsman's
Complete  Guide.  Being  a  Treatise  on  the  Use
of  the  Gun,  with  Rudimentary  and  Finishing
Lessons  in  the  Art  of  Shooting  Game  of  all
kinds.  Also  Game-driving,  Wildfowl  and
Pigeon-shooting,  Dog-breaking,  etc.  By
MARKSMAN.  With  numerous  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.,  105.  6d.

Ellis. — CHESS  SPARKS  ;  or,  Short  and
Bright  Games  of  Chess.  Collected  and
Arranged  by  J.  H.  ELLIS,  M.  A.  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Folkard. — THE  WILD-FOWLER  :  A
Treatise  on  Fowling,  Ancient  and  Modern,
descriptive  also  of  Decoys  and  Flight-ponds,
Wild-fowl  Shooting,  Gunning-punts,  Shoot-
ing-yachts, etc.  Also  Fowling  in  the  Fens
and  in  Foreign  Countries,  Rock-fowling,
etc.,  etc.,  by  H.  C.  FOLKARD.  With  13  En-
gravings on  Steel,  and  several  Woodcuts.
8vo.,  125.  6d.


16         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Sport  and  Pastime — continued.

Ford. — THE  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE  \  Madden. — THE  DIARY  OF  MASTER

OF  ARCHERY.     By  HORACE  FORD.      New!       WILLIAM  SILENCE:  a  Study  of  Shakespeare

Edition,  thoroughly  Revised  and  Re-written  :       and  of  Elizabethan  Sport.     By  the  Right

•  by  W.  BUTT,  M.A.     With  a  Preface  by  C.  !       Hon.  D.  H<  MADDEN,  Vice-Chancellor  of  the

J.  LONGMAN,  M.A.     8vo.,  145.  University  of  Dublin.     8vo.,  gilt  top,  165.

Francis.—  A  BOOK  ON  ANGLING  :  or,    Maskelyne.— SHARPS  AND  FLATS  :  a

Treatise   on   the   Art  of  Fishing   in   every  Complete    Revelation    of    the    Secrets    o

Branch  ;  including  full  Illustrated  List  of  Sal-  i  Cheating  at  Games  of  Chance  and  Skill.   I

mon  Flies.  By  FRANCIS  FRANCIS.  With  For-  i  JOHN  NEVIL  MASKELYNE,  of  the  Egyptian

trait  and  Coloured  Plates.    Crown  8vo.,  155.  Hall.  With  62  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  65,


Fremantle.  —  THE  BOOK  OF  THE
RIFLE.  By  the  Hon.  T.  F.  FREMANTLE,
V.D.,  Major,  ist  Bucks  V.R.C.  With  54
Plates  and  107  Diagrams  in  the  Text.  8vo.,
i2s.  6d.  net.

Gathorne  -  Hardy.  —  AUTUMNS    IN

ARGYLESHIRE  WITH  ROD  AND  GUN.  By
the  Hon.  A.  E.  GATHORNE-HARDY.  With
8  Photogravure  Illustrations  by  ARCHIBALD
THORBURN.  8vo.,  65.  net.

Graham. — COUNTRY  PASTIMES  FOR
BOYS.  By  P.  ANDERSON  GRAHAM.  With
252  Illustrations  from  Drawings  and
Photographs.  Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  35.  net.

Hutchinson. —  THE  BOOK  OF  GOLF
AND  GOLFERS.  By  HORACE  G.  HUTCHIN-
SON. With  Contributions  by  Miss  AMY
PASCOE,  H.  H.  HILTON,  J.  H.  TAYLOR,  H
J.  WHIGHAM,  and  Messrs.  SUTTON  &  SONS.
With  71  Portraits  from  Photographs.  Large
crown  8vo.,  gilt  top,  75.  6d.  net.

Lang. — ANGLING  SKETCHES.  By
ANDREW  LANG.  With  20  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Lillie. — CROQUET  UP  TO  DA  TE.  Con-
taining the  Ideas  and  Teachings  of  the
Leading  Players  and  Champions.  By  AR-
THUR LILLIE.  With  Contributions  by
Lieut. -Col.  the  Hon.  H.  NEEDHAM,  C.  D.
LOCOCK,  etc.  With  19  Illustrations  (15
Portraits),  and  numerous  Diagrams.  8vo.,
IDS.  6d.  net.

Locock. — SIDE  AND  SCREW:  being
Notes  on  the  Theory  and  Practice  of  the
Game  of  Billiards.  By  C.  D,  LOCOCK.
With  Diagrams.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

Longman. — CHESS  OPENINGS.  By
FREDERICK  W.  LONGMAN.  Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6d.

Mackenzie. — NOTES  FOR  HUNTING
MEN.  By  Captain  CORTLANDT  GORDON
MACKENZIE.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net.


Millais  (JOHN  GUILLE).
THE    WILD-FOWLER  IN  SCOTLAND.

With  a  Frontispiece  in  Photogravure  by
Sir  J.  E.  MILLAIS,  Bart.,  P.R.A.,  8  Photo-
gravure Plates,  2  Coloured  Plates  and  50
Illustrations  from  the  Author's  Drawings
and  from  Photographs.  Royal  4to.,  gilt
top,  305.  net.

THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  THE
BRITISH  SURFACE -FEEDING  DUCKS.
With  6  Photogravures  and  66  Plates  (41
in  Colours)  from  Drawings  by  the  Author,
ARCHIBALD  THORBURN,  and  from  Photo-
graphs. Royal  4to.,  cloth,  gilt  top,  £6  6s.
net.

Modern  Bridge.— By 'Slam'.  With

a  Reprint  of  the  Laws  of  Bridge,  as  adopted
by  the  Portland  and  Turf  Clubs.  i8mo.,
gilt  edges,  35.  6d.  net.

Park. — THE  GAME  OF  GOLF.  By
WILLIAM  PARK,  Jun.,  Champion  Golfer,
1887-89.  With  17  Plates  and  26  Illustra-
tions in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.

Payne-Gallwey  (Sir  RALPH,  Bart).
THE     CROSS-BOW:       its     History,
Construction    and    Management.      With
numerous  Illustrations.     Medium  4to.

LETTERS  TO  YOUNG  SHOOTERS  (First
Series).  On  the  Choice  and  use  of  a  Gun.
With  41  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  75. 61

LETTERS  TO  Yo  UNG  SHOO  TERS(  Second
Series).  On  the  Production,  Preservation,
and  Killing  of  Game.  With  Directions
in  Shooting  Wood-Pigeons  and  Breaking-
in  Retrievers.  With  Portrait  and  103
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  125.  6d.

LETTERS     TO     YOUNG     SHOOTEI
(Third    Series.)        Comprising    a    Short
Natural    History   of  the   Wildfowl
are    Rare    or    Common    to    the   British
Islands,    with     complete     directions    i
Shooting   Wildfowl   on   the    Coast    2


Inland.     With  200  Illustrations.
8vo.,  185.


Crown


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        17


Sport  and  Pastime — continued.


Pole. — THE  THEORY  OF  THE  MODERN
SCIENTIFIC  GAME  OF  WHIST.  By  WILLIAM
POLE,  F.R.S.  Fcp.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  25.  net.

Proctor. — How    TO   PLAY    WHIST:

WITH     THE     LAWS     AND     ETIQUETTE    OF

WHIST.     By  RICHARD  A.  PROCTOR.    Crown
8vo.,  gilt  edges,  35.  net.


Ronalds. — THE  FLY- FISHER'S  ENTO-
MOLOGY. By  ALFRED  RONALDS.  With  20
coloured  Plates.  8vo.,  145.

Selous. — SPORT  AND  TRAVEL,  EAST
AND  WEST.  By  FREDERICK  COURTENEY
SELOUS.  With  18  Plates  and  35  Illustra-
tions in  the  Text.  Medium  8vo.,  125. 6d.  net.


Mental,  Moral,  and  Political  Philosophy.

LOGIC,  RHETORIC,  PSYCHOLOGY,  6>C.


Abbott. — THE  ELEMENTS  OF  LOGIC.
By  T.  K.  ABBOTT,  B.D.     i2mo.,  35.

Aristotle.

THE  ETHICS:  Greek  Text,  Illustrated
with  Essay  and  Notes.  By  Sir  ALEXAN-
DER GRANT,  Bart.  2  vols.  8vo.,  325.

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  ARISTOTLE'S
ETHICS.  Books  I. -IV.  (BookX.  c.vi.-ix.
in  an  Appendix).  With  a  continuous
Analysis  and  Notes.  By  the  Rev.  E.
MOORE,  D.D.  Crown  8vo.,  105.  6d.

Bacon  (FRANCIS).

COMPLETE  WORKS.  Edited  by  R.  L.
ELLIS,  JAMES  SPEDDING  and  D.  D.
HEATH.  7  vols.  8vo.,  £3  135.  6d.

LETTERS  AND  LIFE,  including  all  his
occasional  Works.  Edited  by  JAMES
SPEDDING.  7  vols.  8vo.,  ^4  45.

THE  ESSAYS:  with  Annotations.  By
RICHARD  WHATELY,  D.D.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

THE  ESSAYS:  with  Notes.  By  F.
STORR  and  C.  H.  GIBSON.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  ESSAYS:  with  Introduction,
Notes,  and  Index.  By  E.  A.  ABBOTT,  D.D.
2  Vols.  Fcp.8vo.,6s.  The  Text  and  Index
only,  without  Introduction  and  Notes,  in
One  Volume.  Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6d.

Bain  (ALEXANDER).

MENTAL  AND  MORAL  SCIENCE  :  a
Compendium  of  Psychology  and  Ethics.
Crown  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

Or  separately,
Part  I.  PSYCHOLOGY  AND  HISTORY  OF

PHILOSOPHY.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d.
Par  1 1 1 .  THEOR  YOFE  THICS  ANDE  THICA  L
SYSTEMS.    Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.


Bain  (ALEXANDER) — continued.

LOGIC.  Part  I.  DEDUCTION.  Cr.  8vo.,
45.  Part  II.  INDUCTION.  Cr.  8vo.,  65. 6d.

THE  SENSES  AND  THE  INTELLECT.

8vo.,  155.

THE  EMOTIONS  AND  THE  WILL,
8vo.,  155.

PRACTICAL  ESSAYS.    Cr.  8vo.,  25.
Brooks. — THE  ELEMENTS  OF  MIND  :

being  an  Examination  into  the  Nature  of
the  First  Division  of  the  Elementary  Sub-
stances of  Life.  By  H.  JAMYN  BROOKS.
8vo.,  i  os.  6d.  net.

Crozier  (]OHN  BEATTIE).

CIVILISATION  AND  PROGRESS  :  being
the  Outlines  of  a  New  System  of  Political,
Religious  and  Social  Philosophy.  8vo.,i4$.

HISTORY  OF  INTELLECTUAL  DEVEL-
OPM^ATTVontheLinesofModernEvolution.

Vol.  I.     8vo.,  145.

Vol.  II.     (In  preparation.)

Vol.  III.     8vo.,  IDS.  6d.

Davidson. — THE  LOGIC  OF  DEFINI-
TION, Explained  and  Applied.  By  WILLIAM
L.  DAVIDSON,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

Green  (THOMAS  HILL). — THE  WORKS
OF.  Edited  by  R.  L.  NETTLESHIP.

Vols.  I.  and  II.  Philosophical  Works.  8vo.
165.  each.

Vol.  III.  Miscellanies.  With  Index  to  the
three  Volumes,  and  Memoir.  8vo.,  215.

LECTURES  ON  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF
POLITICAL  OBLIGATION.  With  Preface
by  BERNARD  BOSANQUET.  8vo.,  5*.


i8        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Mental,  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy — continued.

LOGIC,   RHETORIC,    PSYCHOLOGY,    &C.


Gurnhill. — THE  MORALS  OF  SUICIDE.
By  the  Rev.  J.  GURNHILL,  B.A.  Vol.  I.,
Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.  Vol.  II.,  Crown  8vo.,
55.  net.

Hodgson  (SHADWORTH  H.),
TIME  AND  SPACE  :  A  Metaphysical

Essay.     8vo.,  165.
THE    THEORY    OF    PRACTICE:     an

Ethical  Inquiry.     2  vols.     8vo.,  245.
THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  REFLECTION.

2  VOls.       8VO.,  215.

THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  EXPERIENCE.
Book  I.  General  Analysis  of  Experience  ;
Book  II.  Positive  Science;  Book  III.
Analysis  of  Conscious  Action  ;  Book  IV.
The  Real  Universe.  4  vols.  8vo.,  365.  net.

Hume. — THE  PHILOSOPHICA L  WOR KS
OP  DAVID  HUME.  Edited  by  T.  H.  GREEN
and  T.  H.  GROSE.  4  vols.  8vo.,  285.  Or
separately,  ESSAYS.  2  vols.  145.  TREATISE
OF  HUMAN  NATURE.  2  vols.  145.

Tames  (WILLIAM,  M.D.,  LL.D.).

THE  WILL  TO  BELIEVED  and  Other
Essays  in  Popular  Philosophy.  Crown
8vo.,  75.  6d.

THE  VARIETIES  OF  RELIGIOUS  EX-
PERIENCE :  a  Study  in  Human  Nature.
Being  the  Gifford  Lectures  on  Natural
Religion  delivered  at  Edinburgh  in  1901-
1902.  8vo.,  i2s.  net.

Justinian. — THE  INSTITUTES  OF
JUSTINIAN:  Latin  Text,  chiefly  that  ol
Huschke,  with  English  Introduction,  Trans-
lation, Notes,  and  Summary.  By  THOMAS
C.  SANDARS,  M.A.  8vo.,  185.

Kant  (IMMANUEL).
CRITIQUE   OF   PRACTICAL   REASON,
AND  OTHER  WORKS  ON  THE  THEORY  OP
ETHICS.     Translated  by  T.  K.  ABBOTT,
B.D.     With  Memoir.     8vo.,  125.  6d.

FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE
METAPHYSIC  OF  ETHICS.  Translated  b>
T.  K.  ABBOTT,  B.D.  Crown  8vo,  35.

INTRODUCTION  TO  LOGIC,  AND  HIS
ESSAY  ON  THE  MISTAKEN  SUBTILTY  OF
THE  FOUR  FIGURES.  Translated  by  T.
K.  ABBOTT.  8vo.,  6s

Kelly. — GOVERNMENT  OR  HUMAN
E VOLUTION.  By  EDMOND  KELLY,  M.A.,
F.G.S.  Vol.  I.  Justice.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.
net.  Vol.  II.  Collectivism  and  Individualism.
Crown  8vo.,  105.  6d.  net.


K  i  1 1  i  C  k. — HANDBOOK  TO  MILL'S
SYSTEM  OF  LOGIC.  By  Rev.  A.  H.
KILLICK,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6rf.

Ladd  (GEORGE  TRUMBULL).

PHIL  OSOPHY  OF  COND  UCT  :  a  T  re  at  i  se
of  the  Facts,  Principles  and  Ideals  of
Ethics.  8vo.,  2is.

ELEMENTS  OF  PHYSIOLOGICAL  PSY-
CHOLOGY. 8VO.,  215.

OUTLINES  OF  DESCRIPTIVE  PSYCHO-
LOGY: a  Text-Book  of  Mental  Science  for
Colleges  and  Normal  Schools.  8vo.,  125.

OUTLINES  OF  PHYSIOLOGICAL  PSY-
CHOLOGY. 8VO.,  125.

PRIMER  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.  Cr.  8vo.,
55.  6d.

Lecky. — THE  MAP  OF  LIFE:  Con-
duct and  Character.  By  WILLIAM  EDWARD
HARTPOLE  LECKY.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

Lutoslawski. — THE  ORIGIN  AND
GROWTH  OF  PLATO'S  LOGIC.  With  an
Account  of  Plato's  Style  and  of  the  Chrono-
logy of  his  Writings.  By  WINCENTY
LUTOSLAWSKI.  8vo.,  215.


I  Max  Mailer  (F.).

THE  SCIENCE  OF  THOUGHT.   8vo.,  2  is.

THE  Six  SYSTEMS  OF  INDIAN  PHIL-
OSOPHY.   8vo.,  185.

THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  VEDANTA
PHILOSOPHY.     Crown  8vo.,  55.

Mill  (JOHN  STUART).
A  SYSTEM  OF  LOGIC.   Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.
ON  LIBERTY.     Crown  8vo.,  15.  \d.  ,

CONSIDERATIONS   ON  REPRESENTA-
TIVE GOVERNMENT.    Crown  8vo.,  25.

UTILITARIANISM.     8vo.,  25.  6d.

EXAMINATION    OF    SIR      WILLIAM
HAMILTON'S  PHILOSOPHY.    8vo.,  165.


NATURE,  THE  UTILITY
AND  THEISM.     Three  Essays.    8vo.,


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Mental,  Mor  1,  and  Political  Philosophy — continued.

LOGIC,  RHETORIC,  PSYCHOLOGY,  f~C.


Mo  nek.  —  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO
LOGIC.  I'y  WILLIAM  HEXRV  S.  MOXCK,
M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

Myers. — HUMAN  PERSONALITY  AND
ITS  SURVIVAL  OF  BODILY  DEATH.  By
FREDERIC  W.  H.  MYERS.  2  vols.  8vo.,
425.  net.

Pierce. — STUDIES  IN  AUDITORY  AND
VISUAL  SPACE  PERCEPTION:  Essays  on
Experimental  Psychology.  By  A.  H.
PIERCE.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d.  net.

Richmond. — THE  MIND  OF  A  CHILD.

By  ENNIS  RICHMOND.    Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.  net.

Romanes. — MIND  AND  MOTION  AND
MONISM.  By  GEORGE  JOHN  ROMANES,
Cr.  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Sully  QAMES).

AN  ESSAY  ON  LAUGHTER  :  its
Forms,  its  Cause,  its  Development  and
its  Value.  8vo.,  125.  6rf.  net.

THE  HUMAN  MIND  :  a  Text-book  of
Psychology.  2  vols.  8vo.,  2  is.

OUTLINES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY.  Crown
8vo.,  gs.

THE  TEACHER  s  HANDBOOK  OF  PSY-
CHOLOGY. Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d.

STUDIES  OF  CHILDHOOD.  8vo. ,  i  os.6d.

CHILDREN'S  WAYS:  being  Selections
from  the  Author's  '  Studies  of  Childhood  '.
With  25  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Sutherland.  —  THE  ORIGIN  AND
GROWTH  OF  THE  MORAL  INSTINCT.  By
ALEXANDER  SUTHERLAND,  M.A.  2  vols.
8vo.,  28s.


Thomas.  —  INTUITIVE     SUGGES  TION.

By  J.  W.  THOMAS,  Author  of  Spiritual  Law
in  the  Natural  World,'  etc.  Crown  8vo.,
35.  6d.  net.

Webb. —  THE  VEIL  OF  Is is  :  a  Series
of  Essays  on  Idealism.  By  THOMAS  E.
WEBB,  LL.D.,  Q.C.  8vo.,  los.  6d.

Weber. — HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY.

By  ALFRED  WEBER,  Professor  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Strasburg.  Translated  by  FRANK
THILLY,  Ph.D.  8vo.,  i6s.

Whately  (Archbishop).

BACON'S  ESSAYS.  With  Annotations.
8vo.,  los.  6d.

ELEMENTS  OF  LOGIC.  Cr.  8vo.,  45.  6d.

ELEMENTS  OF  RHETORIC.  Cr.  8vo.,
45.  6d.

Zeller  (Dr.  EDWARD).

THE  STOICS,  EPICUREANS,  AND
SCEPTICS.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  O.  J.
REICHEL,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  15$.

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  of
GREEK  PHILOSOPHY.  Translated  by
SARAH  F.  ALLEYNE  and  EVELYN  ABBOTT,
M.A.,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo.,  los.  6<7.

PLATO  AND  THE  OLDER  ACADEMY.
Translated  by  SARAH  F.  ALLEYNE  and
ALFRED  GOODWIN,  B.A.  Crown  8vo.,  i8s.

SOCRATES  AND  THE  SOCRATIC
SCHOOLS.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  O.
J.  REICHEL,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  los.  6d.


Swinburne.  —  PICTURE    LOGIC  :    an

Attempt     to     Popularise     the    Science    of
Reasoning.    By  ALFRED  JAMES  SWINBURNE,  |
M.A.    With  23  Woodcuts.     Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.  I


ARISTOTLE  AND  THE  EARLIER  PERI-
PATETICS. Translated  by  B.  F.  C.  Cos-
TELLOE,  M.A.,  and  J.  H.  MUIRHKAD,
M.A.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  245.


STONYHURST  PHILOSOPHICAL   SERIES.


A  MANUAL  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY.
By  C.  S.  DEVAS,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.,  75.  6<t.

FIRST  PRINCIPLES    OF    KNOWLEDGE.
By  JOHN  RICKABY,  S.J.     Crown  8vo.,  55.

GENERAL   METAPHYSICS.      By   JOHN
RICKABY,  S.J.     Crown  8vo.,  5$.

LOGIC.     By  RICHARD  F.  CLARKE,  S.J.
Crown  8vo.,  55.


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  (ETHICS  AND
NATURALLAW).  By  JOSEPH  RICKABY,  S.J.
Crown  8vo.,  55.


NATURAL  THEOLOGY.      By  BERNARD
BOEDDER,  S.J.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6</.

PSYCHOLOGY.      By  MICHAEL  MAKER,
S.J.,  D.Litt.,  M.A.  (Lond.).    Cr.  8vo.,  6s.  6d.


20        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


History  and  Science  of  Language,  &e.


Davidson. —LEADING  AND  IMPORT-
ANT ENGLISH  WORDS  :  Explained  and  Ex-
emplified. By  WILLIAM  L.  DAVIDSON,
M.A.  Fcp.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

JFarrar. — LANGUAGE  AND  LANGUAGES.

By  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Canter-
bury.    Crown  8vo.,  65.

Graham.  —  ENGLISH  SYNONYMS,
Classified  and  Explained :  with  Practical
Exercises.  By  G.  F.  GRAHAM.  Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.

Max  Muller  (F.).
THE  SCIENCE  OF  LA NGUA GE.    2  vol s .

Crown  8vo.,  105.


Max  Muller  (F.) — continued.

BIOGRAPHIES  OP  WORDS,  AND  THE
HOME  OF  THE  ARYAS.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

CHIPS  FROM  A  GERMAN  WORKSHOP.
Vol.  III.  ESSAYS  ON  LANGUAGE  AND
LITERATURE.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

LAST  ESSAYS.  First  Series.  Essays
on  Language,  Folk-lore  and  other  Sub-
jects. Crown  8vo.,  55.

Roget. — THESAURUS  OF  ENGLISH
WORDS  AND  PHRASES.  Classified  and
Arranged  so  as  to  Facilitate  the  Expression
of  Ideas  and  assist  in  Literary  Composition.
By  PETER  MARK  ROGET,  M.D.,  F.R.S.
With  full  Index.  Crown  8vo.,  95.  net.


Political  Economy  and  Economics.

Macleod  (HENRY  DUNNING) — contd.

THE  THEORY  OF  CREDIT.  8vo.
In  i  Vol.,  305.  net;  or  separately,  Vol.
I.,  105.  net.  Vol.  II.,  Part  L,  IDS.  net.
Vol  II.,  Part  II.  105.  net.

INDIAN  CURRENCY.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net.


Ashley  (W.J.).

ENGLISH  ECONOMIC  HISTORY  AND
THEORY.  Crown  8vo.,  Part  L,  55.  Part
II.,  105.  6d.


SURVEYS,  HISTORIC  AND  ECONOMIC.
Crown  8vo.,  95.  net.


Bagehot. — ECONOMIC  STUDIES.    By

WALTER  BAGEHOT.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Barnett. — PRACTICABLE  SOCIALISM  :

Essays  on  Social  Reform.     By  SAMUEL  A.
and  HENRIETTA  BARNETT.    Crown  8vo.,  65.

Devas. — A  MANUAL  OF  POLITICAL
ECONOMY.  By  C.  S.  DEVAS,  M.A.  Cr.  8vo.,
75.  6d.  (Stonyhurst  Philosophical  Series.)

Lawrence. — I.U<AI  VARIATIONS  IN
WAGES.  By  F.  W.  LAWRENCE  ,  M.A.  With
Index  and  18  Maps  and  Diagrams.  ^io.,8s.td.

Leslie. — Ess  A  YS  ON  POLITICAL  ECO-
NOMY. By  T.  E.  CLIFFE  LESLIE,  Hon.
LL.D.,  Dubl.  8vo.,  105.  6d.


Macleod  (HENRY  DUNNING).
BIMETALLISM.     8vo.,  55.  net.

THE  ELEMENTS  OF  BANKING.     Cr.
8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE    THEORY   AND    PRACTICE    OF
BANKING-  Vol.  I.  8vo.,  125.  Vol.  II.  145.


Mill. — POLITICAL     ECONOMY.
JOHN  STUART  MILL.    Popular  Edition.    Cr.
8vo.,35.6d.  Library  Edition,  avols.  8vo.,3O5.

Mulhall. — INDUSTRIES  AND  WEALT.
OF  NATIONS.     By  MICHAEL  G.  MULHALL,
F.S.S.    With  32  Diagrams.    Cr.  8vo.,  85.  6d.

Symes.  —  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  :  a
Short  Text-book  of  Political  Economy.
With  Problems  for  Solution,  Hints  for
Supplementary  Reading,  and  a  Supple-
mentary Chapter  on  Socialism.  By  J.  ]
SYMFS,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  25.  6d.

Toynbee. — LECTURES  ON  THE  IN-
DUSTRIAL REVOLUTION  OF  THE  187H  CEN-
TURY IN  ENGLAND.  By  ARNOLD  TOYNBEE.
8vo.,  105.  td.

Webb  (SIDNEY  and  BEATRICE).

THE  HISTORY  OF  TRADE  UNIONISM.

With  Map  and  Bibliography.   8vo.,  75.  &

net.
INDUSTRIAL  DEMOCRACY:  a  Study

in  Trade  Unionism.    2  vols.  8vo.,  125.  net.

PROBLEMS  OF  MODERN  INDUSTRY
8vo.,  55.  net,


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.         21


Evolution,   Anthropology,  &e.

Avebury. — THE  ORIGIN  OF  CIVILISA-    Romanes   (GEORGE    JOHN).

TION,  and  the  Primitive  Condition  of  Man.          _  „  ,    ,       ~    T  ,.

By  the  Right  Hon.  LORD  AVEBURY.     With        &SA  ys.     Ed.  by  C.  LLOYD  MORGAN.

6  Plates  and  20  Illustrations.     8vo.,  185.


Clodd  (EDWARD).

THE  STORY  OF  CREATION:  a  Plain
Account  of  Evolution.  With  77  Illustra-
tions.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

A  PRIMER  OF  EVOLUTION:  being  a
Popular  Abridged  Edition  of  '  The  Story
of  Creation '.  With  Illustrations.  Fcp.
8vo.,  15.  6d.

Packard. — LAMARCK,  THE  FOUNDER
OF  EVOLUTION:  his  Life  and  Work,  with
Translations  of  his  Writings  on  Organic
Evolution.  By  ALPHEUS  S.  PACKARD,
M.D.,  LL.D.  With  10  Portrait  and  other
Illustrations.  Large  Crown  8vo.,  95.  net.


Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

AN  EXAMINATION  OF  WEISMANN-
ISM.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

DARWIN,  AND  AFTER  DARWIN:  an
Exposition  of  the  Darwinian  Theory,  and  a
Discussion  on  Post- Darwinian  Questions.
Part  I.  THE  DARWINIAN  THEORY.  With

Portrait  of  Darwin  and  125  Illustrations.

Crown  8vo.,  10$.  6d.
Part   II.    POST-DARWINIAN   QUESTIONS  :

Heredity  and  Utility.     With  Portrait  of

the  Author  and  5  Illustrations.    Cr.  8vo.,

IQS.  6d.
Part    III.      Post-Darwinian     Questions :

Isolation  and  Physiological  Selection.

Crown  8vo.,  55.


The  Science  of

Balfour.  --  THE  FOUNDATIONS  OF
BELIEF  ;  being  Notes  Introductory  to  the
Study  of  Theology.  By  the  Right  Hon.
ARTHUR  JAMES  BALFOUR.  Cr.  8vo.,  65.  net.

Baring-Gould.— THE  ORIGIN  AND
DEVELOPMENT  OF  RELIGIOUS  BELIEF.
By  the  Rev.  S.  BARING-GOULD.  2  vols.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

Campbell. — RELIGION  IN  GREEK  LI-
TERATURE. By  the  Rev.  LEWIS  CAMPBELL.
M.A.,  LL.D.  8vo.,  155.

Davidson. —  THEISM,  as  Grounded  in
Human  Nature,  Historically  and  Critically
Handled.  Being  the  Burnett  Lectures
for  1892  and  1893,  delivered  at  Aberdeen.
By  W.  L.  DAVIDSON,  M.A.,  LL.D.  8vo.,  155.  ,

fames. —  THE  VARIETIES  OF  RE-  \
LIGIOUS  EXPERIENCE  :  a  Study  in  Human  ;
Nature.  Being  the  Gifford  Lectures  on  j
Natural  Religion  delivered  at  Edinburgh  in
1901-1902.  By  WILLIAM  JAMES,  LL.D.,  ;
etc.  8vo.,  125.  net.

,ang  (ANDREW).
MAGIC  AND  RELIGION.  8vo.,  105.  6d.

CUSTOM  AND  MYTH:  Studies  of
Early  Usage  and  Belief.  With  15
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

MYTH,  RITUAL,  AND  RELIGION.  2
vols.  Crown  8vo.,  75.

MODERN  MYTHOLOGY  :  a  Reply  to
Professor  Max  Miiller.  8vo.,  95.

THE  MAKING  OF  RELIGION.  Cr.  8vo.,
55.  net,


Religion,  &c.

Leigh  ton. — TYPICAL  MODERN  CON-
CEPTIONS OF  GOD;  or,  The  Absolute  of
German  Romantic  Idealism  and  of  English
Evolutionary  Agnosticism.  By  JOSEPH
ALEXANDER  LEIGHTON,  Professor  of  Philo-
sophy in  Hobart  College,  U.S.  Crown  8vo.,
35.  6d.  net.

Max  Miiller  (The  Right  Hon.  F.).

CHIPS  FROM  A  GERMAN  WORKSHOP.
Vol.  IV.  Essays  on  Mythology  and  Folk-
lore. Crown  8vo.,  55.

THE  Six  SYSTEMS  OF  INDIAN
PHILOSOPHY.  8vo.,  185.

CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  SCIENCE  OF
MYTHOLOGY.  2  vols.  8vo.,  325.

THE  ORIGIN  AND  GROWTH  OF  RELI-
GION, as  illustrated  by  the  Religions  of
India.  The  Hibbert  Lectures,  delivered
at  the  Chapter  House,  Westminster
Abbey,  in  1878.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SCIENCE  OF
RELIGION  :  Four  Lectures  delivered  at  the
Royal  Institution.  Crown  8vo.,  5*.

NATURAL  RELIGION.  The  Gifford
Lectures,  delivered  before  the  University
of  Glasgow  in  1888.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

PHYSICAL  RELIGION.  The  Gifford
Lectures,  delivered  before  the  University
of  Glasgow  in  1890.  Crown  8vo.,  55.


22        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


The  Science  of  Religion,  &e.—  continued.


Max  Miiller  (The  Right  Hon.  F.)—

continued.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL  RELIGION.  The
Gifford  Lectures,  delivered  before  the  Uni-
versity of  Glasgow  in  1891.  Cr.  8vo.,  55.

THEOSOPHY^  OR  PSYCHOLOGICAL  RE
LIGION.  The  Gifford  Lectures,  delivered
before  the  University  of  Glasgow  in  1892.
Crown  8vo.,  55.

THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  VEDANTA
PHILOSOPHY,  delivered  at  the  Royal
Institution  in  March,  1894.  Cr.  8vo.,  55.

LAST  ESSAYS.  Second  Series —
Essays  on  the  Science  ol  Religion.
Crown  8vo.,  55.


Oakesmith.  —  THE  RELIGION  o
PLUTARCH:  a  Pagan  Creed  of  Apostoli
Times.  An  Essay.  By  JOHN  OAKESMITI:
D.Litt.,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

Wood-Martin  (W.  G.).

TRACES  OF  THE  ELDER  FAITHS  o.
IRELAND  :  a  Folk-lore  Sketch.  A  Hand
book  of  Irish  Pre-Christian  Traditions
With  192  Illustrations.  2  vols.  8vo
305.  net.

PAGAN  IRELAND  :  an  Archaeologies
Sketch.  A  Handbook  of  Irish  Pre
Christian  Antiquities.  With  512  Illus
trations.  8vo.,  155:


Classical  Literature,  Translations,  &e.


Abbott.  —  HELLENICA.  A  Collection
of  Essays  on  Greek  Poetry,  Philosophy,
History,  and  Religion.  Edited  by  EVELYN
ABBOTT,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.


-/Eschylus.  —  EUMENIDES  OF

LVS.     With   Metrical   English  Translation.
By  J.  F.  DAVIES.     8vo.,  75.

Aristophanes.  —  THE    ACHARNIANS

OF  ARISTOPHANES,  translated  into  English
Verse.    By  R.  Y.  TYRRELL.    Crown  8vo.,  15.

Becker  (W.  A.),  Translated  by  the
Rev.  F.  METCALFE,  B.D.

GALLUS  :  or,  Roman  Scenes  in  the
Time  of  Augustus.  With  Notes  and  Ex-
cursuses. With  26  Illustrations.  Crown
8vo.,  35.  6d.

CHARICLES:  or,  Illustrations  ot  the
Private  Life  of  the  Ancient  Greeks.
With  Notes  and  Excursuses.  With  26
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Campbell.  —  RELIGION  IN  GREEK  LI-
TERATURE.   By  the  Rev.  LEWIS  CAMPBELL,
•"M.A.,  LL.D.,  Emeritus  Professor  of  Greek,
University^  of  St.  Andrews.     8vo.,  155.

Cicero.  —  CICERO'S  CORRESPONDENCE.
By  R.  Y.  TYRRELL.  Vols.  I.,  II.,  III.,  8vo.,
each  125.  Vol.  IV.,  155.  Vol.  V.,  145.
Vol.  VI.,  12*.  Vol.  VII.  Index,  75.  6d.


Harvard    Studies    in     Classica

Philology.  Edited  by  a  Committee  of  th
Classical  Instructors  of  Harvard  University
Vols.  XL,  1900;  XII.,  1901  ;  XIII.,  1902
8vo.,  6s.  6d.  net  each.


Hime. — LUCIAN,  THE  SYRIAN  SA
TIRIST.  By  Lieut.-Col.  HENRY  W.  L.  HIME
(late)  Royal  Artillery.  8vo.,  55.  net.


Homer.  —  THE  ODYSSEY  OF

Done   into  English  Verse.      By  WILUAJ
MORRIS.     Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.


Horace. — THE   WORKS  OF  If  OR  AC

RENDERED   INTO    ENGLISH    PROSE.        Will

Life,  Introduction  and  Notes.    By  WILLIAJ
COUTTS,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.


Lang. — HOMER  AND  THE  EPIC.

ANDREW  LANG.     Crown  8vo.,  95.  net.


Lucian.  —  TRANSLATIONS
LUCIAN.       By    AUGUSTA    M.    CAMPBEI.
DAVIDSON,  M.A.  Edin.    Crown  8vo.,  55.  nd


ilvie. — HORAE  LATINAE  :   Studie
in    Synonyms   and   Syntax.      By   the  li


Ogil

in

ROBERT  OGILVIE,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  H.M.  Chi*

Inspector  of  Schools  for  Scotland.

by  ALEXANDER    SOUTER,    M.A.      Wi

Memoir  by  JOSEPH  OGILVIE,  M.A.,

8vo.,  1 2s.  6d.  net,


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.         23


Classical  Literature,  Translations,  &e.—  continued.

Virgil — continued.

THE  /ENEIDS  OF  VIRGIL.  Done  into
English  Verse.  By  WILLIAM  MORRIS.
Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.


.  —  A  DICTIONARY  OF  ROMAN  AND
GREEK  ANTIQUITIES.  By  A.  RICH,  B.A.
With  2000  Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.,  65.  net.

Sophocles.  —  Translated  into  English
Verse.  By  ROBERT  WHITELAW,  M.A.,
Assistant  Master  in  Rugby  School.  Cr.  8vo.,
85.  6d.

Pyrrell.  —  DUBLIN  TRANSLATIONS
INTO  GREEK  AND  LATIN  VERSE.  Edited
by  R.  Y.  TYRRELL.  8vo.,  65.

/irgil.

T//K  J\)/-:MS  OF  VIRGIL.  Translated
into  English  Prose  by  JOHN  CONINGTON.
Crown  8vo.,  65.


T/fK  ^ENEID  OF  VIRGIL.  Translated
into  English  Verse  by  JOHN  CONINGTON.
Crown  8vo.,  65.


THE  ^NEID  OF  VIRGIL,  freely  trans-
lated into  English  Blank  Verse.  By
W.  J.  THORNHILL.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.  net.


OF  VIRGIL.    Translated
into  English  Verse  by  JAMES  RHOADES.
Books  I. -VI.     Crown  8vo.,  55.
Books  VII. -XII.     Crown  8vo.,  55.

THE  ECLOGUES  AND  GEORGICS  OF
VIRGIL.  Translated  into  English  Prose
by  J.  W.  MACKAIL,  Fellow  of  Balliol
College,  Oxford.  i6mo.,  55.

Wilkins. — THE    GROWTH    OF    THE
HOMERIC  POEMS.  By  G.  WILKINS.  8vo.,6s.


Poetry  and  the  Drama.


Irnold.—  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD:    Dabney. —  THE   MUSICAL   BASIS   OF

or,    The    Great    Consummation.       By    Sir  \       VERSE  :    a   Scientific    Study  of  the    Prin-


EDWIN    ARNOLD.      With    14    Illustrations
after  HOLMAN  HUNT.     Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.


Jell  (MRS.  HUGH).

CHAMBER  COMEDIES  :  a  Collection
of  Plays  and  Monologues  for  the  Drawing
Room.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

FAIRY  TALE  PLAYS,  AND  How  TO
ACT  THEM.  With  91  Diagrams  and  52
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  net.

RUMPELSTILTZKIN  :  a  FairyjjPlay  in
Five  Scenes  (Characters,  7  Male ;  i  Fe-
male). From  '  Fairy  Tale  Plays  and
How  to  Act  Them  '.  With  Illustrations,
Diagrams  and  Music.  Cr.  8vo.,  sewed,  6d.


>ird.  —  RONALD'S  FAREWELL,  and
other  Verses.  By  GEORGE  BIRD,  M.A.,
, Vicar  of  Bradwell,  Derbyshire.  Fcp.  8vo.,
45.  Orf.  net.


ciples    of   Poetic   Composition.     By   J.    P.
DABNEY.     Crown  8vo.,  65.  6d.  net.

Ingelow  GEAN).

POETICAL  WORKS.  Complete  in
One  Volume.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt  top,  65.  net.

LYRICAL  AND  OTHER  POEMS.  Selec-
ted from  the  Writings  of  JEAN  INGELOW.
Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6d.  cloth  plain,  35.  cloth  gilt.

Keary. — THE  BROTHERS  :    a    Fairy
Masque.    By  C.  F.  KEARY.    Cr.  8vo.,  45.  net.


Lang  (ANDREW).


Fcp.   8vo.,


GRASS  OF  PARNASSUS.
25.  6d.  net.

THE  BLUE  POETRY  BOOK.  Edited
by  ANDREW  LANG.  With  100  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  65.


By  the  Right  Hon.
Fcp.  8vo.,  55.


Lecky.—

W.  E.  H.  LECKY.


24        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Poetry  ani   the  Drama — continued.


Lytton     (The     Earl     of),     (OWEN
MEREDITH).

THE  WANDERER.    Cr.  8vo.,  IDS.  6d.
LUCILE.     Crown  8vo.,  105.  6<7.
SELECTED  POEMS.    Cr.  8vo.,  105.  6d.


Macauiay. — LA  YS  OF  ANCIENT  ROME>
WITH  '  IVRY'  AND  «  THE  ARMADA  '.  By
Lord  MACAULAY.

Illustrated  by  G.  SCHARF.  Fcp.  410.,  105.  6d.

Bijou        Edition.

i8mo.,  25.  6d.  gilt  top.

Popular  Edition.

Fcp.  410.,  6d.  sewed,  is.  cloth.

Illustrated  by  J.    R.   WEGUELIN.     Crown
8vo.,  35.  net.

Annotated  Edition.     Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  sewed,
is.  6d.  cloth.


MacDonald. — A  BOOK  OF  STRIFE,  IN

THE    FORM    OF    THE    DlARY    OF    AN   OLD

SOUL  :    Poems.     By  GEORGE  MACDONALD,
LL.D.     i8mo.,  6s.


Morris  (WILLIAM).

POETICAL  WORKS  —LIBRARY  EDITION.
Complete  in  n  volumes.     Crown  8vo.,
price  55.  net  each.

THE  EARTHLY  PARADISE.  4  vols.
Crown  8vo.,  55.  net  each.

THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  JASON.
Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

THE  DEFENCE  OF  GUENEVERE,  and
other  Poems.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

THE  STOR  Y  OF  SIG  URD  THE  VOLS  UNG,
AND  THE  FALL  OF  THE  NIBLUNGS.  Cr.
8vo.,  55.  net.

POEMS  BY  THE  IV AY,  AND  £oi/E  IS
ENOUGH.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.


Morris  (WILLIAM) — continued.

THE  ODYSSEY  OF  HOMER.  Done
into  English  Verse.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net

THE  &NEIDS  OF  VIRGIL.  Done
into  English  Verse.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net

THE  TALE  OF  BEOWULF,  SOMETIME
KING  OF  THE  FOLK  OF  THE  WEDERGBA  rs,
Translated  by  WILLIAM  MORRIS  and  A,
J.  WYATT.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

Certain  of  the  POETICAL  WORKS  may  also  be
had  in  the  following  Editions  : —

THE  EA  R  THL  Y  PA  RA  DISE.

Popular  Edition.     5  vols.     i2mo.,  255.;
or  55.  each,  sold  separately.

The  same  in  Ten  Parts,  255.;  or  25.  6d'
each,  sold  separately.

Cheap   Edition,   in  i  vol.     Crown  8vo.,
6s.  net.

POEMS  BY  THE  WAY.  Square  crown
8vo.,  6s.

*»*  For    Mr.    William    Morris's    other
Works,  see  pp.  27,  28,  37  and  40.


Morte  Arthur:  an  Alliterative  Poem
of  the  Fourteenth  Century.  Edited  from
the  Thornton  MS.,  with  Introduction,
Notes  and  Glossary.  By  MARY  MACLEOD
BANKS.  Fcp.  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Nesbit. — LA  YS  AND  LEGENDS.  By  E.
NESBIT  (Mrs.  HUBERT  BLAND).  First
Series.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  Second  Series.
With  Portrait.  Crown  8vo.,  55.


Ramal. — SONGS  OF  CHILDHOOD.   By

WALTER  RAMAL.  With  a  Frontispiece
from  a  Drawing  by  RICHARD  DOYLE.  Fcp.
8vo.,  35.  6d.  net.


R  i  1  e  y .  —  OLD    FA  SHIONED    Ros
Poems.       By    JAMES    WHITCOMB    RILEV.
I2mo.,  gilt  top,  5s.

Romanes. — A  SELECTION  FROM  T.
POEMS  OF  GEORGE  JOHN  ROMANES,  M.A
LL.D.,  F.R.S.      With  an  Introduction  1
T.  HERBERT  WARREN,  President  of  M
dalen  College,  Oxford.     Crown  8vo.,


,


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        25


Poetry  and  the  Drama— continued,

>avage-Armstrong. — BALLADS  OF  Stevenson. — A  CHILD'S  GARDEN  OF
DOWN.  By  G.  F.  SAVAGE-ARMSTRONG,  VERSES.  By  ROBERT  Louis  STEVENSON.
M.A.,  D.Litt.  Crown  8vo.,  js.  6d.  Fcp.  8vo.,  gilt  top,  55.


>hakespeare.

BOIVDLER 's  FAMILY  SHAKESPEARE.
With  36  Woodcuts,  i  vol.  8vo.,  145.
Or  in  6  vols.  Fcp.  8vo.,  215.

THE  SHA  KESPEA  RE  BIR  THDA  Y  BOOK.
By  MARY  F.  DUNBAR.  32mo.,  is.  6d.


Wagner.—  THE  NIBELUNGEN  RING.
Done  into  English  Verse  by  REGINALD
RANKIN,  B.A.,  of  the  Inner  Temple,  Barris-
ter-at-Law.

Vol.  I.      Rhine  Gold,  The  Valkyrie.      Fcp.
8vo.,  gilt  top,  45.  6d.

Vol.    II.     Siegfried,   The    Twilight    of  th
Gods.     Fcp.  8vo.,  gilt  top,  45.  6d.


Fiction,   Humour,   &e.


instey  (F.).

VOCES    POPULI.      (Reprinted    from
'Punch'.)
First  Series.     With  20  Illustrations  by  J.

BERNARD    PARTRIDGE.     Cr.  8vo.,    gilt

top,  35.  net.
Second  Series.   With  25  Illustrations  by  J.

BERNARD  PARTRIDGE.  Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  top,

35.  net.

THE  MAN  FROM  BLANKLEY'S,  and
other  Sketches.  (Reprinted  from  '  Punch  '.)
With  25  Illustrations  by  J.  BERNARD
PARTRIDGE.  Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  top,  35.  net.

•alley. — MY  LADY  OF  ORANGE  :  a
Romance  of  the  Netherlands  in  the  Days  of
Alva.  By  H.  C.  BAILEY.  With  8  Illustra-
tions. Crown  8vo.,  65.


Churchill. — SAVROLA  :  a  Tale  of  the
Revolution  in  Laurania.  By  WINSTON
SPENCER  CHURCHILL,  M.P.  Cr.  8vo.,  n>.


Crawford. — THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF
A  TRAMP.  By  J.  H.  CRAWFORD.  With  a
Photogravure  Frontispiece  '  The  Vagrants,'
by  FRED.  WALKER,  and  8  other  Illustra-
tions. Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.


Creed.  —  THE   VICAR  OF  ST.  LUKE'S.
By  SIBYL  CREED.     Crown  8vo.,  65.


BY  THE  RAMPARTS  OF
a  Romance  of  Jehu,  King  of


Davenport.

JEZREEL  :

Israel.  By  ARNOLD  DAVENPORT.  With
Frontispiece  by  LANCELOT  SPEED.  Crown
8vo.,  6s.


*eaconsfield  (The  Earl  of).

NOVELS  AND  TALES.  Complete
in  ii  vols.  Crown  Svo.,  is.  6d.  each,  or
in  sets,  11  vols.,  gilt  top,  155.  net.

*vian  Grey.  Sybil.

*ie  Young  Duke,  etc.     Henrietta  Temple.

•roy,  Ixion,  etc.  Venetia.


<ntarini        Fleming,


Coningsby.


Lothair.
ncred.  Endymion.

NOVELS  AND  TALES.  THE  HUGH-
ENDEN  EDITION.  With  2  Portraits  and
ii  Vignettes,  n  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  425.

JDttome.  —  LIFE.,  THE  INTERPRETER.
5y  PHYLLIS  BOTTOM.E.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.


Dougall. — BEGGARS    ALL.       By    L.
DOUGALL.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Doyle  (Sir  A.  CONAN).

MICAH  CLARKE:  A  Tale  of  Mon-
mouth's  Rebellion.  With  10  Illustra-
tions. Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  6d.

THE  REFUGEES:  A  Tale  of  the
Huguenots.  With  25  Illustrations.  Cr.
8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  STARK  MUNRO  LETTERS.  Cr.
8vo.,  3s.  6d.

THE  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  POLESTAR,
and  other  Tales.  Cr.  8vo.,  3s.  6d.


26


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Fiction,  Humour,  &e. — continued.

Dyson.— THE     GOLD-STEALERS  :    a    Haggard  (H.  RIDER).
Story  of   Waddy.      By    EDWARD    DYSON,


Author  of  'Rhymes  from  the  Mines,'   etc.
Crown  8vo.,  6s.


Farrar  (F.  W.,    DEAN   OF   CANTER-
BURY).

DARKNESS  AND  DAWN:  or,  Scenes
in  the  Days  of  Nero.  An  Historic  Tale.
Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  top,  6s.  net.

GATHERING  CLOUDS  :  a  Tale  of  the
Days  of  St.  Chrysostom.  Cr.  8vo.,  gilt
top,  6s.  net.


Fowler  (EDITH  H.).

THE  YOUNG  PRETENDERS.  A  Story
of  Child  Life.  With  12  Illustrations  by
Sir  PHILIP  BURNE-JONES,  Bart.  Crown
8vo.,  6s.

THE  PROFESSOR'S  CHILDREN.  With
24  Illustrations  by  ETHEL  KATE  BURGESS.
Crown  8vo.,  6s.


Francis  (M.  E.).

FlANDERS    WIDOW.


Cr.  8vo.,  65.


YEOMAN  FLEETWOOD.  With  Fron-
tispiece. Crown  8vo.,  35.  net.

PASTORALS  OF  DORSET.  With  8
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.

THE  MANOR  FARM.  With  Frontis-
piece by  CLAUD  C.  DU  PRE  COOPER.
Crown  8vo.,  6s.


Froude. — THE  Two  CHIEFS  OF  DUN-
BOY:  an  Irish  Romance  of  the  Last  Century.
By  JAMES  A.  FROUDE.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Gurdon. — MEMORIES  AND  FANCIES  :  j
Suffolk   Tales    and    other    Stories ;    Fairy  {
Legends  ;   Poems  ;    Miscellaneous  Articles.
By  the  late  LADY  CAMILLA  GURDON.     Cr.
8vo.,  5s.


ALLAN  QUATERMAIN.  With  31
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

ALLAN'S  WIFE.  With  34  Illustra-
tions. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

BEATRICE.  With  Frontispiece  and*
Vignette.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

BLACK  HEART  AND  WHITE  HEART^
AND  OTHER  STORIES.  With  33  Illustra-
tions. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

CLEOPATRA.  With  29  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

COLONEL  QUARITCH,  V.C.  With
Frontispiece  and  Vignette.  Cr.  8vo.,  35. 6d.


DAWN.     With  16  Illustrations.
8vo.,  35.  6d.


Cr,


DR.  THERNE.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

ERIC  BRIGHTEYES.     With  51  Illus-
trations.    Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

HEART  OF  THE   WORLD.     With  15
Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

JOAN  HASTE.   With  20  Illustrations,
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

LYSBETH.      With    26    Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.,  6s.

MAIWA'S  REVENGE.    Cr.  8vo.,  15.  6d~

MONTEZUMA^S  DAUGHTER.     With  24
Illustrations.     Crown  8vo. ,  35.  6d.

MR.    MEESON 's    WILL.      With    16
Illustrations.     Crown  8vo..  35.  6d.

NAD  A  THE  LILY.    With  23  Illustra-
tions.    Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

SHE.    With  32  Illustrations.    Crown
8vo.,  35.  6d.

SWALLOW  :  a  Tale  of  the  Great  Trek.
With  8  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35. 6rf.

THE  PEOPLE  OF  THE  MIST.     With
1 6  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE    WITCH'S  HEAD.       With    16
Illustrations.     Crown  8vo^  35.  6d.


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


27


Fiction,   Humour,   &c. — continued.


Haggard  and  Lang.—  THE  WORLD'S

DESIRE.  By  H.  RIDER  HAGGARD  and
ANDREW  LANG.  With  27  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Harte. — IN  THE  CARQUINEZ  WOODS,
By  BRET  HARTE.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Hope. — THE  HEART  OF  PRINCESS
OSRA.  By  ANTHONY  HOPE.  With  9  Illus-
trations. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Howard. — THE  FAILURE  OF  SUCCESS.

By  Lady  MABEL  HOWARD.  Crown  8vo.,
65.

Hutchinson. — A  FRIEND  OF  NELSON.

By  HORACE  G.  HUTCHINSON.     Cr.  8vo.,  65.

[erome. — SKETCHES  IN  LAVENDER:
BLUE  AND  GREEN.  By  JEROME  K.  JEROME,
Author  of  '  Three  Men  in  a  Boat,'  etc.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Joyce. — OLD      CELTIC      ROMANCES.

Twelve  of  the  most  beautiful  of  the  Ancient
Irish  Romantic  Tales.  Translated  from  the
Gaelic.  By  P.  W.  JOYCE,  LL.D.  Crown
8vo.,  35.  £>d.

-ang  (ANDREW).

A  MONK  OF  FIFE  ;  a  Story  of  the
Days  of  Joan  of  Arc.  With  13  Illustra-
tions by  SELWYN  IMAGE.  Crown  8vo.,
35.  6d.

THE  DISEXTANGLERS.  With  7
Full-page  Illustrations  by  H.  J.  FORD.
Crown  8vo.,  6s.

^yall  (EDNA).
THE  HINDERERS.   Crown  8vo.,  as. 6d.

THE  A  UTOBIOGRAPH  Y  OF  A  SLANDER.

Fcp.  8vo.,  15.  sewed.

Presentation  Edition.  Witli  20  Illustra-
tions by  LANCELOT  SPEED.  Crown
8vo.,  25.  6d.  net.

DOREEN.  The  Story  of  a  Singer.
Crown  8vo.,  6s.

WAYFARING  MEN.     Crown  8vo.,  65.

HOPE  THE  HERMIT  :  a  Romance  of
Borrowdale.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.


Marchmont. — IN   THE  NAME  OF  A

WOMAN:  a  Romance.  By  ARTHUR  W.
MARCHMONT.  With  8  Illustrations.  Crown
8vo.,  6s.


Mason  and  Lang.  —PARSON KELLY.

By  A.  E.  W.  MASON  and  ANDREW  LANG.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Max     M tiller.  —  DEUTSCHE    LIEBE

(GERMAN  LOVE]  :  Fragments  from  the
Papers  of  an  Alien.  Collected  by  F.  MAX
MULLER.  Translated  from  the  German  by
G.  A.  M.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt  top,  55.


Melville  (G.  J.  WHYTE).


The  Gladiators.
The  Interpreter.
Good  for  Nothing.
The  Queen's  Maries.

Crown  8vo. ,  is.  6d.  each.


Holmby  House.
Kate  Coventry.
Digby  Grand.
General  Bounce.


Merriman. — FLOTSAM:   A   Story  of

the  Indian  Mutiny.  By  HENRY  SETON
MERRIMAN.  With  Frontispiece  and  Vig-
nette by  H.  G.  MASSEY.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6<Y.


Morris  (WILLIAM).
THE  SUNDERING  FLOOD.     Cr.  8vo.,

75.  6rf.

THE  WATER  OF  THE  WONDROUS
ISLES.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.

THE  WELL  A  r  THE  WORLD'S  END.
2  vols.  8vo.,  285.

THE   WOOD  BEYOND   THE   WORLD.

Crown  8vo.,  6s.  net.

THE  STORY  OF  THE  GLITTERING
PLAIN,  which  has  been  also  called  The
Land  of  the  Living  Men,  or  The  Acre  of
the  Undying.  Square  post  8vo.,  55.  net.

THE  ROOTS  OF  THE  MOUNTAINS,
wherein  is  told  somewhat  of  the  Lives  of
the  Men  of  Burgdale,  their  Friends,  their
Neighbours,  their  Foemen,  and  their
Fellows-in-Arms.  Written  in  Prose  and
Verse.  Square  crown  8vo.,  8s.


28         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Fiction,    Humour,   &c.— continued.

Morris  (WILLIAM) — continued.  Sewell  (ELIZABETH  M.).


A  TALE  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  THE
WOLFINGS,  and  all  the  Kindreds  of  the
Mark.  Written  in  Prose  and  Verse.
Square  crown  8vo.,  65.

A  DREAM  OF  JOHN  BALL,  AND  A
KING'S  LESSON.  i6mo.,  25.  net.

NEWS  FROM  NOWHERE;  or,  An
Epoch  of  Rest.  Being  some  Chapters
from  an  Utopian  Romance.  Post  8vo.,
is.  6d.


THE  STORY  OF  GRETTIR  THE  STRONG.

Translated  from  the  Icelandic  by  EIRIKR
MAGNUSSON  and  WILLIAM  MORRIS.  Cr.
8vo.,  55.  net.

THREE  NORTHERN  LOVE  STORIES,
AND  O  THER  TALES.  Translated  from  the
Icelandic  by  EIRIKR  MAGNUSSON  and
WILLIAM  MORRIS.  Crown  8vo.,  65.  net.

%*  For    Mr.    William    Morris's   other
Works,  see  pp.  24,  37  and  40.


Newman  (Cardinal).

Loss  AND  GAIN:    The    Story  of  a
Convert.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

CALLISTA  :    A   Tale   of  the   Third
Century.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Phillipps-Wolley. — SNAP:  a  Legend
of  the  Lone  Mountain.  By  C.  PHILLIPPS-
WOLLEY.  With  13  Illustrations.  Crown
8vo. ,  35.  6d.


Portman. — STATION  STUDIES  :  being
the  Jottings  of  an  African  Official.  By
LIONEL  PORTMAN.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.


Ridley. — ANNE  MAINWARING.  By
ALICE  RIDLEY,  Author  of  '  The  Story  of
Aline'.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.


A  Glimpse  of  the  World,
Laneton  Parsonage.
Margaret  Percival.
Katharine  Ashton.
The  Earl's  Daughter.
The  Experience  of  Life.


Amy  Herbert
Cleve  Hall.
Gertrude.
Home  Life.
After  Life.
Ursula.     Ivors.


Cr.  8vo.,  cloth  plain,  is.  6d.  each.     Cloth
extra,  gilt  edges,  2s.  6d.  each.


Sheehan.  —  LUKE    DELMEGE.      By

the  Rev.  P.  A.  SHEEHAN,  P.P.,  Author  a
'  My  New  Curate  '.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.


(E.    (E.)    and    Ross


Somerville

(MARTIN).


SOME  EXPERIENCES    OF  AN

R.M.      With  31    Illustrations  by  E.  (E
SOMERVILLE.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.


THE    REAL
8vo.,  35.  6d


CHARLOTTE.       Crowr


THE  SILVER  Fox.     Cr.  8voM  35.  6d


Stebbing. — RACHEL  WULFSTAN,  anc
other  Stories.  By  W.  STEBBING,  author  o
1  Probable  Tales '.  Crown  8vo.,  45.  6rf.


Stevenson  (ROBERT  Louis).

THE  STRANGE  CASE  OF  DR.JEKYU
AND  MR.  HYDE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  sewed
is.  6d.  cloth.

THE     STRANGE      CASE      OF     DR
JEKYLL  AND  MR.  HYDE  ;  WITH  OTH
FABLES.     Crown  8vo.,  bound  in  buckram
with  gilt  top,  55.  net.

'  Silver  Library  '  Edition.    Crown  8vo.
3s.  6d.

MORE  NEW  ARABIAN  NIGHTS — Tn>
DYNAMITER.  By  ROBERT  Louis  STEVE
SON  and  FANNY  VAN  DE  GRIFT  STEVE
SON.     Crown  8vo.,  3s.  6d.

THE     WRONG    Box.      By    ROBER'
Louis  STEVENSON  and  LLOYD  OSBOUR
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d~


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.        ao.


Fiction,  Humour,  &c. — continued.


Suttner. — LAY  DOWN    YOUR  ARMS   Walford  (L.  B.) — continued.

(Die  Waffen  Nieder) :  The  Autobiography
of  Martha  von  Tilling.  By  BERTHA  VON
SUTTNER.  Translated  by  T.  HOLMES.
Cr.  8vo.,  is.  6d.


Swan. — BALLAST.     By  MYRA  SWAN.
Crown  8vo.,  6s.


Trollope  (ANTHONY).
THE  WARDEN.     Cr.  8vo.,  15.  6d.
BARCHESTER  TOWERS.  Cr.8vo.,is.6d.

Walford  (L.  B.).
CHARLOTTE.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.
ONE  OF  OURSELVES.     Cr.  8vo.,  65.
THE  INTRUDERS.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d.
LEDDY  MARGET.   Crown  8vo.,  25.  6d.

IVA  KILDARE  :  a  Matrimonial  Pro-
blem.    Crown  8vo.,  25.  6d.

MR.   SMITH:   a   Part   of  his    Life.
Crown  8vo.,  25.  6d.

THE  BABY'S    GRANDMOTHER.     Cr.
8vo.,  2s.  6d.


COUSINS.     Crown  8vo.,  25.  6d.

TROUBLESOME    DAUGHTERS.
8vo.,  25.  6d.

PAULINE.     Crown  8vo.,  25.  6d.


Cr.


THE  MISCHIEF  OF  MONICA.
8vo.,  2s.  6d.


Cr.


DICK  NET  HER  BY.     Cr.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.


THE  HISTORY  OF  A    WEEK.

8vo.  25.  6d.


Cr.


A  STIFF-NECKED  GENERATION.     Cr.
8vo.  25.  6d.

,  and  other  Stories.     Cr.  8vo.,
2s.  6d.


THE  ONE  GOOD   GUEST.     Cr.  8vo..

25.  6d.

*  PLOUGHED]     and     other     Stories.
Crown  8vo.,  25.  6d.

THE  MA  TCHMAKER.    Cr.  8vo. ,  2s.  6d~


Ward. — ONE    POOR    SCRUPLE.      By-
Mrs.  WILFRID  WARD.     Crown  8vo.,  65.


Weyman  (STANLEY).

THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  WOLF.  With
Frontispiece  and  Vignette.  Crown  8vo.,.
35.  6d.

A  GENTLEMAN  OF  FRANCE.  With
Frontispiece  and  Vignette.  Cr.  8vo.,  65.

THE  RED  COCKADE.  With  Frontis-
piece and  Vignette.  Crown  8vo.,  65.

SHREWSBURY.  With  24  Illustra-
tions by  CLAUDE  A.  SHEPPERSON.  Cr.
8vo.,  65.

SOPHIA.  With  Frontispiece.  Crowr*
8vo.,  65,


Yeats  (S.  LEVETT).

THE  CHEVALIER  D'AuRiAC.   Crown.
8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  TRAITOR'S  WAY.     Cr.  8vo.,  65,


Yoxall.—  THE  ROMMANY  STONE.    By
J.  H.  YOXALL,  M.P.     Crown  8vo.,  65.


30         MESSRS.   LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Popular  Science  (Natural  History,  &e.).


Butler. — OUR  HOUSEHOLD  INSECTS.    Hudson  (W.  H.).

An  Account  of  the  Insect-Pests  found  in
Dwelling-Houses.  By  EDWARD  A.  BUTLER,
B.A.,  B.Sc.  (Lond.).  With  113  Illustra-
tions. Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.


BIRDS  AND   MAN.

8vo.,  65.  net.


Large    crown


Furneaux  (W.).


THE  OUTDOOR  WORLD;  or  The
Young  Collector's  Handbook.  With  18
Plates  (16  of  which  are  coloured),  and  549
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,
gilt  edges,  65.  net.

BUTTERFLIES  AND  MOTHS  (British).
With  12  coloured  Plates  and  241  Illus-
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt
edges,  65.  net.


LIFE  IN  PONDS  AND  STREAMS.
With  8  coloured  Plates  and  331  Illustra-
tions in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt
edges,  6s.  net.


Hartwig  (GEORGE).

THE  SEA  AND  ITS  LIVING  WONDERS.
With  12  Plates  and  303  Woodcuts.  Svo.,
gilt  top,  75.  net.

THE  TROPICAL  WORLD.  With  8
Plates  and  172  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  gilt
top,  75.  net.

THE  POLAR  WORLD.  With  3  Maps,
8  Plates  and  85  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  gilt
top,  js.  net.

THE  SUBTERRANEAN  WORLD.  With
3  Maps  and  80  Woodcuts.  8vo.,  gilt
top,  75.  net.


Helmholtz. — POPULAR  LECTURES  ON
SCIENTIFIC  SUBJECTS.  By  HERMANN  VON
HELMHOLTZ.  With  68  Woodcuts.  2  vols.
Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.


NATURE  IN  DOWNLAND.  With  12
Plates  and  14  Illustrations  in  the  Text  by
A.  D.  McCoRMiCK.  8vo.,  105.  6d.  net.


BRITISH  BIRDS.  With  a  Chapter
on  Structure  and  Classification  by  FRANK
E.  BEDDARD,  F.R.S.  With  16  Plates  (8
of  which  are  Coloured),  and  over  100  Illus-
trations in  the  Text.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt
edges,  6s.  net.


Millais. — THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OP
THE  BRITISH  SURFACE  FEEDING-DUCKS.
By  JOHN  GUILLE  MILLAIS,  F.Z.S.,  etc.
With  6  Photogravures  and  66  Plates  (41  in
Colours)  from  Drawings  by  the  Author,
ARCHIBALD  THORBURN,  and  from  Photo-
graphs. Royal  410.,  £6  6s.


Proctor  (RICHARD  A.).

LIGHT  SCIENCE  FOR  LEISURE  HOURS.
Familiar  Essays  on  Scientific  Subjects.
Crown  8vo.,  3s.  6d.

Ro  UGH  WA  vs  MA DE  SMOO  TH.  Fami -
liar  Essays  on  Scientific  Subjects.  Crown
8vo.,  35.  6d.

PLEA  SA  NT  WA  YS  IN  SCIENCE  .  C  rown
8vo.,  35.  6d.

NATURE  STUDIES.     By  R.  A.  PROC-
TOR,   GRANT    ALLEN,    A.    WILSON,    1
FOSTER  and  E.  CLODD.     Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6<f.


LEISURE  READINGS.  By  R.  A.  PROC-
TOR, E.  CLODD,  A.  WILSON,  T.  FOSTER
and  A.  C.  RANYARD.  Cr.  8vo.,  3*-  6d-


%*  For  Mr.  Proctor's  other  books  see  pp.  17
and  35,  and  Messrs.  Longmans  &  Co.'s  Cata-
logue of  Scientific  Works.


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.         31

Popular    Science    (Natural  History,  &e.) — continued.


Stanley.  —A  FAMILIAR  HISTORY  ot
BIRDS.  By  E.  STANLEY,  D.D.,  formerly
Bishop  of  Norwich.  With  160  Illustrations
Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Wood  (Rev.  J.  G.).

HOMES  WITHOUT  HANDS:  A  Descrip-
tion of  the  Habitations  of  Animals,  classed  i
according  to  tlieir  Principle  of  Construc-
tion.    With   140  Illustrations.     8vo.,  gilt
top,  75.  net.

INSECTS  A  T  HOME  :  A  Popular  Ac-
count of  British  Insects,  their  Structure,  i
Habits  and  Transformations.     With  700  |
Illustrations.     8vo. ,  gilt  top,  75.  net.


Wood  (Rev.  J.  G.)— continued.

INSECTS  ABROAD  :  A  Popular  Ac-
count of  Foreign  Insects,  their  Structure,
Habits  and  Transformations.  With  600
Illustrations.  8vo.,  75.  net.

Our  OF  DOORS;  a  Selection  of
Original  Articles  on  Practical  Natural
History.  With  u  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,
35.  6d.

PETLAND  REVISITED.  With  33
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.

STRANGE  DWELLINGS:  a  Description
of  the  Habitations  of  Animals,  abridged
from  '  Homes  without  Hands'.  With  60
Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Works  of  Reference.


Gwilt.— -AN  ENCYCLOPEDIA    OF  AR-    Maunder  (SAMUEL;—  continued.


CHITECTURE.       By    JOSEPH    GwiLT,    F.S.A.

With    1700    Engravings.       Revised    (1888),
with    Alterations    and    Considerable   Addi-  I
tions   by    WYATT    PAPWORTH.      8vo.,    215.  i
net.


Longmans'  GAZETTEER  OF  THE
WORLD.  Edited  by  GEORGE  G.  CHIS-
HOLM,  M.A.,  B.Sc.  Imperial  8vo.,  185.  net  ;
cloth,  215.  half-morocco.


Maunder  (SAMUEL).

BIOGRAPHICAL     TREASURY.      With  ;

Supplement  brought  down  to   1889.     By
Rev.  JAMES  WOOD.     Fcp.  8vo.,  6s.


THE  TREASURY  OF  BOTANY.  Edited
by  J.  LINDLEY,  F.R.S.,  and  T.  MOORE,
F.L.S.  With  274  Woodcuts  and  20  Steel
Plates.  2  vols.  Fcp.  8vo.,  125.


Roget.  —  THESA  UR  us  OF  ENGLISH
WORDS  AND  PHRASES.  Classified  and  Ar-
ranged so  as  to  Facilitate  the  Expression  of
Ideas  and  assist  in  Literary  Composition.
By  PETER  MARK  ROGET,  M.D.,  F.R.S.
Recomposed  throughout,  enlarged  and  im-
proved, partly  from  the  Author's  Notes,  and
with  a  full  Index,  by  the  Author's  Son,
JOHN  LEWIS  ROGET.  Crown  8vo.,  95.  net.


THE    TREASURY  OF  BIBLE  KNOW-
LEDGE.   By  the  Rev.  J.  AYRE,  M.A.   With

5  Maps,   15    Plates,   and  300  Woodcuts.     \Wi\\ioh.--PoPULAR  TABLES  for  giving
Fcp.    8vo.,   6s.  information   for   ascertaining   the   value  of

Lifehold,  Leasehold,  and  Church  Property,
the  Public  Funds,  etc.      By  CHARLES    M.


TREASURY  OF  KNOWLEDGE  AND  LIB-
RARY OF  REFERENCE.     Fcp.  8vo.,  65.


WILLICH.-     Edited   by    H.   BENCE  JONES.
Crown  8vo.,  xos.  6d.


32        MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Children's  Books.


Adelborg". — CLEAN  PETER  AND  THE
CHILDREN  OF  GRUBBYLEA.  By  OTTILIA
ADELBORG.  Translated  from  the  Swedish
by  Mrs.  GRAHAM  WALLAS.  With  23
Coloured  Plates.  Oblong  410.,  boards,
35.  6d.  net.


Alick's    Adventures.  —  By    G.    R.

With    8    Illustrations   by   JOHN    HASSALL.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Brown. — THE  BOOK  OF  SAINTS  AND
FRIENDLY  BEASTS.  By  ABBIE  FARWELL
BROWN.  With  8  Illustrations  by  FANNY  Y.
CORY.  Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.  net.


Buckland. — TWOLITTLERUNAWAYS.

Adapted  from  the  French  of  Louis  DES-
NOYERS.  By  JAMES  BUCKLAND.  With  no
Illustrations  by  CECIL  ALDIN.  Cr.  8vo.,  65.


Crake  (Rev.  A.  D.).

EDWY  THE  FAIR;  or,  The  First
Chronicle  of  jEscendune.  Cr.  8vo. ,  silver
top,  25.  net.

ALFGAR  THE  DANE  ;  or,  The  Second
Chronicle  of  ^Escendune.  Cr.  8vo.,  silver
top,  2s.  net.

THE  RIVAL  HEIRS  :  being  the  Third
and  Last  Chronicle  of  ^Escendune.  Cr.
8vo.,  silver  top,  25.  net.

THE  HOUSE  OP  WALDERNE.  A  Tale
of  the  Cloister  and  the  Forest  in  the  Days
of  the  Barons'  Wars.  Crown  8vo.,  silver
top,  25.  net.

BRIAN  FITZ- COUNT.  A  Story  of
Wallingford  Castle  and  Dorchester
Abbey.  Cr.  8vo.,  silver  top,  25.  net.


Henty  (G.  A.). — EDITED  BY.

YULE  LOGS  :  A  Story-Book  for  Boys.
By  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.  With  61  Illus-
trations. Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  35.  net.

YULE  TIDE  YARNS:  a  Story-Book
for  Boys.  By  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.  With
45  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  35.
net.


Lang  (ANDREW). — EDITED  BY.

THE  BLUE  FAIRY  BOOK.  With  138
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  6s.,

ThE  RED  FAIRY  BOOK.  With  100
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  65.

THE  GREEN  FAIR  Y  BOOK.  With  99 ;
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  6s.

THE  GREY  FAIRY  BOOK.  With  65
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  6s.j

THE  YELLOW  FAIRY  BOOK.  With
104  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  6s.

THE  PINK  FAIRY  BOOK.  With  67
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  6s.

THE  VIOLET  FAIRY  BOOK.  With  8
Coloured  Plates  and  54  other  Illustrations,:
Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  65.

THE  BL  UE  POE TR  Y  BOOK.  With  i  oc
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  6s.

THE  TRUE  STORY  BOOK.  With  6t
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  6s

THE  RED  TR  UE  STOR  Y  BOOK.  Witr
100  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  6s  \

THE  ANIMAL  STORY  BOOK.  With
67  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  6s

THE  RED  BOOK  OF  ANIMAL  STORIES\
With  65  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  gil'
edges,  65.

THE  ARABIAN  NIGHTS  ENTERTAIN\

MENTS.    With  66  Illustrations.    Cr.  8vo.

gilt  edges,  6s.
THE  BOOK  OF  ROMANCE.     With  £;

Coloured  Plates  and  44  other  Illustrations ',

Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  6s.


Lyall. — THE  B URGES  LETTERS  :  ^
Record  of  Child  Life  in  the  Sixties.  By
EDNA  LYALL.  With  Coloured  Frontispiece
and  8  other  Full-page  Illustrations  b}i
WALTER  S.  STACEY.  Crown  8vo.,  2s.  6d


Meade  (L.  T.).

DADDY'S  BOY.    With  8  Illustrations

Crown  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  35.  net.
DEB  AND   THE  DUCHESS.     With  7

Illustrations.    Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  35.  net
THE  BERESFORD  PRIZE.      With  7

Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  35.  net
THE  HOUSE  OF  SURPRISES.    With  t

Illustrations.     Cr.  8vo.,  gilt  edges,  35.  net


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


33


Children's  Books — continued.


Murray.  —  FLOWER  LEGENDS  FOR
CHILDREN.  By  HILDA  MURRAY  (the  Hon.
Mrs.  MURRAY  of  Elibank).  Pictured  by  J.
S.  ELAND.  With  numerous  Coloured  and
other  Illustrations.  Oblong  410.,  65.

Penrose.  —  CHUBBY  :    A    NUISANCE.

By  Mrs.  PENROSE.  With  8,  Illustrations
by  G.  G.  M ANTON.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Praeger  (ROSAMOND).

THE  ADVENTURES  OF  TK*.  THREE
BOLD  BABES:  HECTOR,  HONOR i A  AND
ALISANDER.  A  Story  in  Pictures.  With
24  Coloured  Plates  and  24  Outline  Pic-
tures. Oblong  4to.,  35.  6d.

THE  FUR  THER  DOINGS  OF  THE  THREE
BOLD  BABES.  With  24  Coloured  Pictures
and  24  Outline  Pictures.  Oblong  410., 35. 6rf.

Roberts.  —  THE  ADVENTURES  OF
CAPTAIN  JOHN  SMirti  ;  Captain  of  Two
Hundred  and  Fifty  Horse,  and  sometime
President  of  Virginia.  By  E.  P.  ROBERTS.
With  17  Illustrations  and  3  Maps.  Crown
8vo.,  55.  net.

Stevenson. — A  CHILD'S  GARDEN  OF
VERSES.  By  ROBERT  Louis  STEVENSON.
Fcp.  8vo.,  gilt  top,  55.

Tappan. —  OLD  BALLADS  IN  PROSE.

By  EVA  MARCH  TAPPAN.  With  4  Illus-
trations by  FANNY  Y.  CORY.  Crown  8vo.,
gilt  top,  45.  6d.  net.


Upton  (FLORENCE  K.  AND  BERTHA).

THE  ADVENTURES  OF  Two  DUTCH
DOLLS  AND  A  '  GOLLIWOGG\  With  31
Coloured  Plates  and  numerous  Illustra-
tions in  the  Text.  Oblong  4to.,  6s.

THE  GOLLIWOGG'S  BICYCLE  CLUB.
With  31  Coloured  Plates  and  numerous
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Oblong  4to.,  65.

THE  GOLLIWOGG  AT  THE  SEASIDE.
With  31  Coloured  Plates  and  numerous
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Oblong  410. ,  6s.

THE  GOLUWOGG  IN  WAR.  With  31
Coloured  Plates.  Oblong  4to.,  6s.

THE  GOLLIWOGG'S  POLAR  ADVEN-
TURES. With  31  Coloured  Plates.  Ob-
long 4to.,  6s.

THE  GOLLIWOGG'S  AUTO-GO-CART.
With  31  Coloured  Plates  and  numerous
Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Oblong  410.,  6s.

THE  GOLLIIVOGGS  AIR-SHIP.    With

30  Coloured  Pictures  and  numerous  Illus-
trations in  the  Text.     Oblong  410.,  6s.

THE  VEGE-MEN'S  REVENGE.     With

31  Coloured  Plates  and  numerous  Illus-
trations in  the  Text.     Oblong  4to.,  6s.

Wemyss. — '  THINGS  WE  THOUGHT
OF'  :  Told  from  a  Child's  Point  of  View.
By  MARY  C.  E.  WEMYSS,  Author  of  '  All
About  All  of  Us  '.  With  8  Illustrations  in
Colour  .by  S.  R.  PRAEGER.  Crown  8vo.,
3s.  6d.


The  Silver  Library.


CROWN  8vo.     35.  6d.

Arnold's  (Sir    Edwin)  Seas  and  Lands.     With
71  Illustrations.     y.  6d.

Bagehot's  (W.)  Biographical  Studies,     y.  6d.
Bagehot's  (W.)  Economic  Studies,     y.  6d.

Bagehot's  (W.)  Literary  Studies.  With  Portrait.
3  vols. ,  y.  6d.  each.

Baker's  (Sir   S.   W.)  Eight   Years  in  Ceylon.

With  6  Illustrations.     y.  6d.

Baker's  (Sir  S.  W.)  Rifle  and  Hound  in  Ceylon.

With  6  Illustrations.     35.  6d.

Baring-Gould's  (Rev.  S.)  Curious  Myths  of  the
Middle  Ages.    y.  6d.

Baring-Gould's  (Rev.  S.)  Origin  and  Develop-
ment of  Religious  Belief.    2  vols.    y.6d.  each.

Becker's  (W.  A.)  Gallus :  or,  Roman  Scenes  in  the
Time  of  Augustus.     With  26  Illus.     y.  6d.


EACH  VOLUME.

Becker's  (W.  A.)  Charicles:  or,  Illustrations  of
the  Private  Life  of  the  Ancient  Greeks.
With  26  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Bent's  (J.  T.)  The  Ruined  Cities  of  Mashona-

land.     With  117  Illustrations,     y.  6d.

Brassey's  (Lady)  A  Voyage  in  the  '  Sunbeam  '.

With  66  Illustrations.     3*.  6d.
Buckle's   (H.    T.)   History    of    Civilisation    in

England.     3  vols.     10^.  6d.
Churchill's    (Winston    S.)   The    Story    of   the

Malakand  Field  Force,  1897.     With  6  Maps

and  Plans,     y.  6d.
Clodd's  (E.)  Story  of  Creation:  a  Plain  Account

of  Evolution.     With  77  Illustrations,    y.  6d.

Conybeare  (Rev.  W.  J.)  and  Howson's  (Very
Rev.  J.  S.)  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.

With  46  Illustrations.     3-f.  6d.
Dougall's  (L.)  Beggars  All :  a  Novel,     y.  6d.
Doyle's  (Sir  A.  Conan)  Micah  Clarke.    A  Tale  of

Monmoutn's  Rebellion.  With  10  Illusts.


34         MESSRS.   LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


The  Silver  Library — continued.


Doyle's   (Sir  A.   Gonan)   The  Captain    of  the
Poles  tar,  and  other  Tales,     y.  6d.

Doyle's  (Sir  A.  Conan)  The  Refugees :  A  Tale  of
the  Huguenots.    With  25  Illustrations,     y6d.  \

Doyle's  (Sir  A.  Conan)  The  Stark  Munro  Letters.

y.  6d.

Proude's  (J.  A.)  The  History  of  England,  from
the   Fall  of  Wolsey   to   the   Defeat   of  the  i
Spanish  Armada.      12  vols.     y.  6d.  each.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  English  in  Ireland.     3  vols.
ioj.  6d.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Divorce  of  Catherine  of
Aragon.     y.  6d,

Proude's  (J.  A.)  The  Spanish  Story  of  the
Armada,  and  other  Essays,  y.  6d.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  English  Seamen  in  the  Sixteenth
Century.  35.  6d.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  Short  Studies  on  Great  Sub-
jects. 4  vols.  y.  6d.  each.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  Oceana,  or  England  and  Her

Colonies.     With  9  Illustrations.     35.  6d.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Council  of  Trent.    3^.6^.    !

Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Life  and  Letters  of
Erasmus,  y.  6d.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  Thomas  Carlyle:  a  History  of
his  Life.

1795-1835.  2  vols.  75-.     1834-1881.   2  vols.   75.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  Caesar :  a  Sketch.     3^.  6</.

Froude's  (J.  A.)  The  Two  Chiefs  of  Dunboy  :  an

Irish  Romance  of  the  Last  Century.    .y.  6d.

Froude's  (J.   A.)    Writings,    Selections    from,  j

y.  6d.

Gleig's    (Rev.    G.    R.)    Life    of    the    Duke    of  |
Wellington.     With  Portrait,     y.  6d.

Greville's  (C.  C.  F.)  Journal  of  the  Reigns  of
King  George  IV.,  King  William  IV.,  and
Queen  Victoria.  8  vols. ,  y.  6d.  each.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  She  :  A  History  of  Adventure.
With  32  Illustrations.  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Allan  Ouatermain.  With
20  Illustrations.  3^.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Colonel  Quaritch,  V.C.  :    a  !
Tale  of  Country    Life.      With    Frontispiece
and  Vignette.      3$.   6J.

Haggard's  (H.  R.tfCleopatra.  With  29  Illustra-
tions, y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Eric  Brighteyes.  With  5,
Illustrations,  y.  6J.


Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Beatrice.  With  Frontispiece
and  Vignette,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Black  Heart  and  White  Heart.

With  33  Illustrations.     y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Allan's  Wife.  With  34  Illus
trations.  y.  &/.

Haggard  (H.  R.)  Heart  of  the  World.     With

15  Illustrations,     y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Montezuma's  Daughter.  With
25  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Swallow :  a  Tale  of  the  Great
Trek.  With  8  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  The  Witch's  Head.  With
1 6  Illustrations.  3^.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Mr.  Meeson's  Will.  With
16  Illustrations.  3^.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Nada  the  Lily.  With  23
Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Dawn.  With  i6Illusts.  3^.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  The  People  of  the  Mist.  With
16  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Haggard's  (H.  R.)  Joan  Haste.  With  20  Illus-
trations. 35.  6d.

Haggard  (H.  R.)  and  Lang's  (A.)  The  World'*
Desire.  With  27  Illustrations.  3.*.  6d.

Harte's  (Bret)  In  the  Carquinez  Woods  and
other  Stories.  y.  6d.

Helmholtz's  (Hermann  von)  Popular  Lecturei
on  Scientific  Subjects.  With  68  Illustrations.
2  vols.  35.  6d.  each.

Hope's  (Anthony)  The  Heart  of  Princess  Osra.

With  9  Illustrations.      3.?.  6d.

Hewitt's  (W.)  Visits  to  Remarkable  Places.
With  80  Illustrations.  35.  6d.

Jefferies'  (R.)  The   Story  of  My  Heart:    M>

Autobiography.     With  Portrait.     3^.  6d.

Jefferies'  (R.)  Field  and  Hedgerow.  With
Portrait.  y.  6d.

Jefferies'(R.)Red  Deer.  With  17  Illusts.    3s-  6l'-

Jefferies'  (R.)  Wood  Magic:  a  Fable.  With
Frontispiece  and  Vignette  by  E.  V.  B.  3^.  &

Jefferies  (R.)  The  Toilers  of  the  Field.  With
Portrait  from  the  Bust  in  Salisbury  Cathedral.
y.  6d.

Kaye  (Sir  J.)  and  Malleson's  (Colonel)  History
of  the  Indian  Mutiny  of  1857-8.  6  vols.
y.  6d.  each.

Knight's  (E.  F.)  The  Cruise  of  the    '  Alerte ':

the  Narrative  of  a  Search  for  Treasure  on
the  Desert  Island  of  Trinidad.  With  «
Maps  and  23  Illustrations.  y.  6d.


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.         35


The  Silver  Library — continued.


Knight's (E.  F.)  Where  Three  Empires  Meet:  a

Narrative  of  Recent  Travel  in  Kashmir,
Western  Tibet,  Baltistan,  Gilgit.  With  a  Map
and  54  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Knight's  (E.  F.)  The  'Falcon'  on  the  Baltic:  a

Coasting  Voyage  from  Hammersmith  to
Copenhagen  in  a  Three-Ton  Yacht.  With
Map  and  n  Illustrations.  y.  6d.

Kostlin's  (J.)  Life  of  Luther.  With  62  Illustra-
tions and  4  Facsimiles  of  MSS.  y.  6d.

Lang's  (A.)  Angling  Sketches.  With  20  Illustra-
tions, y.  6d.

Lang's  (A.)  Custom  and  Myth:  Studies  of  Early
Usage  and  Belief.  3*.  6d.

Lang's  (A.)  Cock  Lane  and  Common-Sense.  3.1-.  6d.

Lang's  (A.)  The  Book  of  Dreams  and  Ghosts,

y.  6d.

Lang's  (A.)  A  Monk  of  Fife:  a  Story  of  the
Days  of  Joan  of  Arc.  With  13  Illustrations.
3-r.  6d.

Lang's  (A.)  Myth,Ritual,  and  Religion.  2  vols.  js.

Lees  (J.  A.)  and  Clutterbuck's  (W.  J.)  B.C.
1887,  A  Ramble  in  British  Columbia.  With
Maps  and  75  Illustrations.  3^.  6d

Levett-Yeats'    (S.)    The    Chevalier    D'Auriac.

y.  6d.

Macaulay's  (Lord)  Complete  Works.  '  Albany  '
Edition.  With  12  Portraits.  12  vols.  3^.  6d.
each.

Macaulay's  (Lord)  Essays  and  Lays  of  Ancient
Rome,  etc.  With  Portrait  and  4  Illustrations
to  the  '  Lays  '.  y  6d.

Hacleod's  (H.  D.)  Elements  of  Banking,    y.  6d.

Marshman's  (J.  C.)  Memoirs  of  Sir  Henry
Havelock.  35.  6d.

Mason  (A.  E.  W.)  and  Lang's  (A.)  Parson  Kelly.

y.  6d.

Merivale's  (Dean)  History  of  the  Romans
under  the  Empire.  8  vols.  35.  6d.  each.

Merriman's  (H.  S.  Flotsam  :  A  Tale  of  the
Indian  Mutiny.  ^.  6d.

,    Mill's  (J.  S.)  Political  Economy.     3*.  6d.
Mill's  (J.  S.)  System  of  Logic,    y.  6d.

Milner's  (Geo.)  Country  Pleasures  :  the  Chroni-
cle of  a  Year  chiefly  in  a  Garden,  y.  6d.

Nansen's  (F.)  The  First  Crossing  of  Greenland.

With  142  Illustrations  and  a  Map.     y.  6d.

Phillipps-Wolley's  (C.)  Snap :  a  Legend  of  the  \
Lone  Mountain    With  13  Illustrations,   y.  6d.


Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Orbs  Around  Us.     y.  6d.
Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Expanse  of  Heaven.  3.?.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Light  Science  for  Leisure
Hours,  y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  The  Moon.     3^.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Other  Worlds  than  Ours.  y.6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Our  Place  among  Infinities  :

a  Series  of  Essays  contrasting  our  Little
Abode  in  Space  and  Time  with  the  Infinities
around  us.  y,  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Other  Suns  than  Ours.  y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Rough  Ways  made  Smooth.

y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Pleasant  Way  sin  Science.  y.6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Myths  and  Marvels  of  As-
tronomy, y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Nature  Studies,     y.  6d.

Proctor's  (R.  A.)  Leisure  Readings.  By  R.  A.
PROCTOR,  EDWARD  CLODD,  ANDREW
WILSON,  THOMAS  FOSTER,  and  A.  C.
RANYARD.  With  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Rossetti's  (Maria  F.)  A  Shadow  of  Dante.  35.  6d.

Smith's  (R.  Bosworth)  Carthage  and  the  Cartha-
ginians. With  Maps,  Plans,  etc.  y.  6d.

Stanley's  (Bishop)  Familiar  History  of  Birds.

With  160  Illustrations.     3^.  6d.

Stephen's  (Sir  Leslie)  The  Playground  of  Europe
(The  Alps).  With  4  Illustrations,  y.  6d.

Stevenson's  (R.  L.)  The  Strange  Case  of  Dr.
Jekyll  and  Mr.  Hyde;  with  other  Fables.  3^.6^.

Stevenson  (R.  L.)  and  Osbourne's  (LI.)  The
Wrong  Box.  y.  6d.

Stevenson  (Robert  Louis)  and  Stevenson's
(Fanny  van  de  Grift)  More  New  Arabian

Nights.— The  Dynamiter.     35.  6d.

Trevelyan's  (Sir  G.  0.)  The  Early  History  of
Charles  James  Fox.  y.  6d.

Weyman's  (Stanley  J.)  The  House  of  the
Wolf :  a  Romance.  y.  6d.

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Petland  Revisited.  With
33  Illustrations  y.  6d.

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Strange  Dwellings.  With
60  Illustrations.  3^.  6d.

Wood's  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Out  of  Doors.  With  n
Illustrations,  y.  6d.


36         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Cookery,   Domestic  Management,   &c.

De  Sails   (Mrs.)— continued.

LA  MODE.     Fcp.  8vo

Fcp.  8vo


Acton.  —  MODERN  COOKERY.  By
ELIZA  ACTON.  With  150  Woodcuts.  Fcp.
8vo.,  45.  6d.


Angwin. — SIMPLE  HINTS  ON  CHOICE

OF  FOOD,  with  Tested  and  Economical
Recipes.  For  Schools,  Homes,  and  Classes
for  Technical  Instruction.  By  M.  C.  ANGWIN,
Diplomate  (First  Class)  of  the  National
Union  for  the  Technical  Training  of  Women,
etc.  Crown  8vo.,  is.

Ashby. — HEALTH  IN  THE  NURSERY.

By  HENRY  ASHBY,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  Physi-
cian to  the  Manchester  Children's  Hospital.
With  25  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  net.

Bull  (THOMAS,  M.D.).

HINTS  TO  MOTHERS  ON  THE  MAN-
AGEMEA  T  OF  THEIR  HEALTH  DURING  THE
PERIOD  OF  PREGNANCY.  Fcp.  8vo.,  sewed,
is.  6d.  ;  cloth,  gilt  edges,  25.  net.

THE  MATERNAL  MANAGEMENT  OF
CHILDREN  IN  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE.
Fcp.  8vo.,  sewed,  is.  6d.  ;  cloth,  gilt
edges,  2s.  net.

De  Salis  (Mrs.).

A  LA  MODE  COOKERY:  Up-to-
date  Recipes.  With  24  Plates  (16  in
Colour).  Crown  8vo.,5s.  net.

CAKES    AND     CONFECTIONS    A
MODE.     Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

-Docs :  A  Manual  for  Amateurs.
Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

DRESSED  GAME  AND  POULTRY  A  LA
MODE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

DRESSED   VEGETABLES  A  LA  MODE.

Fcp.  8vo.,  is  6d.
DRINKS  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp.  8vo.,  is.6d.


Fcp.  8vc
Part  II,


ENTREES

is.  6d.

FLORAL  DECORATIONS.
is.  6a.

GARDENING  A  LA  MODE.
Part    L,    Vegetables,    is.    6d.
Fruits,   is.  6d.

NATIONAL  VIANDS  A  LA  MODE.  Fcp
8vo.,  is.  6d.

NEW-LAID  EGGS.     Fcp.  8vo.,  15.  6a

OYSTERS  A~   LA   MODE.     Fcp.  8vo.
is.  6d.

PUDDINGS  AND  PASTRY 'A  LA  MODE
Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

SAVOURIES  A  LA  MODE.     Fcp.  8vo,
is.6d.

SOUPS   AND    DRESSED    FISH  A  L.
MODE.     Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

SWEETS  AND  SUPPER  DISHES  A  L.
MODE.     Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

TEMPTING  DISHES  FOR  SWALL  h
COMES.     Fcp.  8vo.,  is.  6d.

WRINKLES     AND      NOTIONS     FO.
E  VERY  HOUSEHOLD.     Crown  8vo. ,  is.  6<

Lear. — MAIGRE  COOKERY.    By  H.  L
LA        SIDNEY  LEAR.     i6mo.,  2s.

Poole. — COOKERY  FOR  THE  DIABETK
By  W.  H.  and  Mrs.  POOLE.  With  Prefac
by  Dr.  PAVY.  Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.

Rotheram. — HOUSEHOLD   COOKER

RECIPES.  By  M.  A.  ROTHERAM,  First  Cla*
Diplomee,  National  Training  School  (
Cookery,  London  ;  Instructress  to  the  Bee
fordshire  County  Council.  Crown  8vo.,  2s


The  Fine  Arts  and  Music.

Burne-Jones. —  THE  BEGINNING  OF    Hamlin. — A     TEXT-BOOK    OF
THE    WORLD:     Twenty-five    Pictures    by        HISTORY  OF  ARCHITECTURE.     By  A.  D.  F
Sir  EDWARD  BURNE-JONES,  Bart.     Medium  i       HAMLIN,    A.M.      With    229    Illustration;
4to.,  Boards,  js.  6d.  net.  Crown  8vo.,  ys.  6d.

Burns  and  Colenso. — LIVING  ANA-    Haweis  (Rev.  H.  R.).


TOMY.  By  CECIL  L.  BURNS,  R.B.A.,  and
ROBERT  J.  COLENSO,  M.A.,  M.D.  40  Plates,
ii £  by  8|  ins.,  each  Plate  containing  Two
Figures — (a)  A  Natural  Male  or  Female
Figure  ;  (6)  The  same  Figure  Anatomatised.
In  a  Portfolio,  75.  6d.  net.


Music  AND  MORALS.    With  Portrai
of  the  Author.     Crown  8vo.,  6s.  net.

MY  MUSICAL  LIFE.     With  Portrai
of  Richard  Wagner   and  3  Illustratio
Crown  8vo.,  6s.  net.


.tion:


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.         37

The  Fine  Arts  and  Music — continued.


-luish,    Head,    and    Longman.—

SAMPLERS  AND  TAPESTRY  EMBROIDERIES.
By  MARCUS  B.  HUISH,  LL.B. ;  also  'The
Stitchery  of  the  Same,'  by  Mrs.  HEAD  ;
and  '  Foreign  Samplers,'  by  Mrs.  C.  J.
LONGMAN.  With  30  Reproductions  in
Colour,  and  40  Illustrations  in  Mono-
chrome. 4to,,  £2  25.  net.

iullah. — THE  HISTORY  OF  MODERN

Music.     By  JOHN  HULLAH.     8vo.,  85.  6d.

ameson  (Mrs.  ANNA).

SACKED  AND  LEGENDARY  ART,  con-
taining Legends  of  the  Angels  and  Arch-
angels, the  Evangelists,  the  Apostles,  the
Doctors  of  the  Church,  St.  Mary  Mag-
dalene, the  Patron  Saints,  the  Martyrs,
the  Early  Bishops,  the  Hermits,  and  the
Warrior-Saints  of  Christendom,  as  repre-
sented in  the  Fine  Arts.  With  19  Etchings
and  187  Woodcuts.  2  vols.  8vo.,  205.  net.

LEGENDS  OF  THE  MONASTIC  ORDERS,
as  represented  in  the  Fine  Arts,  com-
prising the  Benedictines  and  Augustines,
and  Orders  derived  from  their  Rules,  the
Mendicant  Orders,  the  Jesuits,  and  the
Order  of  the  Visitation  of  St.  Mary.  With
ii  Etchings  and  88  Woodcuts.  I  vol.
8vo.,  105.  net.

LEGENDS  OF  THE  MADONNA,  OR
BLESSED  VIRGINMARY.  Devotional  with
and  without  the  Infant  Jesus,  Historical
from  the  Annunciation  to  the  Assumption,
as  represented  in  Sacred  and  Legendary
Christian  Art.  With  27  Etchings  and
165  Woodcuts,  i  vol.  8vo.,  IDS.  net.

7 HE  HISTORY  OF  OUR  LORD,  as  ex-
emplified in  Works  of  Art,  with  that  of
His  Types,  St.  John  the  Baptist,  and
other  persons  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa-
ment. Commenced  by  the  late  Mrs.
JAMESON  ;  continued  and  completed  by
LADY  EASTLAKE.  With  31  Etchings
and  281  Woodcuts.  2  vols.  8vo.,  205.  net.

-risteller.  —  ANDREA  MANTEGNA.
By  PAUL  KRISTELLER.  English  Edition  by
x  ARTHUR  STRONG,  M.A.,  Librarian  to  the
rlouse  of  Lords,  and  at  Chatsworth.  With
16  Photogravure  Plates  and  162  Illustrations
n  the  Text.  410.,  gilt  top,  £3  IDS.  net.

Jacfarren.  —  LECTURES  ON  HAR-
WNY.  By  Sir  GEORGE  A.  MACFARREN.

VO.,   12S.


Morris  (WILLIAM).

ARCHITECTURE,  INDUSTRY  AND
WEALTH.  Collected  Papers.  Crown
8vo.,  6s.  net.

HOPES  AND  FEARS  FOR  ART.  Five
Lectures  delivered  in  Birmingham,  Lon-
don, etc.,  in  1878-1881.  Cr  8vo.,  45.  6d.

AN  ADDRESS  DELIVERED  AT  THE
DISTRIBUTION  OF  PRIZES  TO  STUDENTS
OF  THE  BIRMINGHAM  MUNICIPAL  SCHOOL
OF  ART  ON  2iST  FEBRUARY,  1894.  8vo.,
2s.  6d.  net.  (Printed  in  '  Golden  '  Type.)

SOME  HINTS  ON  PATTERN-DESIGN-
ING :  a  Lecture  delivered  at  the  Working
Men's  College,  London,  on  loth  Decem-
ber, 1881.  8vo.,  25.  6d.  net.  (Printed  in
'Golden'  Type.)

ARTS  AND  ITS  PRODUCERS  (1888)
AND  THE  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS  OF  TO-DAY
(1889).  8vo.,  25.  6d.  net.  (Printed  in
'Golden'  Type.)

ARCHITECTURE  AND  HISTORY,  AND
WESTMINSTER  ABBEY.  Two  Papers
read  before  the  Society  for  the  Protection
of  Ancient  Buildings.  8vo.,  25.  6d.  net.
(Printed  in  '  Golden  '  Type.)

ARTS    AND    CRAFTS  ASSAYS.      By
Members  of  the  Arts  and  Crafts  Exhibition
Society.      With  a  Preface   by  WILLIAM
MORRIS.      Crown  8vo.,  25.  6d.  net.
\*  For    Mr.    William    Morris's   other
Works,  see  pp.  24,  27,  28  and  40.

Robertson. — OLD    ENGLISH    SONGS

AND  DANCES.  Decorated  in  Colour  by  W.
GRAHAM  ROBERTSON.  Royal  4to.,  425.  net.

Scott.  -  -  THE  PORTRAITURES  OF
JULIUS  CAESAR  :  a  Monograph.  By  FRANK
J.  SCOTT.  With  many  Full-page  Plates
and  Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Small  4to.

Vanderpoel. —  COLOUR    PROBLEMS:

a  Practical  Manual  for  the  Lay  Student  of
Colour.  By  EMILY  NOYES  VANDERPOEL.
With  117  Plates  in  Colour.  Square  8vo.,
215.  net.

Van  Dyke. — A  TEXT-BOOK  ON  THE
HISTORY  OF  PAINTING.  By  JOHN  C.  VAN
DYKE.  With  no  Illustrations.  Cr.  8vo.,  65.

Wellington. — A  DESCRIPTIVE  AND
HISTORICAL  CATALOGUE  OF  THE  COLLEC-
TIONS OF  PICTURES  AND  SCULPTURE  AT
APSLEY  HOUSE,  LONDON.  By  EVELYN,
Duchess  of  Wellington.  Illustrated  by  52
Photo-Engravings,  specially  executed  by
BRAUN,  CLEMENT,  &  Co.,  of  Paris.  2  vols.,
royal  4to.,  £6  6s.  net.


38         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Miscellaneous  and  Critical  Works.

Annals  of  Mathematics  (under  the    Exploded  I  teas,AND  OTHER  ESSAY*

Auspices  of  Harvard  University).      Issued         By  the  Author  of  Times  and  Days'.    Ci
Quarterly.     4to.,  2s.  net  each  number.  8vo.,  55.


Auto  da  Fe  and  other  Essays :

some  being  Essays  in  Fiction.  By  the
Author  of  '  Essays  in  Paradox  '  and  '  Ex-
ploded Ideas'.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

Bagehot. —  LITERARY  STUDIES.  By
WALTER  BAGEHOT.  With  Portrait.  3  vols.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.  each.

Baker.'  —  EDUCATION    AND     LIFE  :

Papers  and  Addresses.  By  JAMES  H.
BAKER,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Baring-Gould.—  CURIOUS  MYTHS  OF
THE  MIDDLE  AGES.  By  Rev.  S.  BARING-
GOULD.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

Baynes.  —  SHAKESPEARE  STUDIES,
and  other  Essays.  By  the  late  THOMAS
SPENCER  BAYNES,  LL.B.,  LL.D.  With  a
Biographical  Preface  by  Professor  LEWIS
CAMPBELL.  Crown  8vo.',  75.  6d.

Bonnell.  -  -  CHARLOTTE  BRONTE,
GEORGE  ELIOT,  JANE  AUSTEN:  Studies  in
their  Works.  By  HENRY  H.  BONNELL.
Crown  8vo.

Booth. — THE  DISCOVERY  AND  DE-
CIPHERMENT OF  THE  TRILINGUAL  CUNEI-
FORM INSCRIPTIONS.  By  ARTHUR  JOHN
BOOTH,  M.A.  W7ith  a  Plan  of  Persepolis.
8vo.  145.  net.

Charities  Register,  The  Annual,

AND  DIGEST:  being  a  Classified  Register
of  Charities  in  or  available  in  the  Metropolis.
8vo.,  55.  net.

Christie. — SELECTED    ESSAYS.      By

RICHARD  COPLEY  CHRISTIE,  M.A.,  Oxon.
Hon.  LL.D.,  Viet.  With  2  Portraits  and  3
other  Illustrations.  8vo.,  125.  net.

Dickinson. — KING  ARTHUR  IN  CORN-
WALL. By  W.  HOWSHIP  DICKINSON,  M.D.
With  5  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Essays  in  Paradox.    By  the  Author

of  '  Exploded  Ideas  '  and  '  Times  and
Days  '.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

Evans. — THE    ANCIENT   STONE    IM-
PLEMENTS, WEAPONS  AND  ORNAMENTS  OF
GREAT   BRITAIN.      By   Sir  JOHN   EVANS,
K.C.B.      With     537     Illustrations.       8vo.,  j
105.  6d.  net.


Frost.  —  A  MEDLEY  BOOK.  B
GEORGE  FROST.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6</.  net!

G  eikie.  —  THE  Vic  A  RAND  HIS  FRIEND*
Reported  by  CUNNINGHAM  GEIKIE.  D.D
LL.D.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

Haggard  (H.  RIDER).

A  FARMER  s  YEAR  :  being  his  Com
monplace  Book  for  1898.  With  36  Illus
trations.  Crown  8vo.,  75.  6d.  net.

RURAL  ENGLAND.  With  23  Agri
cultural  Maps  and  56  Illustrations  fron
Photographs.  2  vols.,  8vo.,  365.  net.

Hoenig.  —  INQUIRIES      CONCERNING

THE  TACTICS  OF   THE  FUTURE.       By  FRIT

HOENIG.  With  i  Sketch  in  the  Text  and
Maps.  Translated  by  Captain  H.  M.  BOWER
8vo.,  155.  net.

Hutchinson. — DREAMS  AND  THEH
MEANINGS.  By  HORACE  G.  HUTCHINSON
8vo.,  gilt  top,  95.  6d.  net.

Jefferies  (RICHARD).

FIELD  AND  HEDGEROW:  With  For
trait.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  STORY  OF  MY  HEART:  m]
Autobiography.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

RED  DEER.  With  17  Illustrations
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  TOILERS  OF  THE  FIELD.  Crowi
8vo.,  35.  6d.

WOOD  MAGIC:  a  Fable.  Crowi
8vo.,  35.  6d.

Jekyll  (GERTRUDE).

HOME   AND    GARDEN:    Notes   an<
Thoughts,    Practical    and    Critical,   o
Worker  in  both.      With  53  Illustration;
from  Photographs.     8vo.,  los.  6d.  net.

WOOD    AND    GARDEN:   Notes
Thoughts,    Practical   and   Critical,  <
Working  Amateur.  With  71  Photograph
8vo..  105.  6d.  net.


MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


39


Miscellaneous  and  Critical   Works — continued.

ohnson  (J.  &  J.  H.).  Max  Miiller  (The  Right  Hon.  R).


THE  PATENTEES  MANUAL  :  a
Treatise  on  the  Law  and  Practice  of
Letters  Patent.  8vo.,  105.  6d.

AN  EPITOME  OF  THE  LAW  AND
PRACTICE  CONNECTED  WITH  PATENTS
FOR  INVENTIONS,  with  a  reprint  of  the
Patents  Acts  of  1883,  1885,  1886  and
1888.  Crown  8voM  25.  6d.


. —  THE  ORIGIN  AND  HISTORY
OF  IRISH  NAMES  OF  PLACES.  By  P.  W.
JOYCE,  LL.D.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  each.


,ang  (ANDREW).

LETTERS  TO  DEAD  AUTHORS.     Fcp.  !
8vo.,   2s.   6d.  net.

BOOKS   AND   BOOKMEN.       With     2
Coloured     Plates    and    17    Illustrations.  \
Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6rf.  net.

OLD  FRIENDS.   Fcp.  8vo.,  2s.  6d.  net.


LETTERS    ON    LITERATURE.
8vo.,  2S.  6rf.  net.


Fcp.


ESSAYS  IN  LITTLE.      With  Portrait
of  the  Author.     Crown  8vo.,  25.  6d.

COCK   LANE    AND    COMMON-SENSE.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  6il.

THE  BOOK  OF  DREAMS  AND  GHOSTS.
Crown  8vo.,  35.  bd.


flaryon. — How  THE  GARDEN  GREW.

f!y  MAUD  MARYON.     With  4  Illustrations,
rown  8vo.,  55.  net.


^  Itthews.  — No  TES  ON  SPEECH-
BAKING.  By  BRANDER  MATTHEWS.  Fcp.
/o.,  r5.  6d.  net.


COLLECTED  WORKS.    1 8  vols.    Crown
8vo.,  55.  each.

Vol.  I.  NATURAL  RELIGION:  the  Gifford
Lectures,  1888.

Vol.  II.  PHYSICAL  RELIGION:  the  Gifford
Lectures,  1890.

Vol.  III.    ANTHROPOLOGICAL  RELIGION:
the  Gifford  Lectures,  1891.

Vol.  IV.    THEOSOPHY;  or,  Psychological
Religion  :  the  Gifibrd  Lectures,  1892.


CHIPS  FROM  A  GERMAN  WORKSHOP.
Vol.  V.  Recent  Essays  and  Addresses.
Vol.  VI.  Biographical  Essays.

Vol.  VII.  Essays  on  Language  and  Litera-
ture.

Vol.    VIII.    Essays   on    Mythology    and
Folk-lore.


Vol.  IX.  THE  ORIGIN  AND  GROWTH  OF
RELIGION,  as  Illustrated  by  the  Re-
ligions of  India  :  the  Hibbert  Lectures,
1878.

Vol.  X.    BIOGRAPHIES  OF  WORDS,  AND

THE   HOME   OF   THE  AKYAS.

Vols.  XL,  XII.  THE  SCIENCE  OF
LANGUAGE  :  Founded  on  Lectures  de-
livered at  the  Royal  Institution  in  1861
and  1863.  2  vols.  105.

Vol.  XIII.  INDIA  :  What  can  it  Teach
Us?

Vol.  XIV.  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE
SCIENCE  OF  RELIGION.  Four  Lectures,
1870.

Vol.  XV.  RAMAKRISHKA  :  his  Life  and
Sayings.

Vol.  XVI.  THREE  LECTURES  ON  THE
V  ED  ANT  A  PHILOSOPHY,  1894.

Vol.  XVII.  LAST  ESSAYS.  First  Series.
Essays  on  Language,  Folk-lore,  etc.

Vol.  XVIII.  LASTESSAYS.  Second  Series.
Essays  on  the  Science  of  Religion.


40         MESSRS.  LONGMANS  &  CO.'S  STANDARD  AND  GENERAL  WORKS.


Miscellaneous  and  Critical  Works— continued.

Milner.— COUNTRY  PLEASURES:  the  (  Soulsby  (Lucv  H.  M.)— continued
Chronicle   of  a  Year   chiefly  in  a  Garden.          0

By  GEORGE  MILNER.     Crown  8vo.,  35.  6rf.    I       &TRAY     THOUGHTS     FOR     iNVALi

i6mo.,  25.  net.

STRAY  THOUGHTS   ON  CHARACJ
Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6d.  net.

Southey. — THE  CORRESPONDENCE

ROBERTSOUTHEY  WITHC AROLINEBOW.

Edited  by  EDWARD  DOWDEN.     8vo.,  14,

Stevens. — ON  THE  STOWAGE  OF  SH
AND  THEIR  CARGOES.    With  Informatior
garding  Freights,  Charter- Parties,  etc.
ROBERT  WHITE  STEVENS.     8vo.,  215.

Pollock.— JANE  AUSTEN:    her  Con-,

temporaries    and    Herself.       By    WALTER     Sutherland. — TWENTIETH  CENTl


Morris. — SIGNS  OF  CHANGE.     Seven

Lectures  delivered  on  various  Occasions.
By  WILLIAM  MORRIS.  Post  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Parker  and  Unwin. —  THE  ART  OF

BUILDING  A  HOME  :  a  Collection  of
Lectures  and  Illustrations.  By  BARRY
PARKER  and  RAYMOND  UNWIN.  With  68
Full-page  Plates.  8vo.,  105.  6d.  net.


HERRIES  POLLOCK.     Cr.  8vo.,  35.  6d.  net.


Poore  (GEORGE  VIVIAN,  M.D.).

ESSAYS  ON  RURAL  HYGIENE.  With
13  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  6s.  6d.

THE  DWELLING  HOUSE.  With  36
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.

THE  EARTH  IN  RELATION  TO  THE
PRESERVATION  AND  DESTRUCTION  OF
CONTAGIA  :  being  the  Milroy  Lectures
delivered  at  the  Royal  College  of  Physi-
cians in  1899,  together  with  other  Papers
on  Sanitation.  With  13  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.,  55.


Rossetti.  -  A  SHADOW  OF  DANTE  :
being  an  Essay  towards  studying  Himself,
his  World  and  his  Pilgrimage.  By  MARIA
FRANCESCA  ROSSETTI.  Crown  8vo.,  35.  6d.


Shad  well.  —  DRINK  :  TEMPERANCE
AND  LEGISLATION.  By  ARTHUR  SHADWELL,
M.A.,  M.D.  Crown  8vo.,  55.  net.

Soulsby  (Lucv  H.  M.).

STRAY     THOUGHTS     ON    READING.
Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6d.  net.

STK AY  THOUGHTS  FOR  GIRLS.  i6mo.,

15.  6d    net.

STRA  Y  THOUGHTS  FOR  MOTHERS  AND

TEACHERS.     Fcp.  8vo.,  25.  6d.  net.
10,000/1/03.


INVENTIONS:  a  Forecast.  By  GEO
SUTHERLAND,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.,  45.  6d.

Thuillier. — THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  LA
DEFENCE,  AND  THEIR  APPLICATION^  TO  :
CONDITIONS  OF  TO-DAY.  By  Captain
F.  THUILLIER,  R.E.  With  Maps  and  Pli
Svo.,  125.  6d.  net.

Turner  and  Sutherland. — THE  1

VELOPMENT  OF  AlSTRALIAN  LlTERATl

By  HENRY  GYLES  TURNER  and  ALEXAN
SUTHERLAND.  With  Portraits  and  Illus
tions.  Crown  8vo.,  55.

Warwick. — PROGRESS  IN  Wo  ME
EDUCA  TIONIN  THE  BRITISH  EMPIRE  :  b<
the  Report  of  Conferences  and  a  Cong
held  in  connection  with  the  Educatic
Section,  Victorian  Era  Exhibition.  Ed
by  the  COUNTESS  OF  WARWICK.  Cr.  8vo

Weathers. — A  PRACTICAL  GUIDE-
GARDEN  PLANTS.  By  JOHN  WEATH*
F.R.H.S.  With  159  Diagrams.  8vo.,  ;
net.

Webb. — THE  MYSTERY  OF  WILL*

SHAKESPEARE  :    a  Summary   of  Evide:j
By  his  Honour  Judge  T.  WEBB,  sometj
Regius     Professor     of    Laws    and    Pu<
Orator  in  the  University  of  Dublin.   |
105.  6d.  net.

Whittall. — FREDERICK  THE  GRI
ON  KINGCRAFT,  from  the  Original  M^
script ;  with  Reminiscences  and  Turlll
Stories.  By  Sir  J.  WILLIAM  WHITTVJ
President  of  the  British  Chamber  of  C
merce  of  Turkey.  8vo.,  75.  6d.  net.


8821


DEC  0  3
